I -- the Parsonage all true history contain instruction ; though , in some , the treasure may be hard to find , and when find , so trivial in quantity , that the dry , shrivell kernel scarcely compensate for the trouble of crack the nut . whether this be the case with my history or not , I be hardly competent to judge . I sometimes think it might prove useful to some , and entertaine to other ; but the world may judge for itself . Shield by my own obscurity , and by the lapse of year , and a few fictitious name , I do not fear to venture ; and will candidly lay before the public what I would not disclose to the most intimate friend . my father be a clergyman of the north of , who be deservedly respecte by all who know he ; and , in he younger day , liv pretty comfortably on the joint income of a small incumbency and a snug little property of he own . my mother , who marry he against the wish of she friend , be a squire 's daughter , and a woman of spirit . in vain it be represent to she , that if she become the poor parson 's wife , she must relinquish she carriage and she lady 's - maid , and all the luxuries and elegancy of affluence ; which to she be little less than the necessary of life . a carriage and a lady 's - maid were great convenience ; but , thank heaven , she have foot to carry she , and hand to minister to she own necessity . a elegant house and spacious grounds be not to be despise ; but she would rather live in a cottage with than in a palace with any other man in the world . find argument of no avail , she father , at length , tell the lover they might marry if they please ; but , in so do , he daughter would forfeit every fraction of she fortune . he expect this would cool the ardour of both ; but he be mistaken . my father know too well my mother 's superior worth not to be sensible that she be a valuable fortune in herself : and if she would but consent to embellish he humble hearth he should be happy to take she on any term ; while she , on she part , would rather labour with she own hand than be divide from the man she love , whose happiness it would be she joy to make , and who be already one with she in heart and soul . so she fortune go to swell the purse of a wiser sister , who have marry a rich nabob ; and she , to the wonder and compassionate regret of all who know she , go to bury herself in the homely village parsonage among the hill of - . and yet , in spite of all this , and in spite of my mother 's high spirit and my father 's whim , I believe you might search all through , and fail to find a happier couple . of six child , my sister and myself be the only two that survive the perils of infancy and early childhood . I , be the younger by five or six year , be always regard as the child , and the pet of the family : father , mother , and sister , all combine to spoil I -- not by foolish indulgence , to render I fractious and ungovernable , but by ceaseless kindness , to make I too helpless and dependent -- too unfit for buffet with the car and turmoil of life . and I be brotch up in the strictest seclusion . my mother , be at once highly accomplish , well inform , and fond of employment , take the whole charge of we education on herself , with the exception of -- which my father undertake to teach we -- so that we never even go to school ; and , as there be no society in the neighbourhood , we only intercourse with the world consiste in a stately tea - party , now and then , with the principal farmer and tradespeople of the vicinity ( just to avoid be stigmatize as too proud to consort with we neighbour ) , and a annual visit to we paternal grandfather 's ; where himself , we kind grandmamma , a maiden aunt , and two or three elderly lady and gentleman , be the only person we ever see . sometimes we mother would amuse we with story and anecdote of she younger day , which , while they entertaine we amazingly , frequently awoke -- in I , at least -- a secret wish to see a little more of the world . I think she must have be very happy : but she never seem to regret past time . my father , however , whose temper be neither tranquil nor cheerful by nature , often unduly vex himself with think of the sacrifice he dear wife have make for he ; and trouble he head with revolve endless scheme for the augmentation of he little fortune , for she sake and ours . in vain my mother assure he she be quite satisfied ; and if he would but lay by a little for the child , we should all have plenty , both for time present and to come : but save be not my father 's forte . he would not run in debt ( at least , my mother take good care he should not ) , but while he have money he must spend it : he like to see he
he house comfortable , and he wife and daughter well clothed , and well attend ; and besides , he be charitably dispose , and like to give to the poor , accord to he mean : or , as some might think , beyond they . at length , however , a kind friend suggest to he a means of double he private property at one stroke ; and further increase it , hereafter , to a untold amount . this friend be a merchant , a man of enterprising spirit and undoubt talent , who be somewhat straiten in he mercantile pursuit for want of capital ; but generously propose to give my father a fair share of he profit , if he would only entrust he with what he could spare ; and he think he might safely promise that whatever sum the latter chose to put into he hand , it should bring he in cent . per cent . the small patrimony be speedily sell , and the whole of its price be deposite in the hand of the friendly merchant ; who as promptly proceed to ship he cargo , and prepare for he voyage . my father be delighted , so be we all , with we brighten prospect . for the present , it be true , we be reduce to the narrow income of the curacy ; but my father seem to think there be no necessity for scrupulously restrict we expenditure to that ; so , with a stand bill at 's , another at 's , and a third at 's , we get along even more comfortably than before : though my mother affir we have better keep within bound , for we prospect of wealth be but precarious , after all ; and if my father would only trust everything to she management , he should never feel himself stint : but he , for once , be incorrigible . what happy hour and I have pass while sit at we work by the fire , or wander on the heath - clad hill , or id under the weeping birch ( the only considerable tree in the garden ) , talk of future happiness to ourselves and we parent , of what we would do , and see , and possess ; with no firmer foundation for we goodly superstructure than the riche that be expect to flow in upon we from the success of the worthy merchant 's speculation . we father be nearly as bad as ourselves ; only that he affec not to be so much in earnest : express he bright hope and sanguine expectation in jest and playful sally , that always strike I as be exceedingly witty and pleasant . we mother laugh with delight to see he so hopeful and happy : but still she fear he be set he heart too much upon the matter ; and once I hear she whisper as she leave the room , ' grant he be not disappoint ! I know not how he would bear it . ' Disappoint he be ; and bitterly , too . it come like a thunder - clap on we all , that the vessel which contain we fortune have be wreck , and go to the bottom with all its store , together with several of the crew , and the unfortunate merchant himself . I be grieve for he ; I be grieve for the overthrow of all we air - build castle : but , with the elasticity of youth , I soon recover the shook . though rich have charms , poverty have no terror for a inexperienced girl like I . indeed , to say the truth , there be something exhilarat in the idea of be drive to strait , and throw upon we own resource . I only wish papa , mamma , and Mary be all of the same mind as myself ; and then , instead of lamenting past calamity we might all cheerfully set to work to remedy they ; and the greater the difficulty , the harder we present privation , the greater should be we cheerfulness to endure the latter , and we vigour to contend against the former . do not lament , but she brood continually over the misfortune , and sank into a state of dejection from which no effort of mine could rouse she . I could not possibly bring she to regard the matter on its bright side as I do : and indeed I be so fearful of be charge with childish frivolity , or stupid insensibility , that I carefully keep most of my bright idea and cheer notion to myself ; well know they could not be appreciate . my mother think only of consol my father , and pay we debt and retrench we expenditure by every available means ; but my father be completely overwhelm by the calamity : health , strength , and spirit sank beneath the blow , and he never wholly recover they . in vain my mother strove to cheer he , by appeal to he piety , to he courage , to he affection for herself and we . that very affection be he greatest torment : it be for we sake he have so ardently long to increase he fortune -- it be we interest that have lent such brightness to he hope , and that impart such bitterness to he present distress . he now torment himself with remorse at have neglect my mother 's advice ; which would at least have save he from the additional burden of debt -- he vainly reproach himself for have bring she from the dignity , the ease , the luxury of she former station to toil with he through the car and toil of poverty . it be gall
gall and wormwood to he soul to see that splendid , highly - accomplished woman , once so courte and admire , transform into a active managing housewife , with hand and head continually occupy with household labour and household economy . the very willingness with which she perform these duty , the cheerfulness with which she bear she reverse , and the kindness which withheld she from imput the smallest blame to he , be all pervert by this ingenious self - tormentor into further aggravations of he suffering . and thus the mind prey upon the body , and disorder the system of the nerve , and they in turn increase the trouble of the mind , till by action and reaction he health be seriously impaired ; and not one of we could convince he that the aspect of we affair be not half so gloomy , so utterly hopeless , as he morbid imagination represent it to be . the useful pony phaeton be sell , together with the stout , well - feed pony -- the old favourite that we have fully determined should end it 's day in peace , and never pass from we hand ; the little coach - house and stable be let ; the servant boy , and the more efficient ( be the more expensive ) of the two maid - servants , be dismiss . we clothes be mende , turn , and darn to the utmost verge of decency ; we food , always plain , be now simplify to a unprecedented degree -- except my father 's favourite dish ; we coal and candle be painfully economize -- the pair of candle reduce to one , and that most sparingly use ; the coal carefully husband in the half - empty grate : especially when my father be out on he parish duty , or confin to be through illness -- then we sit with we foot on the fender , scrape the perishing ember together from time to time , and occasionally add a slight scattering of the dust and fragment of coal , just to keep they alive . as for we carpet , they in time be wear threadbare , and patch and darn even to a greater extent than we garment . to save the expense of a gardener , and I undertake to keep the garden in order ; and all the cooking and household work that could not easily be manage by one servant - girl , be do by my mother and sister , with a little occasional help from I : only a little , because , though a woman in my own estimation , I be still a child in theirs ; and my mother , like most active , manage woman , be not gif with very active daughter : for this reason -- that be so clever and diligend herself , she be never temp to trust she affair to a deputy , but , on the contrary , be willing to act and think for other as well as for number one ; and whatever be the business in hand , she be apt to think that no one could do it so well as herself : so that whenever I offer to assist she , I receive such a answer as , love , you can not indeed -- there be nothing here you can do . go and help you sister , or get she to take a walk with you -- tell she she must not sit so much , and stay so constantly in the house as she do -- she may well look thin and deject . ' ' Mary , mamma say I be to help you ; or get you to take a walk with I ; she say you may well look thin and deject , if you sit so constantly in the house . ' ' help I you cannot , Agnes ; and I can not go out with you -- I have far too much to do . ' ' then let I help you . ' ' you cannot , indeed , dear child . go and practise you music , or play with the kitten . ' there be always plenty of sewing on hand ; but I have not be teach to cut out a single garment , and except plain hemm and seam , there be little I could do , even in that line ; for they both assert that it be far easier to do the work themselves than to prepare it for I : and besides , they like better to see I prosecut my study , or amuse myself -- it be time enough for I to sit bend over my work , like a grave matron , when my favourite little pussy be become a steady old cat . under such circumstance , although I be not many degree more useful than the kitten , my idleness be not entirely without excuse . through all we trouble , I never but once hear my mother complain of we want of money . as summer be come on she observe to and I , ' what a desirable thing it would be for you papa to spend a few week at a watering - place . I be convince the sea -air and the change of scene would be of incalculable service to he . but then , you see , there be no money , ' she add , with a sigh . we both wish exceedingly that the thing might be do , and lament greatly that it could not . ' well , well ! ' say she , ' it be no use complain . possibly something might be do to further the project after all . , you be a beautiful
beautiful drawer . what do you say to do a few more picture in you best style , and get they fram , with the water - colou drawing you have already do , and try to dispose of they to some liberal picture - dealer , who have the sense to discern they merit ? ' ' , I should be deligh if you think they could be sell ; and for anything worth while . ' ' it be worth while try , however , my dear : do you procure the drawing , and I will endeaavor to find a purchaser . ' 'i wish _I_ could do something , ' say I . ' you , ! well , who know ? you draw pretty well , too : if you choose some simple piece for you subject , I daresay you will be able to produce something we shall all be proud to exhibit . ' ' but I have another scheme in my head , mamma , and have have long , only I do not like to mention it . ' ' indeed ! pray tell we what it be . ' 'I should like to be a governess . ' my mother utter a exclamation of surprise , and laugh . my sister drop she work in astonishment , exclaim , ' you a governess , Agnes ! what can you be dream of ? ' ' well ! I do not see anything so very extraordinary in it . I do not pretend to be able to instruct great girl ; but surely I could teach little one : and I should like it so much : I be so fond of child . do let I , mamma ! ' ' but , my love , you have not learn to take care of yourself yet : and young child require more judgment and experience to manage than elder one . ' ' but , mamma , I be above eighteen , and quite able to take care of myself , and other too . you do not know half the wisdom and prudence I possess , because I have never be try . ' ' only think , ' say , ' what would you do in a house full of stranger , without I or mamma to speak and act for you -- with a parcel of child , besides yourself , to attend to ; and no one to look to for advice ? you would not even know what clothes to put on . ' ' you think , because I always do as you bid I , I have no judgment of my own : but only try I -- that be all I ask -- and you shall see what I can do . ' at that moment my father enter and the subject of we discussion be explain to he . ' what , my little Agnes a governess ! ' cry he , and , in spite of he dejection , he laugh at the idea . ' yes , papa , do not you say anything against it : I should like it so much ; and I be sure I could manage delightfully . ' ' but , my darling , we could not spare you . ' and a tear glisten in he eye as he add -- 'no , no ! afflict as we be , surely we be not bring to that pass yet . ' 'Oh , no ! ' say my mother . ' there be no necessity whatever for such a step ; it be merely a whim of she own . so you must hold you tongue , you naughty girl ; for , though you be so ready to leave we , you know very well we can not part with you . ' I be silence for that day , and for many succeed one ; but still I do not wholly relinquish my darling scheme . get she draw material , and steadily set to work . I get mine too ; but while I draw , I think of other thing . how delightful it would be to be a governess ! to go out into the world ; to enter upon a new life ; to act for myself ; to exercise my unused faculty ; to try my unknown power ; to earn my own maintenance , and something to comfort and help my father , mother , and sister , besides exonerat they from the provision of my food and clothing ; to show papa what he little Agne could do ; to convince and that I be not quite the helpless , thoughtless be they suppose . and then , how charme to be entrust with the care and education of child ! whatever other say , I feel I be fully competent to the task : the clear remembrance of my own thought in early childhood would be a surer guide than the instruction of the most mature adviser . I have but to turn from my little pupil to myself at they age , and I should know , at once , how to win they confidence and affection : how to wake the contrition of the erring ; how to embole the timid and conseal the afflict ; how to make practicable , instruction desirable , and lovely and comprehensible . - delightful task ! to teach the young idea how to shoet ! to train the tender plant , and watch they bud unfolding day by day ! influence by so many inducement , I determine still to persevere ; though the fear of displease my mother , or distresse my father 's feeling , prevent I from resume the subject for several day . at length , again , I mention
mention it to my mother in private ; and , with some difficulty , get she to promise to assist I with she endeavour . my father 's reluctant consent be next obtain , and then , though still sigh she disapproval , my dear , kind mother begin to look out for a situation for I . she write to my father 's relation , and consult the newspaper advertisement -- she own relation she have long drop all communication with : a formal interchange of occasional letter be all she have ever have since she marriage , and she would not at any time have apply to they in a case of this nature . but so long and so entire have be my parent 's seclusion from the world , that many week elapse before a suitable situation could be procure . at last , to my great joy , it be decree that I should take charge of the young family of a certain ; whom my kind , prim aunt have know in she youth , and assert to be a very nice woman . she husband be a retired tradesman , who have realize a very comfortable fortune ; but could not be prevail upon to give a greater salary than twenty - five pound to the instructress of he child . I , however , be glad to accept this , rather than refuse the situation -- which my parent be inclin to think the better plan . but some week more be yet to be devote to preparation . how long , how tedious those week appear to I ! yet they be happy one in the main -- full of bright hope and ardent expectation . with what peculiar pleasure I assist at the making of my new clothes , and , subsequently , the packing of my trunk ! but there be a feeling of bitterness mingl with the latter occupation too ; and when it be do -- when all be ready for my departure on the morrow , and the last night at home approach -- a sudden anguish seem to swell my heart . my dear friend look so sad , and spoke so very kindly , that I could scarcely keep my eye from overflow : but I still affect to be gay . I have take my last ramble with on the moor , my last walk in the garden , and round the house ; I have feed , with she , we pet pigeon for the last time -- the pretty creature that we have tame to peck they food from we hand : I have give a farewell stroke to all they silky back as they crowd in my lap . I have tenderly kiss my own peculiar favourite , the pair of snow - white fantail ; I have play my last tune on the old familiar piano , and sung my last song to papa : not the last , I hope , but the last for what appear to I a very long time . and , perhaps , when I do these thing again it would be with different feeling : circumstance might be change , and this house might never be my settled home again . my dear little friend , the kitten , would certainly be change : she be already grow a fine cat ; and when I return , even for a hasty visit at , would , most likely , have forget both she playmate and she merry prank . I have rom with she for the last time ; and when I strok she soft bright fur , while she lay purr herself to sleep in my lap , it be with a feeling of sadness I could not easily disguise . then at bed - time , when I retire with to we quiet little chamber , where already my drawer be clear out and my share of the bookcase be empty -- and where , hereafter , she would have to sleep alone , in dreary solitude , as she express it -- my heart sank more than ever : I feel as if I have be selfish and wrong to persist in leave she ; and when I knelt once more beside we little bed , I pray for a blessing on she and on my parent more fervently than ever I have do before . to conceal my emotion , I bury my face in my hand , and they be presently bath in tear . I perceive , on rising , that she have be cry too : but neither of we spoke ; and in silence we betake ourselves to we repose , creep more closely together from the consciousness that we be to part so soon . but the morning bring a renewal of hope and spirit . I be to depart early ; that the conveyance which take I ( a gig , hire from , the draper , grocer , and tea - dealer of the village ) might return the same day . I rise , wash , dress , swallow a hasty breakfast , receive the fond embrace of my father , mother , and sister , kiss the cat -- to the great scandal of , the maid -- shook hand with she , mount the gig , draw my veil over my face , and then , but not till then , burst into a flood of tear . the gig roll on ; I look back ; my dear mother and sister be still stand at the door , look after I , and wave they adieux . I return they salute , and pray to bless they from my heart : we descende the hill , and I could see they no more . ' it be a
a coldish mornin ' for you , , ' observ ; ' and a darksome 'un too ; but we be happen get to yon spot afore there come much rain to signify . ' ' yes , I hope so , ' reply I , as calmly as I could . ' it be come a good sup last night too . ' 'yes . ' ' but this cold wind will happen keep it off . ' ' perhaps it will . ' here end we colloquy . we cross the valley , and begin to ascend the opposite hill . as we be toil up , I look back again ; there be the village spire , and the old grey parsonage beyond it , bask in a slanting beam of sunshine -- it be but a sickly ray , but the village and surround hill be all in sombre shade , and I haile the wander beam as a propitious oman to my home . with clasped hand I fervently implor a blessing on its inhabitant , and hastily turn away ; for I see the sunshine be depart ; and I carefully avoid another glance , lest I should see it in gloomy shadow , like the rest of the landscape . -- in the Art of as we drive along , my spirit revive again , and I turn , with pleasure , to the contemplation of the new life upon which I be enter . but though it be not far past the middle of , the heavy cloud and strong north - easterly wind combine to render the day extremely cold and dreary ; and the journey seem a very long one , for , as observe , the roads be ' very heavy ' ; and certainly , he horse be very heavy too : it crawl up the hill , and crept down they , and only condescende to shake it be side in a trot where the road be at a dead level or a very gentle slope , which be rarely the case in those rug region ; so that it be nearly one o'clock before we reach the place of we destination . yet , after all , when we enter the lofy iron gateway , when we drive softly up the smooth , well - roll carriage - road , with the green lawn on each side , stud with young tree , and approach the new but stately mansion of Wellwood , rise above its mushroom poplar - grove , my heart fail I , and I wish it be a mile or two farther off . for the first time in my life I must stand alone : there be no retreating now . I must enter that house , and introduce myself among its strange inhabitant . but how be it to be do ? true , I be near nineteen ; but , thanks to my retired life and the protecte care of my mother and sister , I well know that many a girl of fifteen , or under , be gift with a more womanly address , and greater ease and self - possession , than I be . yet , if be a kind , motherly woman , I might do very well , after all ; and the child , of course , I should soon be at ease with they -- and , I hope , I should have but little to do with . ' be calm , be calm , whatever happen ,' I say within myself ; and truly I keep this resolution so well , and be so fully occupy in steady my nerve and stifle the rebellious flutter of my heart , that when I be admit into the hall and usher into the presence of , I almost forget to answer she polite salutation ; and it afterwards strike I , that the little I do say be speak in the tone of one half - dead or half - asleep . the lady , too , be somewhat chilly in she manner , as I discover when I have time to reflect . she be a tall , spare , stately woman , with thick black hair , cold grey eye , and extremely sallow complexion . with due politeness , however , she show I my bedroom , and leave I there to take a little refreshment . I be somewhat dismay at my appearance on look in the glass : the cold wind have swell and redden my hand , uncurled and entangle my hair , and dye my face of a pale purple ; add to this my collar be horridly crumple , my frock splash with mud , my foot clad in stout new boot , and as the trunk be not bring up , there be no remedy ; so have smoothe my hair as well as I could , and repeatedly twitch my obdurate collar , I proceed to clomp down the two flight of stair , philosophize as I go ; and with some difficulty find my way into the room where await I . she lead I into the dining - room , where the family luncheon have be laid out . some beefsteak and half - cold potatoe be set before I ; and while I dine upon these , she sit opposite , watch I ( as I think ) and endeavour to sustain something like a conversation -- consist chiefly of a succession of commonplace remark , express with frigid formality : but this might be more my fault than hers , for I really could not converse . in fact , my attention be almost wholly absorb in my dinner : not from ravenous appetite , but from distress at the toughness of the beefsteak , and the numbness
numbness of my hand , almost palsy by they five - hour ' exposure to the bitter wind . I would gladly have eat the potatoe and let the meat alone , but have get a large piece of the latter on to my plate , I could not be so impolite as to leave it ; so , after many awkward and unsuccessful attempt to cut it with the knife , or tear it with the fork , or pull it asunder between they , sensible that the awful lady be a spectator to the whole transaction , I at last desperately grasp the knife and fork in my fists , like a child of two year old , and fall to work with all the little strength I possess . but this need some apology - - with a feeble attempt at a laugh , I say , ' my hand be so benumb with the cold that I can scarcely handle my knife and fork . ' 'i daresay you would find it cold , ' reply she with a cool , immutable gravity that do not serve to reassure I . when the ceremony be conclude , she lead I into the sitting - room again , where she ring and send for the child . ' you will find they not very far advanced in they attainment , ' say she , ' for I have have so little time to attend to they education myself , and we have think they too young for a governess till now ; but I think they be clever child , and very apt to learn , especially the little boy ; he be , I think , the flower of the flock -- a generous , noble - spirited boy , one to be lead , but not drive , and remarkable for always speak the truth . he seem to scorn deception ' ( this be good news ) . ' he sister will require watch , ' continue she , ' but she be a very good girl upon the whole ; though I wish she to be keep out of the nursery as much as possible , as she be now almost six year old , and might acquire bad habits from the nurse . I have order she crib to be place in you room , and if you will be so kind as to overlook she wash and dress , and take charge of she clothes , she need have nothing further to do with the nursery maid . ' I reply I be quite willing to do so ; and at that moment my young pupil enter the apartment , with they two younger sister . master be a well - grow boy of seven , with a somewhat wiry frame , flaxen hair , blue eye , small turn - up nose , and fair complexion . be a tall girl too , somewhat dark like she mother , but with a round full face and a high colour in she cheek . the second sister be , a very pretty little girl ; assure I she be a remarkably gentle child , and require encouragement : she have not learn anything yet ; but in a few day , she would be four year old , and then she might take she first lesson in the alphabet , and be promote to the schoolroom . the remain one be , a little broad , fat , merry , playful thing of scarcely two , that I covet more than all the rest -- but with she I have nothing to do . I talk to my little pupil as well as I could , and try to render myself agreeable ; but with little success I fear , for they mother 's presence keep I under a unpleasant restraint . they , however , be remarkably free from shyness . they seem bold , lively child , and I hope I should soon be on friendly term with they -- the little boy especially , of whom I have hear such a favourable character from he mamma . in there be a certain affect simper , and a craving for notice , that I be sorry to observe . but she brother claim all my attention to himself ; he stand bolt upright between I and the fire , with he hand behind he back , talk away like a orator , occasionally interrupt he discourse with a sharp reproof to he sister when they make too much noise . ' oh , , what a darling you be ! ' exclaim he mother . ' come and kiss dear mamma ; and then will not you show you schoolroom , and you nice new book ? ' 'I will not kiss you , mamma ; but I will show my schoolroom , and my new book . ' ' and my schoolroom , and my new book , , ' say . ' they be mine too . ' ' they be , ' reply he decisively . ' come along , -- I will escort you . ' when the room and book have be show , with some bickering between the brother and sister that I do my utmost to appease or mitigate , bring I she doll , and begin to be very loquacious on the subject of its fine clothes , it be bed , it be chest of drawer , and other appurtenance ; but tell she to hold she clamour , that might see he rocking - horse , which , with a most important bustle , he drag forth from its corner into the middle of the room , loudly call on I to attend to it . then , order he sister to hold the rein , he mount , and
and make I stand for ten minute , watch how manfully he use he whip and spur . meantime , however , I admire 's pretty doll , and all its possession ; and then tell master Tom he be a capital rider , but I hope he would not use he whip and spur so much when he ride a real pony . 'Oh , yes , I will ! ' say he , lay on with redoubled ardour . 'I will cut into he like smoke ! Eeh ! my word ! but he shall sweat for it . ' this be very shocking ; but I hope in time to be able to work a reformation . ' now you must put on you bonnet and shawl , ' say the little hero , ' and I will show you my garden . ' ' and , ' say . lift he fist with a menace gesture ; she utter a loud , shrill scream , run to the other side of I , and make a face at he . ' surely , , you would not strike you sister ! I hope I shall never see you do that . ' ' you will sometimes : I be oblige to do it now and then to keep she in order . ' ' but it be not you business to keep she in order , you know -- that be for --' ' well , now go and put on you bonnet . ' 'I do not know -- it be so very cloudy and cold , it seem likely to rain ; -- and you know I have have a long drive . ' 'No matter -- you must come ; I shall allow of no excuse , ' reply the consequential little gentleman . and , as it be the first day of we acquaintance , I think I might as well indulge he . it be too cold for to venture , so she stay with she mamma , to the great relief of she brother , who like to have I all to himself . the garden be a large one , and tastefully lay out ; besides several splendid dahlias , there be some other fine flowers still in bloom : but my companion would not give I time to examine they : I must go with he , across the wet grass , to a remote sequestered corner , the most important place in the grounds , because it contain this garden . there be two round bed , stock with a variety of plant . in one there be a pretty little rise -tree . I pause to admire it be lovely blossom . 'Oh , never mind that ! ' say he , contemptuously . ' that be only 's garden ; look , this be mine . ' after I have observ every flower , and listen to a disquisition on every plant , I be permit to depart ; but first , with great pomp , he pluck a polyanthus and present it to I , as one conferr a prodigious favour . I observ , on the grass about he garden , certain apparatus of stick and corn , and ask what they be . ' Traps for bird . ' ' why do you catch they ? ' ' say they do harm . ' ' and what do you do with they when you catch they ? ' ' different thing . sometimes I give they to the cat ; sometimes I cut they in piece with my penknife ; but the next , I mean to roast alive . ' ' and why do you mean to do such a horrible thing ? ' ' for two reason : first , to see how long it will live -- and then , to see what it will taste like . ' ' but do not you know it be extremely wicked to do such thing ? remember , the bird can feel as well as you ; and think , how would you like it yourself ? ' 'Oh , that be nothing ! I be not a bird , and I can not feel what I do to they . ' ' but you will have to feel it some time , Tom : you have hear where wicked people go to when they die ; and if you do not leave off torture innocent bird , remember , you will have to go there , and suffer just what you have make they suffer . ' 'Oh , pooh ! I sha not . know how I treat they , and he never blame I for it : he say it be just what he use to do when he be a boy . last summer , he give I a nest full of young sparrow , and he see I pull off they leg and wing , and head , and never say anything ; except that they be nasty thing , and I must not let they soil my trousers : end uncle be there too , and he laugh , and say I be a fine boy . ' ' but what would you mamma say ? ' 'Oh , she do not care ! she say it be a pity to kill the pretty singing bird , but the naughty sparrow , and mouse , and rat , I may do what I like with . so now , , you see it be not wicked . ' 'i still think it be , ; and perhaps you papa and mamma would think so too , if they think much about it . however ,' I internally add , ' they may say what they please , but I be determi you shall do nothing of
of the kind , as long as I have power to prevent it . ' he next take I across the lawn to see he mole - trap , and then into the stack - yard to see he weasel - trap : one of which , to he great joy , contain a dead weasel ; and then into the stable to see , not the fine carriage - horse , but a little rough colt , which he inform I have be breed on purpose for he , and he be to ride it as soon as it be properly train . I try to amuse the little fellow , and listen to all he chatter as complacently as I could ; for I think if he have any affections at all , I would endeaavor to win they ; and then , in time , I might be able to show he the error of he way : but I look in vain for that generous , noble spirit he mother talk of ; though I could see he be not without a certain degree of quickness and penetration , when he choose to exert it . when we re-enter the house it be nearly tea - time . master tell I that , as papa be from home , he and I and be to have tea with mamma , for a treat ; for , on such occasion , she always dine at luncheon - time with they , instead of at six o'clock . after , go to bed , but favour we with he company and conversation till eight . after he be gone , . further enlighten I on the subject of she child 's disposition and acquirement , and on what they be to learn , and how they be to be manage , and caution I to mention they defect to no one but herself . my mother have warn I before to mention they as little as possible to she , for people do not like to be tell of they child 's fault , and so I conclude I be to keep silence on they altogether . about half - past nine , invite I to partake of a frugal supper of cold meat and bread . I be glad when that be over , and she take she bedroom candlestick and retire to rest ; for though I wish to be pleased with she , she company be extremely irksome to I ; and I could not help feel that she be cold , grave , and forbid -- the very opposite of the kind , warm - hear matron my hope have depict she to be . -- a few more Lessons I rise next morning with a feeling of hopeful exhilaration , in spite of the disappointment already experience ; but I find the dressing of be no light matter , as she abundant hair be to be smear with pomade , plait in three long tail , and tie with bow of ribbon : a task my unaccustomed finger find great difficulty in perform . she tell I she nurse could do it in half the time , and , by keep up a constant fidget of impatience , contrive to render I still longer . when all be done , we go into the schoolroom , where I meet my other pupil , and chat with the two till it be time to go down to breakfast . that meal be conclude , and a few civil word have be exchange with , we repair to the schoolroom again , and commence the business of the day . I find my pupil very backward , indeed ; but , though averse to every species of mental exertion , be not without ability . could scarcely read a word , and be so careless and inattentive that I could hardly get on with she at all . however , by dint of great labour and patience , I manage to get something done in the course of the morning , and then accompany my young charge out into the garden and adjacent grounds , for a little recreation before dinner . there we get along tolerably together , except that I find they have no notion of go with I : I must go with they , wherever they choose to lead I . I must run , walk , or stand , exactly as it suit they fancy . this , I think , be reverse the order of thing ; and I find it doubly disagreeable , as on this as well as subsequent occasion , they seem to prefer the dirtiest place and the most dismal occupations . but there be no remedy ; either I must follow they , or keep entirely apart from they , and thus appear neglectful of my charge . to -day , they manifest a particular attachment to a well at the bottom of the lawn , where they persist in dabbling with stick and pebble for above half a hour . I be in constant fear that they mother would see they from the window , and blame I for allow they thus to draggle they clothes and wet they foot and hand , instead of take exercise ; but no argument , command , or entreaty could draw they away . if she do not see they , some one else do -- a gentleman on horseback have enter the gate and be proceed up the road ; at the distance of a few pace from we he pause , and call to the child in a waspish penetrating tone , bay they ' keep out of that water . ' ' , ' say he , ' ( I suppose it be ) , I be surprised that you should allow they to
to dirty they clothes in that manner ! do not you see how have soil she frock ? and that 's sock be quite wet ? and both of they without glove ? dear , dear ! let I request that in future you will keep they Decent at least ! ' so say , he turn away , and continue he ride up to the house . this be . I be surprise that he should nominate he child master and ; and still more so , that he should speak so uncivilly to I , they governess , and a perfect stranger to himself . presently the bell ring to summon we in . I dine with the child at one , while he and he lady take they luncheon at the same table . he conduct there do not greatly raise he in my estimation . he be a man of ordinary stature -- rather below than above -- and rather thin than stout , apparently between thirty and forty year of age : he have a large mouth , pale , dingy complexion , milky blue eye , and hair the colour of a hempen cord . there be a roast leg of mutton before he : he help , the child , and I , desire I to cut up the child 's meat ; then , after twist about the mutton in various direction , and eye it from different point , he pronounce it not fit to be eat , and call for the cold beef . ' what be the matter with the mutton , my dear ? ' ask he mate . ' it be quite overdone . do not you taste , , that all the goodness be roast out of it ? and can not you see that all that nice , red gravy be completely dry away ? ' ' well , I think the will suit you . ' the beef be set before he , and he begin to carve , but with the most rueful expression of discontent . ' what be the matter with the , ? I be sure I think it be very nice . ' ' and so it be very nice . a nicer jous not could not be ; but it be quite spoiled , ' reply he , dolefully . ' how so ? ' ' how so ! why , do not you see how it be cut ? dear -- dear ! it be quite shocking ! ' ' they must have cut it wrong in the kitchen , then , for I be sure I carve it quite properly here , yesterday . ' ' no doubt they cut it wrong in the kitchen -- the savage ! dear -- dear ! do ever any one see such a fine piece of beef so completely ruin ? but remember that , in future , when a decent dish leave this table , they shall not touch it in the kitchen . remember that , ! ' Notwithstand the ruinous state of the beef , the gentleman manage to out himself some delicate slice , part of which he eat in silence . when he next speak , it be , in a less querulous tone , to ask what there be for dinner . ' and grouse , ' be the concise reply . ' and what besides ? ' ' . ' ' what kind of fish ? ' 'I do not know . ' ' you do not know ? ' cry he , look solemnly up from he plate , and suspend he knife and fork in astonishment . ' no . I tell the cook to get some fish -- I do not particularize what . ' ' well , that beat everything ! a lady profess to keep house , and do not even know what fish be for dinner ! profess to order fish , and do not specify what ! ' ' perhaps , , you will order dinner yourself in future . ' nothing more be say ; and I be very glad to get out of the room with my pupil ; for I never feel so ashamed and uncomfortable in my life for anything that be not my own fault . in the afternoon we apply to lesson again : then go out again ; then have tea in the schoolroom ; then I dress for dessert ; and when she and she brother have go down to the dining - room , I take the opportunity of begin a letter to my dear friend at home : but the child come up before I have half complete it . at seven I have to put to be ; then I play with till eight , when he , too , go ; and I finish my letter and unpack my clothes , which I have hithertoo find no opportunity for do , and , finally , go to be myself . but this be a very favourable specimen of a day 's proceedings . my task of instruction and surveillance , instead of become easier as my charge and I get better accustom to each other , become more arduous as they character unfolded . the name of governess , I soon find , be a mere mockery as apply to I : my pupil have no more notion of obedience than a wild , unbroken colt . the habitual fear of they father 's peevish temper , and the dread of the punishment he be will not to inflict when irritate , keep they generally within bounds in he immediate presence . the girl , too , have some fear of they mother 's anger ; and the boy might occasionally be bribed to do as she bid he by the hope of reward
reward ; but I have no reward to offer ; and as for punishment , I be give to understand , the parent reserve that privilege to themselves ; and yet they expect I to keep my pupil in order . other child might be guide by the fear of anger and the desire of approbation ; but neither the one nor the other have any effect upon these . master , not content with refuse to be rule , must need set up as a ruler , and manifest a determination to keep , not only he sister , but he governess in order , by violent manual and pedal application ; and , as he be a tall , strong boy of he year , this occasion no trifling inconvenience . a few sound box on the ear , on such occasion , might have settle the matter easily enough : but as , in that case , he might make up some story to he mother which she would be sure to believe , as she have such unshaken faith in he veracity -- though I have already discover it to be by no means unimpeachable -- I determine to refrain from strike he , even in self - defence ; and , in he most violent mood , my only resource be to throw he on he back and hold he hand and foot till the frenzy be somewhat abated . to the difficulty of prevent he from do what he ought not , be add that of force he to do what he ought . often he would positively refuse to learn , or to repeat he lesson , or even to look at he book . here , again , a good birch rod might have be serviceable ; but , as my powers be so limited , I must make the best use of what I have . as there be no settled hour for study and play , I resolve to give my pupil a certain task , which , with moderate attention , they could perform in a short time ; and till this be do , however weary I be , or however perverse they might be , nothing short of parental interference should induce I to suffer they to leave the schoolroom , even if I should sit with my chair against the door to keep they in . patience , Firmness , and be my only weapon ; and these I resolve to use to the utmost . I determine always strictly to fulfil the threat and promise I make ; and , to that end , I must be cautious to threat and promise nothing that I could not perform . then , I would carefully refrain from all useless irritability and indulgence of my own ill - temper : when they behave tolerably , I would be as kind and oblige as it be in my power to be , in order to make the widest possible distinction between good and bad conduct ; I would reason with they , too , in the simplest and most effective manner . when I reprove they , or refuse to gratify they wish , after a glaring fault , it should be more in sorrow than in anger : they little hymn and prayer I would make plain and clear to they understanding ; when they say they prayer at night and ask pardon for they offence , I would remind they of the sins of the past day , solemnly , but in perfect kindness , to avoid raise a spirit of opposition ; penitential hymn should be say by the naughty , cheerful one by the comparatively good ; and every kind of instruction I would convey to they , as much as possible , by entertaine discourse -- apparently with no other object than they present amusement in view . by these means I hope in time both to benefit the child and to gain the approbation of they parent ; and also to convince my friend at home that I be not so want in skill and prudence as they suppose . I know the difficulty I have to contend with be great ; but I know ( at least I believe ) unremitting patience and perseverance could overcome they ; and night and morning I implor assistance to this end . but either the child be so incorrigible , the parent so unreasonable , or myself so mistaken in my view , or so unable to carry they out , that my best intention and most strenuous effort seem productive of no better result than sport to the child , dissatisfaction to they parent , and torment to myself . the task of instruction be as arduous for the body as the mind . I have to run after my pupil to catch they , to carry or drag they to the table , and often forcibly to hold they there till the lesson be done . tom I frequently put into a corner , seat myself before he in a chair , with a book which contain the little task that must be say or read , before he be release , in my hand . he be not strong enough to push both I and the chair away , so he would stand twist he body and face into the most grotesque and singular contortion -- laughable , no doubt , to a unconcerned spectator , but not to I -- and utter loud yell and doleful outcry , intend to represent weeping but wholly without the accompaniment of tear . I know this be do solely for the purpose of annoie I ; and , therefore , however I might inwardly tremble with impatience and irritation , I manfully strove to suppress all visible sign of molestation , and affect to
to sit with calm indifference , wait till it should please he to cease this pastime , and prepare for a run in the garden , by cast he eye on the book and read or repeat the few word he be require to say . sometimes he be determined to do he write badly ; and I have to hold he hand to prevent he from purposely blott or disfigur the paper . frequently I threaten that , if he do not do better , he should have another line : then he would stubbornly refuse to write this line ; and I , to save my word , have finally to resort to the expedient of hold he finger upon the pen , and forcibly draw he hand up and down , till , in spite of he resistance , the line be in some sort complete . yet be by no means the most unmanageable of my pupil : sometimes , to my great joy , he would have the sense to see that he wisest policy be to finish he tasnks , and go out and amuse himself till I and he sister come to join he ; which frequently be not at all , for seldom follow he example in this particular : she apparently prefer rolling on the floor to any other amusement : down she would drop like a leaden weight ; and when I , with great difficulty , have succeed in root she thence , I have still to hold she up with one arm , while with the other I hold the book from which she be to read or spell she lesson . as the dead weight of the big girl of six become too heavy for one arm to bear , I transfer it to the other ; or , if both be weary of the burden , I carry she into a corner , and tell she she might come out when she should find the use of she foot , and stand up : but she generally prefer lie there like a log till dinner or tea - time , when , as I could not deprive she of she meal , she must be liberate , and would come crawl out with a grin of triumph on she round , red face . often she would stubbornly refuse to pronounce some particular word in she lesson ; and now I regret the lost labour I have have in striving to conquer she obstinacy . if I have pass it over as a matter of no consequence , it would have be better for both party , than vainly strive to overcome it as I do ; but I think it my absolute duty to crush this vicious tendency in the bud : and so it be , if I could have do it ; and have my power be less limited , I might have enforce obedience ; but , as it be , it be a trial of strength between she and I , in which she generally come off victorious ; and every victory serve to encourage and strengthen she for a future contest . in vain I argue , coax , entreate , threaten , scold ; in vain I keep she in from play , or , if oblige to take she out , refuse to play with she , or to speak kindly or have anything to do with she ; in vain I try to set before she the advantages of do as she be bid , and be love , and kindly treat in consequence , and the disadvantage of persisting in she absurd perversity . sometimes , when she would ask I to do something for she , I would answer ,-- ' yes , I will , , if you will only say that word . come ! you would better say it at once , and have no more trouble about it . ' ' no . ' ' then , of course , I can do nothing for you . ' with I , at she age , or under , neglect and disgrace be the most dreadful of punishment ; but on she they make no impression . sometimes , exasperate to the utmost pitch , I would shake she violently by the shoulder , or pull she long hair , or put she in the corner ; for which she punish I with loud , shrill , piercing scream , that go through my head like a knife . she know I hate this , and when she have shriek she utmost , would look into my face with a air of vindictive satisfaction , exclaim ,--'now , then ! that be for you ! ' and then shriek again and again , till I be force to stop my ear . often these dreadful cry would bring Bloomfield up to inquire what be the matter ? ' be a naughty girl , ma'am . ' ' but what be these shocking scream ? ' ' she be scream in a passion . ' 'I never hear such a dreadful noise ! you might be kill she . why be she not out with she brother ? ' 'I can not get she to finish she lesson . ' ' but must be a good girl , and finish she lesson . ' this be blandly speak to the child . ' and I hope I shall never hear such terrible cry again ! ' and fix she cold , stony eye upon I with a look that could not be mistaken , she would shut the door , and walk away . sometimes I would try to take the little obstinate creature by surprise , and casually ask she the word while she be think of something else ; frequently she would
would begin to say it , and then suddenly cheek herself , with a provoke look that seem to say , ' ah ! I be too sharp for you ; you sha not trick it out of I , either . ' on another occasion , I pretend to forget the whole affair ; and talk and play with she as usual , till night , when I put she to bed ; then bend over she , while she lay all smile and good humour , just before depart , I say , as cheerfully and kindly as before --' now , , just tell I that word before I kiss you good - night . you be a good girl now , and , of course , you will say it . ' ' no , I will not . ' ' then I can not kiss you . ' ' well , I do not care . ' in vain I express my sorrow ; in vain I linger for some symptom of contrition ; she really ' do not care , ' and I leave she alone , and in darkness , wonder most of all at this last proof of insensate stubbornness . in my childhood I could not imagine a more afflictive punishment than for my mother to refuse to kiss I at night : the very idea be terrible . more than the idea I never feel , for , happily , I never commit a fault that be deem worthy of such penalty ; but once I remember , for some transgression of my sister 's , we mother think proper to inflict it upon she : what she feel , I can not tell ; but my sympathetic tear and suffer for she sake I shall not soon forget . another troublesome trait in be she incorrigible propensity to keep run into the nursery , to play with she little sister and the nurse . this be natural enough , but , as it be against she mother 's express desire , I , of course , forbade she to do so , and do my utmost to keep she with I ; but that only increase she relish for the nursery , and the more I strove to keep she out of it , the oftener she go , and the longer she stay , to the great dissatisfaction of , who , I well know , would impute all the blame of the matter to I . another of my trials be the dressing in the morning : at one time she would not be washed ; at another she would not be dress , unless she might wear some particular frock , that I know she mother would not like she to have ; at another she would scream and run away if I attempt to touch she hair . so that , frequently , when , after much trouble and toil , I have , at length , succeed in bring she down , the breakfast be nearly half over ; and black look from ' mamma , ' and testy observation from 'papa , ' speak at I , if not to I , be sure to be my meed : for few thing irritate the latter so much as want of punctuality at meal time . then , among the minor annoyance , be my inability to satisfy with she daughter 's dress ; and the child 's hair ' be never fit to be see . ' sometimes , as a powerful reproach to I , she would perform the office of tire woman herself , and then complain bitterly of the trouble it give she . when little come into the schoolroom , I hope she would be mild and inoffensive , at least ; but a few day , if not a few hour , suffice to destroy the illusion : I find she a mischievous , intractable little creature , give up to falsehood and deception , young as she be , and alarmingly fond of exercise she two favourite weapon of offence and defence : that of spitting in the face of those who incur she displeasure , and bellow like a bull when she unreasonable desire be not gratify . as she , generally , be pretty quiet in she parent 's presence , and they be impressed with the notion of she be a remarkably gentle child , she falsehood be readily believe , and she lould uproars lead they to suspect harsh and injudicious treatment on my part ; and when , at length , she bad disposition become manifest even to they prejudiced eye , I feel that the whole be attribute to I . ' what a naughty girl Fanny be get ! ' would say to she spouse . ' do not you observe , my dear , how she be alte since she enter the schoolroom ? she will soon be as bad as the other two ; and , I be sorry to say , they have quite deteriorate of late . ' ' you may say that , ' be the answer . 'I have be think that same myself . I think when we get they a governess they would improve ; but , instead of that , they get worse and worse : I do not know how it be with they learn , but they habits , I know , make no sort of improvement ; they get rougher , and dirtier , and more unseemly every day . ' I know this be all point at I ; and these , and all similar innuendoe , affect I far more deeply than any open accusation would have do ; for against the latter I should have be rouse to speak in my own defence : now I
I judge it my wisest plan to subdue every resentful impulse , suppress every sensitive shrinking , and go on perseveringly , do my best ; for , irksome as my situation be , I earnestly wish to retain it . I think , if I could struggle on with unremitting firmness and integrity , the child would in time become more humanized : every month would contribute to make they some little wiser , and , consequently , more manageable ; for a child of nine or ten as frantic and ungovernable as these at six and seven would be a maniac . I flatter myself I be benefit my parent and sister by my continuance here ; for small as the salary be , I still be earn something , and with strict economy I could easily manage to have something to spare for they , if they would favour I by take it . then it be by my own while that I have get the place : I have bring all this tribulation on myself , and I be determined to bear it ; nay , more than that , I do not even regret the step I have take . I longe to show my friend that , even now , I be competent to undertake the charge , and able to acquit myself honourably to the end ; and if ever I feel it degrad to submit so quietly , or intolerable to toil so constantly , I would turn towards my home , and say within myself - they may crush , but they shall not subdue I ! ' Tis of thee that I think , not of they . I be allow to visit home ; but my holiday be only of a fortnight 's duration : ' for , ' say , 'I think , as you have see you friend so lately , you would not care for a longer stay . ' I leave she to think so still : but she little know how long , how wearisome those fourteen week of absence have be to I ; how intensely I have longe for my holiday , how greatly I be disappointed at they curtailment . yet she be not to blame in this . I have never tell she my feeling , and she could not be expect to divine they ; I have not be with she a full term , and she be justified in not allow I a full vacation . -- the I spare my reader the account of my delight on come home , my happiness while there -- enjoy a brief space of rest and liberty in that dear , familiar place , among the loving and the love -- and my sorrow on be oblige to bid they , once more , a long adieu . I return , however , with unabated vigour to my work -- a more arduous task than anyone can imagine , who have not feel something like the misery of be charge with the care and direction of a set of mischievous , turbulent rebel , whom he utmost exertion can not bind to they duty ; while , at the same time , he be responsible for they conduct to a higher power , who exact from he what can not be achieve without the aid of the superior 's more potent authority ; which , either from indolence , or the fear of become unpopular with the say rebellious gang , the latter refuse to give . I can conceive few situation more harassing than that wherein , however you may long for success , however you may labour to fulfil you duty , you effort be baffle and set at nuy by those beneath you , and unjustly censure and misjudge by those above . I have not enumerate half the vexatious propensity of my pupil , or half the trouble result from my heavy responsibility , for fear of trespasse too much upon the reader 's patience ; as , perhaps , I have already do ; but my design in write the few last page be not to amuse , but to benefit those whom it might concern ; he that have no interest in such matter will doubtless have skip they over with a cursory glance , and , perhaps , a malediction against the prolixity of the writer ; but if a parent have , therefrom , gather any useful hint , or a unfortunate governess receive thereby the slightest benefit , I be well reward for my pain . to avoid trouble and confusion , I have take my pupil one by one , and discuss they various quality ; but this can give no adequate idea of be worry by the whole three together ; when , as be often the case , all be determined to ' be naughty , and to tease , and put she in a passion . ' sometimes , on such occasion , the thought have suddenly occur to I --' if they could see I now ! ' mean , of course , my friend at home ; and the idea of how they would pity I have make I pity myself -- so greatly that I have have the utmost difficulty to restrain my tear : but I have restrain they , till my little tormentor be go to dessert , or clear off to bed ( my only prospects of deliverance ) , and then , in all the bliss of solitude , I have give myself up to the luxury of a unrestricted burst of weeping . but this be a weakness I do not often indulge : my employment be too numerous , my leisure moment too precious , to admit of much time be give to fruitless lamentation . I particularly remember one
one wild , snowy afternoon , soon after my return in : the child have all come up from dinner , loudly declare that they mean 'too be naughty ;' and they have well keep they resolution , though I have talk myself hoarse , and weary every muscle in my throat , in the vain attempt to reason they out of it . I have get pin up in a corner , whence , I tell he , he should not escape till he have do he appoint task . , have possess herself of my work - bag , and be rifl its contents -- and spitte into it besides . I tell she to let it alone , but to no purpose , of course . ' burn it , ! ' cry : and this command she hasten to obey . I spring to snatch it from the fire , and dart to the door . ' , throw she desk out of the window ! ' cry he : and my precious desk , contain my letter and papers , my small amount of cash , and all my valuable , be about to be precipitate from the three - storey window . I flow to rescue it . meanwhile have leave the room , and be rush down the stair , follow by . have secure my desk , I run to catch they , and come scamper after . all three escape I , and run out of the house into the garden , where they plunge about in the snow , shout and scream in exultant glee . what must I do ? if I follow they , I should probably be unable to capture one , and only drive they farther away ; if I do not , how be I to get they in ? and what would they parent think of I , if they see or hear the child riot , hatless , bonnetless , gloveless , and bootless , in the deep soft snow ? while I stand in this perplexity , just without the door , try , by grim look and angry word , to awe they into subjection , I hear a voice behind I , in harshly piercing tone , exclaim , - ' ! be it possible ? what , in the 's name , can you be think about ? ' 'I can not get they in , sir , ' say I , turn round , and behold , with he hair on end , and he pale blue eye bolting from they socket . ' but I insist upon they be get in ! ' cry he , approach nearer , and look perfectly ferocious . ' then , sir , you must call they yourself , if you please , for they will not listen to I ,' I reply , step back . ' come in with you , you filthy brat ; or I will horsewhip you every one ! ' roar he ; and the child instantly obey . ' there , you see !-- they come at the first word ! ' ' yes , when you speak . ' ' and it be very strange , that when you have the care of them you have no better control over th'ey than that ! -- now , there they be -- go upstairs with they nasty snowy foot ! do go after 'em and see they make decent , for heaven 's sake ! ' that gentleman 's mother be then stay in the house ; and , as I ascend the stair and pass the drawing - room door , I have the satisfaction of hear the old lady declaim aloud to she daughter - in - law to this effect ( for I could only distinguish the most emphatic word ) - ' gracious heaven !-- never in all my life --!-- get they death as sure as -- ! do you think , my dear , she be a proper person ? take my word for it --' I hear no more ; but that suffice . the senior have be very attentive and civil to I ; and till now I have think she a nice , kind - hear , chatty old body . she would often come to I and talk in a confidential strain ; nodding and shake she head , and gesticulat with hand and eye , as a certain class of old lady be will not to do ; though I never know one that carry the peculiarity to so great a extent . she would even sympathise with I for the trouble I have with the child , and express at time , by half sentence , intersperse with nod and know wink , she sense of the injudicious conduct of they mamma in so restrict my power , and neglect to support I with she authority . such a mode of testifying disapprobation be not much to my taste ; and I generally refuse to take it in , or understand anything more than be openly spoken ; at least , I never go farther than a implied acknowledgment that , if matter be otherwise order my task would be a less difficult one , and I should be better able to guide and instruct my charge ; but now I must be doubly cautious . , though I see the old lady have she defect ( of which one be a proneness to proclaim she perfection ) , I have always be wishful to excuse they , and to give she credit for all the virtue she profess , and even imagine other yet untold . kindness , which have be the food of my life through so many year , have lately be so entirely deny I , that I welcome
welcome with grateful joy the slightest semblance of it . no wonder , then , that my heart warm to the old lady , and always gladden at she approach and regret she departure . but now , the few word luckily or unluckily hear in passing have wholly revolutionize my idea respect she : now I look upon she as hypocritical and insincere , a flatterer , and a spy upon my word and deed . Doubtless it would have be my interest still to meet she with the same cheerful smile and tone of respectful cordiality as before ; but I could not , if I would : my manner alte with my feeling , and become so cold and shy that she could not fail to notice it . she soon do notice it , and she manner alte too : the familiar nod be change to a stiff bow , the gracious smile give place to a glare of ferocity ; she vivacious loquacity be entirely transfer from I to ' the darling boy and girl , ' whom she flatter and indulge more absurdly than ever they mother have do . I confess I be somewhat trouble at this change : I fear the consequence of she displeasure , and even make some effort to recover the ground I have lose -- and with better apparent success than I could have anticipate . at one time , I , merely in common civility , ask after she cough ; immediately she long visage relax into a smile , and she favour I with a particular history of that and she other infirmity , follow by a account of she pious resignation , deliver in the usual emphatic , declamatory style , which no writing can portray . ' but there be one remedy for all , my dear , and that be resignation ' ( a toss of the head ) , ' resignation to the will of heaven ! ' ( a uplifting of the hand and eye ) . ' it have always support I through all my trial , and always will do ' ( a succession of nod ) . ' but then , it be not everybody that can say that ' ( a shake of the head ) ; ' but I be one of the pious one , ! ' ( a very significant nod and toss ) . ' and , thank heaven , I always be ' ( another nod ) , ' and I glory in it ! ' ( a emphatic clasping of the hand and shaking of the head ) . and with several texts of , misquote or misapply , and religious exclamation so redolent of the ludicrous in the style of delivery and manner of bring in , if not in the expression themselves , that I decline repeat they , she withdraw ; toss she large head in high good - humour -- with herself at least -- and leave I hope that , after all , she be rather weak than wick . at she next visit to , I go so far as to say I be glad to see she look so well . the effect of this be magical : the word , intend as a mark of civility , be receive as a flattering compliment ; she countenance brighten up , and from that moment she become as gracious and benign as heart could wish -- in outward semblance at least . from what I now see of she , and what I hear from the child , I know that , in order to gain she cordial friendship , I have but to utter a word of flattery at each convenient opportunity : but this be against my principle ; and for lack of this , the capricious old dame soon deprive I of she favour again , and I believe do I much secret injury . she could not greatly influence she daughter - in - law against I , because , between that lady and herself there be a mutual dislike -- chiefly show by she in secret detraction and calumniation ; by the other , in a excess of frigid formality in she demeanour ; and no fawning flattery of the elder could thaw away the wall of ice which the younger interpose between they . but with she son , the old lady have better success : he would listen to all she have to say , provide she could soothe he fretful temper , and refrain from irritat he by she own asperity ; and I have reason to believe that she considerably strengthen he prejudice against I . she would tell he that I shamefully neglect the child , and even he wife do not attend to they as she ought ; and that he must look after they himself , or they would all go to ruin . thus urge , he would frequently give himself the trouble of watch they from the window during they play ; at time , he would follow they through the grounds , and too often come suddenly upon they while they be dabbl in the forbidden well , talk to the coachman in the stable , or revell in the filth of the farm - yard -- and I , meanwhile , wearily stand , by , have previously exhaust my energy in vain attempt to get they away . often , too , he would unexpectedly pop he head into the schoolroom while the young people be at meal , and find they spill they milk over the table and themselves , plunge they finger into they own or each other 's mug , or quarrell over they victual like a set of tiger 's cub . if I be quiet at the moment , I be connive at they
they disorderly conduct ; if ( as be frequently the case ) I happen to be exalt my voice to enforce order , I be use undue violence , and set the girl a bad example by such ungentleness of tone and language . I remember one afternoon in spring , when , owe to the rain , they could not go out ; but , by some amazing good fortune , they have all finish they lesson , and yet abstain from run down to tease they parent -- a trick that annoye I greatly , but which , on rainy day , I seldom could prevent they do ; because , below , they find novelty and amusement -- especially when visitor be in the house ; and they mother , though she bid I keep they in the schoolroom , would never chide they for leave it , or trouble herself to send they back . but this day they appear satisfied with , they present abode , and what be more wonderful still , seem dispose to play together without depend on I for amusement , and without quarrell with each other . they occupation be a somewhat puzzling one : they be all squat together on the floor by the window , over a heap of broken toy and a quantity of bird ' egg -- or rather egg -shell , for the contents have luckily be abstract . these shell they have break up and be pound into small fragment , to what end I could not imagine ; but so long as they be quiet and not in positive mischief , I do not care ; and , with a feeling of unusual repose , I sit by the fire , put the finishing stitch to a frock for 's doll ; intend , when that be do , to begin a letter to my mother . suddenly the door open , and the dingy head of look in . ' all very quiet here ! what be you do ? ' say he . ' no harm To - day , at least , ' think I . but he be of a different opinion . Advance to the window , and see the child 's occupations , he testily exclaim --' what in the world be you about ? ' ' we be grind egg -shell , papa ! ' cry . ' how you make such a mess , you little devils ? do not you see what confounded work you be make of the carpet ? ' ( the carpet be a plain brown drugget ) . ' , do you know what they be do ? ' ' yes , sir . ' ' you know it ? ' 'yes . ' ' you know it ! and you actually sit there and permit they to go on without a word of reproof ! ' 'I do not think they be do any harm . ' ' any harm ! why , look there ! just look at that carpet , and see -- be there ever anything like it in a house before ? no wonder you room be not fit for a pigsty -- no wonder you pupil be worse than a litter of pig !-- no wonder -- oh ! I declare , it put I quite past my patience ' and he depart , shutt the door after he with a bang that make the child laugh . ' it put I quite past my patience too ! ' mutter I , get up ; and , seize the poker , I dash it repeatedly into the cinder , and stir they up with unwonted energy ; thus ease my irritation under pretence of mende the fire . after this , be continually look in to see if the schoolroom be in order ; and , as the child be continually litter the floor with fragment of toy , stick , stone , stubble , leave , and other rubbish , which I could not prevent they bring , or oblige they to gather up , and which the servants refuse to ' clean after they ,' I have to spend a considerable portion of my valuable leisure moment on my knee upon the floor , in painsfully reduce thing to order . once I tell they that they should not taste they supper till they have pick up everything from the carpet ; might have hers when she have take up a certain quantity , when she have gather twice as many , and be to clear away the rest . wonderful to state , the girl do they part ; but be in such a fury that he fly upon the table , scatter the bread and milk about the floor , strike he sister , kick the coal out of the coal - pan , attempt to overthrow the table and chair , and seem inclined to make a Dougla - larder of the whole contents of the room : but I seize upon he , and , send to call she mamma , hold he , in spite of kick , blow , yell , and execration , till make she appearance . ' what be the matter with my boy ? ' say she . and when the matter be explain to she , all she do be to send for the nursery -maid to put the room in order , and bring master Bloomfield he supper . ' there now , ' cry , triumphantly , look up from he viand with he mouth almost too full for speech . ' there now , ! you see I have get my supper in spite of you : and I have not pick up a single thing ! ' the only person in the house who have any real sympathy
sympathy for I be the nurse ; for she have suffer like affliction , though in a smaller degree ; as she have not the task of teaching , nor be she so responsible for the conduct of she charge . 'Oh , ! ' she would say , ' you have some trouble with they childer ! ' 'I have , indeed , ; and I daresay you know what it be . ' 'Ay , I do so ! but I do not vex myself of 'er 'em as you do . and then , you see , I hit th'ey a slap sometimes : and they little ' un -- I give th'ey a good whipping now and then : there be nothing else will do for 'em , as what they say . Howsoever , I have lose my place for it . ' ' have you , ? I hear you be go to leave . ' 'Eh , bless you , yes ! give I warn a three wik sin ' . she tell I afore how it muld be , if I hit th'ey again ; but I could not hold my hand off th'ey at nothing . I know not how you do , for 's worse by the half nor she sister ! ' chapter V-- the besides the old lady , there be another relative of the family , whose visit be a great annoyance to I -- this be 's uncle ,' 's brother ; a tall , self - sufficient fellow , with dark hair and sallow complexion like he sister , a nose that seem to disdain the earth , and little grey eye , frequently half - close , with a mixture of real stupidity and affect contempt of all surround object . he be a thick - set , strongly - build man , but he have find some means of compresse he waist into a remarkably small compass ; and that , together with the unnatural stillness of he form , show that the lofy - minded , manly , the scorner of the female sex , be not above the foppery of stay . he seldom deign to notice I ; and , when he do , it be with a certain supercilious insolence of tone and manner that convince I he be no gentleman : though it be intend to have a contrary effect . but it be not for that I dislike he come , so much as for the harm he do the child -- encourage all they evil propensity , and undo in a few minute the little good it have take I month of labour to achieve . Fanny and little he seldom condescende to notice ; but be something of a favourite . he be continually encourage she tendency to affectation ( which I have do my utmost to crush ) , talk about she pretty face , and fill she head with all manner of conceited notion concern she personal appearance ( which I have instruct she to regard as dust in the balance compare with the cultivation of she mind and manners ) ; and I never see a child so susceptible of flattery as she be . whatever be wrong , in either she or she brother , he would encourage by laugh at , if not by actually praise : people little know the injury they do to child by laugh at they fault , and make a pleasant jest of what they true friend have endeavoure to teach they to hold in grave abhorrence . though not a positive drunkard , habitually swallow great quantity of wine , and take with relish a occasional glass of brandy and water . he teach he nephew to imitate he in this to the utmost of he ability , and to believe that the more wine and spirit he could take , and the better he like they , the more he manifest he bold , and manly spirit , and rise superior to he sister . have not much to say against it , for he favourite beverage be gin and water ; of which he take a considerable portion every day , by dint of constant sipping -- and to that I chiefly attribute he dingy complexion and waspish temper . likewise encourage 's propensity to persecute the lower creation , both by precept and example . as he frequently come to course or shoot over he brother - in - law 's grounds , he would bring he favourite dog with he ; and he treat they so brutally that , poor as I be , I would have give a sovereign any day to see one of they bite he , provide the animal could have do it with impunity . sometimes , when in a very complacent mood , he would go a - bird '-nest with the child , a thing that irritate and annoye I exceedingly ; as , by frequent and persever attempt , I flatter myself I have partly show they the evil of this pastime , and hope , in time , to bring they to some general sense of justice and humanity ; but ten minute ' bird '-nest with uncle , or even a laugh from he at some relation of they former barbarity , be sufficient at once to destroy the effect of my whole elaborate course of reasoning and persuasion . happily , however , during that spring , they never , but once , get anything but empty nests , or egg -- be too impatient to leave they till the bird be hatch ; that once , , who have be with he uncle into the neighbouring plantation , come run in high glee into the garden , with a brood of little callow nestling in he hand . and
and , whom I be just bring out , run to admire he spoil , and to beg each a bird for themselves . 'no , not one ! ' cry . ' they be all mine ; uncle give they to I -- one , two , three , four , five -- you sha not touch one of they ! no , not one , for you life ! ' continue he , exultingly ; lay the nest on the ground , and stand over it with he leg wide apart , he hand thrust into he breech - pocket , he body bend forward , and he face twist into all manner of contortion in the ecstasy of he delight . ' but you shall see I fetle 'em off . my word , but I will wallop th'ey ? see if I do not now . by gum ! but there be rare sport for I in that nest . ' ' but , , ' say I , 'I shall not allow you to torture those bird . they must either be kill at once or carry back to the place you take they from , that the old bird may continue to feed they . ' ' but you do not know where that be , madam : it be only I and uncle Robson that know that . ' ' but if you do not tell I , I shall kill they myself -- much as I hate it . ' ' you dare not . you dare not touch they for you life ! because you know papa and mamma , and uncle , would be angry . , ha ! I have catch you there , ! ' 'I shall do what I think right in a case of this sort without consult any one . if you papa and mamma do not happen to approve of it , I shall be sorry to offend they ; but you uncle 's opinion , of course , be nothing to I . ' so say -- urge by a sense of duty -- at the risk of both make myself sick and incurr the wrath of my employer -- I get a large flat stone , that have be rear up for a mouse - trap by the gardener ; then , have once more vainly endeavoure to persuade the little tyrant to let the bird be carry back , I ask what he intend to do with they . with fiendish glee he commence a list of torment ; and while he be busy in the relation , I drop the stone upon he intend victim and crush they flat beneath it . be the outcry , terrible the execration , consequent upon this daring outrage ; uncle have be come up the walk with he gun , and be just then pause to kick he dog . fly towards he , vow he would make he kick I instead of . lean upon he gun , and laugh excessively at the violence of he nephew 's passion , and the bitter malediction and opprobrious epithet he heape upon I . ' well , you be a good 'un ! ' exclaim he , at length , take up he weapon and proceed towards the house . ' , but the lad have some spunk in he , too . curse I , if ever I see a nobler little scoundrel than that . he be beyond petticoat government already : by ! he defy mother , granny , governess , and all ! , ha , ha ! never mind , , I will get you another brood to - morrow . ' ' if you do , , I shall kill they too , ' say I . ' Humph ! ' reply he , and have honoure I with a broad stare -- which , contrary to he expectation , I sustain without flinch - - he turn away with a air of supreme contempt , and stalk into the house . next go to tell he mamma . it be not she way to say much on any subject ; but , when she next see I , she aspect and demeanou be doubly dark and chilled . after some casual remark about the weather , she observ -- 'I be sorry , , you should think it necessary to interfere with 's amusement ; he be very much distress about you destroy the bird . ' ' when 's amusement consist in injuring sentient creature ,' I answer , ' I think it my duty to interfere . ' ' you seem to have forgotten , ' say she , calmly , ' that the creature be all create for we convenience . ' I think that doctrine admit some doubt , but merely reply -- ' if they be , we have no right to torment they for we amusement . ' 'I think , ' say she , 'a child 's amusement be scarcely to be weigh against the welfare of a soulless brute . ' ' but , for the child 's own sake , it ought not to be encourage to have such amusement , ' answer I , as meekly as I could , to make up for such unusual pertinacity . ' " be the merciful , for they shall obtain mercy . "' 'Oh ! of course ; but that refer to we conduct towards each other . ' ' " the merciful man show mercy to he beast , " ' I venture to add . 'I think you have not show much mercy , ' reply she , with a short , bitter laugh ; ' kill the poor bird by wholesale in that shocking manner , and put the dear boy to such misery for a mere
mere whim . ' I judge it prudent to say no more . this be the nearest approach to a quarrel I ever have with ; as well as the greatest number of word I ever exchange with she at one time , since the day of my first arrival . but and old be not the only guest whose come to annoye I ; every visitor disturb I more or less ; not so much because they neglect I ( though I do feel they conduct strange and disagreeable in that respect ) , as because I find it impossible to keep my pupil away from they , as I be repeatedly desire to do : Tom must talk to they , and must be notice by they . neither the one nor the other know what it be to feel any degree of shamefacedness , or even common modesty . they would indecently and clamorously interrupt the conversation of they elder , tease they with the most impertinent question , roughly collar the gentleman , climb they knee uninvited , hang about they shoulders or rifle they pocket , pull the lady 's gowns , disorder they hair , tumble they collar , and importunately beg for they trinket . have the sense to be shocked and annoyed at all this , but she have not sense to prevent it : she expect I to prevent it . but how could I -- when the guest , with they fine clothes and new face , continually flatter and indulge they , out of complaisance to they parent -- how could I , with my homely garment , every - day face , and honest word , draw they away ? I strain every nerve to do so : by strive to amuse they , I endeavoure to attract they to my side ; by the exertion of such authority as I possess , and by such severity as I da to use , I try to deter they from torment the guest ; and by reproach they unmannerly conduct , to make they asham to repeat it . but they know no shame ; they scorn authority which have no terror to back it ; and as for kindness and affection , either they have no heart , or such as they have be so strongly guard , and so well conceal , that I , with all my effort , have not yet discover how to reach they . but soon my trials in this quarter come to a close -- sooner than I either expect or desire ; for one sweet evening towards the close of , as I be rejoice in the near approach of the holiday , and congratulate myself upon have make some progress with my pupil ( as far as they learn went , at least , for I have instil something into they head , and I have , at length , bring they to be a little -- a very little -- more rational about get they lesson do in time to leave some space for recreation , instead of torment themselves and I all day long to no purpose ) , send for I , and calmly tell I that after my service would be no longer require . she assure I that my character and general conduct be unexceptionable ; but the child have make so little improvement since my arrival that and she feel it they duty to seek some other mode of instruction . though superior to most child of they year in abilitie , they be decidedly behind they in attainment ; they manners be uncultivated , and they tempers unruly . and this she attribute to a want of sufficient firmness , and diligent , persever care on my part . Unshaken firmness , devote diligence , unwearied perseverance , unceasing care , be the very qualification on which i have secretly pride myself ; and by which i have hope in time to overcome all difficulty , and obtain success at last . I wish to say something in my own justification ; but in attempt to speak , I feel my voice falter ; and rather than testify any emotion , or suffer the tear to overflow that be already gather in my eye , I choose to keep silence , and bear all like a self - convict culprit . thus be I dismiss , and thus I seek my home . ! what would they think of I ? unable , after all my boast , to keep my place , even for a single year , as governess to three small child , whose mother be assert by my own aunt to be a ' very nice woman . ' have be thus weigh in the balance and find want , I need not hope they would be willing to try I again . and this be a unwelcome thought ; for vex , harass , disappoint as I have be , and greatly as I have learn to love and value my home , I be not yet weary of adventure , nor willing to relax my effort . I know that all parent be not like and , and I be certain all child be not like theirs . the next family must be different , and any change must be for the better . I have be season by adversity , and tutor by experience , and I long to redeem my lost honour in the eyes of those whose opinion be more than that of all the world to I . -- the for a few month I remain peaceably at home , in the quiet enjoyment of liberty and rest , and genuine friendship , from all of which I have fast so long ; and in the earnest prosecution of my study , to
to recover what I have lose during my stay at , and to lay in new store for future use . my father 's health be still very infirm , but not materially worse than when I last see he ; and I be glad I have it in my power to cheer he by my return , and to amuse he with singe he favourite song . no one triumph over my failure , or say I have better have take he or she advice , and quietly stay at home . all be glad to have I back again , and lavish more kindness than ever upon I , to make up for the suffering I have undergone ; but not one would touch a shilling of what I have so cheerfully earned and so carefully save , in the hope of share it with they . by dint of pinching here , and scrape there , we debt be already nearly pay . have have good success with she drawing ; but we father have insist upon likewise keep all the produce of she industry to herself . all we could spare from the supply of we humble wardrobe and we little casual expense , he direct we to put into the savings ' - bank ; say , we know not how soon we might be dependent on that alone for support : for he feel he have not long to be with we , and what would become of we mother and we when he be gone , only know ! dear papa ! if he have troublead himself less about the affliction that threaten we in case of he death , I be convinced that dread event would not have take place so soon . my mother would never suffer he to ponder on the subject if she could help it . 'Oh , ! ' exclaim she , on one occasion , ' if you would but dismiss such gloomy subject from you mind , you would live as long as any of we ; at least you would live to see the girl marry , and yourself a happy grandfather , with a canty old dame for you companion . ' my mother laugh , and so do my father : but he laugh soon perish in a dreary sigh . ' they marry -- poor penniless thing ! ' say he ; ' who will take they I wonder ! ' ' why , nobody shall that be not thankful for they . be not I penniless when you take I ? and you pretend , at least , to be vastly pleased with you acquisition . but it be no matter whether they get married or not : we can devise a thousand honest way of make a livelihood . and I wonder , , you can think of bother you head about we Poverty in case of you death ; as if that would be anything compare with the calamity of lose you -- a affliction that you well know would swallow up all other , and which you ought to do you utmost to preserve we from : and there be nothing like a cheerful mind for keep the body in health . ' 'I know , , it be wrong to keep repin as I do , but I can not help it : you must bear with I . ' 'I will not bear with you , if I can alter you , ' reply my mother : but the harshness of she word be undone by the earnest affection of she tone and pleasant smile , that make my father smile again , less sadly and less transiently than be he will not . ' , ' say I , as soon as I could find a opportunity of speak with she alone , 'my money be but little , and can not last long ; if I could increase it , it would lessen 's anxiety , on one subject at least . I can not draw like , and so the best thing I could do would be to look out for another situation . ' ' and so you would actually try again , ? ' ' Decidedly , I would . ' ' why , my dear , I should have think you have have enough of it . ' 'I know , ' say I , ' everybody be not like and --' ' some be worse , ' interrupt my mother . ' but not many , I think , ' reply I , ' and I be sure all child be not like theirs ; for I and be not : we always do as you bid we , do not we ? ' ' generally : but then , I do not spoil you ; and you be not perfect angels after all : have a fund of quiet obstinacy , and you be somewhat faulty in regard to temper ; but you be very good child on the whole . ' 'I know I be sulky sometimes , and I should have be glad to see these child sulky sometimes too ; for then I could have understand they : but they never be , for they could not be offend , nor hurt , nor asham : they could not be unhappy in any way , except when they be in a passion . ' ' well , if they could not , it be not they fault : you can not expect stone to be as pliable as clay . ' ' no , but still it be very unpleasant to live with such unimpressible , incomprehensible creature . you can not love they ; and if you could , you love would be utterly throw away : they could neither return it , nor
nor value , nor understand it . but , however , even if I should stumble on such a family again , which be quite unlikely , I have all this experience to begin with , and I should manage better another time ; and the end and aim of this preamble be , let I try again . ' ' well , my girl , you be not easily discourage , I see : I be glad of that . but , let I tell you , you be a good deal paler and thinner than when you first leave home ; and we can not have you undermine you health to hoard up money either for yourself or other . ' ' Mary tell I I be change too ; and I do not much wonder at it , for I be in a constant state of agitation and anxiety all day long : but next time I be determined to take thing coolly . ' after some further discussion , my mother promise once more to assist I , provide I would wait and be patient ; and I leave she to broach the matter to my father , when and how she deem it most advisable : never doubt she ability to obtain he consent . meantime , I search , with great interest , the advertising column of the newspaper , and write answer to every ' want a Governess ' that appear at all eligible ; but all my letter , as well as the reply , when I get any , be dutifully show to my mother ; and she , to my chagrin , make I reject the situation one after another : these be low people , these be too exacte in they demand , and these too niggardly in they remuneration . ' you talents be not such as every poor clergyman 's daughter possess , Agnes , ' she would say , ' and you must not throw they away . remember , you promise to be patient : there be no need of hurry : you have plenty of time before you , and may have many chance yet . ' at length , she advise I to put a advertisement , myself , in the paper , state my qualifications , &c . ' , singe , draw , , , and german , ' say she , ' be no mean assemblage : many will be glad to have so much in one instructor ; and this time , you shall try you fortune in a somewhat higher family in that of some genuine , thoroughbreed gentleman ; for such be far more likely to treat you with proper respect and consideration than those purse - proud tradespeople and arrogant upstart . I have know several among the higher rank who treat they governess quite as one of the family ; though some , I allow , be as insolent and exact as any one else can be : for there be bad and good in all class . ' the advertisement be quickly write and despatch . of the two party who answer it , but one would consent to give I fifty pound , the sum my mother bade I name as the salary I should require ; and here , I hesitat about engage myself , as I fear the child would be too old , and they parent would require some one more showy , or more experienced , if not more accomplished than I . but my mother dissuad I from decline it on that account : I should do vastly well , she say , if I would only throw aside my diffidence , and acquire a little more confidence in myself . I be just to give a plain , true statement of my acquirement and qualifications , and name what stipulation I choose to make , and then await the result . the only stipulation I venture to propose , be that I might be allow two month ' holiday during the year to visit my friend , at and . the unknown lady , in she reply , make no objection to this , and state that , as to my acquirement , she have no doubt I should be able to give satisfaction ; but in the engagement of governess she consider those thing as but subordinate point ; as be situate in the neighbourhood of of ---, she could get master to supply any deficiency in that respect : but , in she opinion , next to unimpeachable morality , a mild and cheerful temper and oblige disposition be the most essential requisity . my mother do not relish this at all , and now make many objection to my accept the situation ; in which my sister warmly support she : but , unwill to be balk again , I overrule they all ; and , have first obtain the consent of my father ( who have , a short time previously , be apprise of these transaction ) , I write a most obliging epistle to my unknown correspondent , and , finally , the bargain be conclude . it be decree that on the last day of I be to enter upon my new office as governess in the family of Murray , of , near of ---, about seventy mile from we village : a formidable distance to I , as I have never be above twenty mile from home in all the course of my twenty year ' sojourn on earth ; and as , moreover , every individual in that family and in the neighbourhood be utterly unknown to myself and all my acquaintance . but this render it only the more piquant to I . I have now , in some measure , get rid of the mauvaise hont
hont that have formerly oppress I so much ; there be a pleasing excitement in the idea of enter these unknown region , and make my way alone among its strange inhabitant . I now flatter myself I be go to see something in the world : 's residence be near a large town , and not in a manufacturing district , where the people have nothing to do but to make money ; he rank from what I could gather , appear to be higher than that of ; and , doubtless , he be one of those genuine thoroughbred gentry my mother speak of , who would treat he governess with due consideration as a respectable well - educated lady , the instructor and guide of he child , and not a mere upper servant . then , my pupil be older , would be more rational , more teachable , and less troublesome than the last ; they would be less confin to the schoolroom , and not require that constant labour and incessant watch ; and , finally , bright vision mingl with my hope , with which the care of child and the mere duty of a governess have little or nothing to do . thus , the reader will see that I have no claim to be regard as a martyr to filial piety , go forth to sacrifice peace and liberty for the sole purpose of lay up store for the comfort and support of my parent : though certainly the comfort of my father , and the future support of my mother , have a large share in my calculation ; and fifty pound appear to I no ordinary sum . I must have decent clothes become my station ; I must , it seem , put out my washing , and also pay for my four annual journey between and home ; but with strict attention to economy , surely twenty pound , or little more , would cover those expense , and then there would be thirty for the bank , or little less : what a valuable addition to we stock ! oh , I must struggle to keep this situation , whatever it might be ! both for my own honour among my friend and for the solid service I might render they by my continuance there . -- the 31st of be a wild , tempestuous day : there be a strong north wind , with a continual storm of snow drift on the ground and whir through the air . my friend would have have I delay my departure , but fearful of prejudice my employer against I by such want of punctuality at the commencement of my undertaking , I persist in keep the appointment . I will not inflict upon my reader a account of my leave home on that dark winter morning : the fond farewell , the long , long journey to of ---, the solitary waitings in inns for coach or train -- for there be some railway then -- and , finally , the meeting at of --- with 's servant , who have be send with the phaeton to drive I from thence to . I will just state that the heavy snow have throw such impediment in the way of both horse and steam - engine , that it be dark some hour before I reach my journey 's end , and that a most bewildering storm come on at last , which make the few mile ' space between O --- and a long and formidable passage . I sit resign , with the cold , sharp snow drift through my veil and fill my lap , see nothing , and wonder how the unfortunate horse and driver could make they way even as well as they do ; and indeed it be but a toilsome , creeping style of progression , to say the best of it . at length we pause ; and , at the call of the driver , someone unlatch and roll back upon they creaking hinge what appear to be the park gate . then we proceed along a smoother road , whence , occasionally , I perceive some huge , hoary mass gleam through the darkness , which I take to be a portion of a snow - clad tree . after a considerable time we pause again , before the stately portico of a large house with long window descende to the ground . I rise with some difficulty from under the superincumbent snowdrift , and alight from the carriage , expect that a kind and hospitable reception would indemnify I for the toil and hardship of the day . a gentleman person in black open the door , and admit I into a spacious hall , light by a amber - colou lamp suspend from the ceiling ; he lead I through this , along a passage , and open the door of a back room , tell I that be the schoolroom . I enter , and find two young lady and two young gentleman -- my future pupil , I suppose . after a formal greeting , the elder girl , who be trifl over a piece of canva and a basket of german wool , ask if I should like to go upstairs . I reply in the affirmative , of course . ' Matilda , take a candle , and show she she room , ' say she . , a strapping hoyden of about fourteen , with a short frock and trousers , shrug she shoulders and make a slight grimace , but take a candle and proceed before I up the back stair ( a long , steep , double flight ) , and through a long , narrow passage , to a small but tolerably comfortable room . she then ask I
I if I would take some tea or coffee . I be about to answer no ; but remember that I have take nothing since seven o'clock that morning , and feel faint in consequence , I say I would take a cup of tea . say she would tell ' , ' the young lady depart ; and by the time I have divest myself of my heavy , wet cloak , shawl , bonnet , & c. , a mincing damsel come to say the young lady desire to know whether I would take my tea up there or in the schoolroom . under the plea of fatigue I choose to take it there . she withdraw ; and , after a while , return again with a small tea - tray , and place it on the chest of drawer , which serve as a dressing - table . have civilly thank she , I ask at what time I should be expect to rise in the morning . ' the young lady and gentleman breakfast at half - past eight , ma 'am , ' say she ; ' they rise early ; but , as they seldom do any lesson before breakfast , I should think it will do if you rise soon after seven . ' I desire she to be so kind as to call I at seven , and , promise to do so , she withdraw . then , have break my long fast on a cup of tea and a little thin bread and butter , I sit down beside the small , smoulder fire , and amuse myself with a hearty fit of crying ; after which , I say my prayer , and then , feel considerably relieved , begin to prepare for bed . find that none of my luggage be bring up , I institute a search for the bell ; and fail to discover any sign of such a convenience in any corner of the room , I take my candle and venture through the long passage , and down the steep stair , on a voyage of discovery . meet a well - dress female on the way , I tell she what I want ; but not without considerable hesitation , as I be not quite sure whether it be one of the upper servants , or herself : it happen , however , to be the lady 's - maid . with the air of one conferr a unusual favour , she vouchsaf to undertake the send up of my thing ; and when I have re-enter my room , and wait and wonder a long time ( greatly fear that she have forget or neglect to perform she promise , and doubt whether to keep wait or go to bed , or go down again ) , my hope , at length , be revive by the sound of voice and laughter , accompany by the tramp of foot along the passage ; and presently the luggage be bring in by a rough - look maid and a man , neither of they very respectful in they demeanour to I . have shut the door upon they retiring footstep , and unpack a few of my thing , I betake myself to rest ; gladly enough , for I be weary in body and mind . it be with a strange feeling of desolation , mingle with a strong sense of the novelty of my situation , and a joyless kind of curiosity concern what be yet unknown , that I awoke the next morning ; feel like one whir away by enchantment , and suddenly drop from the clouds into a remote and unknown land , widely and completely isolate from all he have ever see or know before ; or like a thistle - see borne on the wind to some strange nook of uncongenial soil , where it must lie long enough before it can take root and germinate , extracte nourishment from what appear so alien to its nature : if , indeed , it ever can . but this give no proper idea of my feeling at all ; and no one that have not live such a retired , stationary life as mine , can possibly imagine what they be : hardly even if he have know what it be to awake some morning , and find himself in , in , with a world of water between himself and all that know he . I shall not soon forget the peculiar feeling with which I raise my blind and look out upon the unknown world : a wide , white wilderness be all that meet my gaze ; a waste of Deserts toss in snow , and heavy laden grove . I descend to the schoolroom with no remarkable eagerness to join my pupil , though not without some feeling of curiosity respect what a further acquaintance would reveal . one thing , among other of more obvious importance , I determine with myself -- I must begin with call they and master . it seem to I a chilling and unnatural piece of punctilio between the child of a family and they instructor and daily companion ; especially where the former be in they early childhood , as at ; but even there , my call the little Bloomfields by they simple name have be regard as a offensive liberty : as they parent have take care to show I , by carefully designate they and , & c. , in speak to I . I have be very slow to take the hint , because the whole affair strike I as so very absurd ; but now I determin to be wiser , and begin at once with as much form and ceremony as any member of the family would be likely to
to require : and , indeed , the child be so much older , there would be less difficulty ; though the little word miss and master seem to have a surprising effect in repress all familiar , open - hear kindness , and extinguish every gleam of cordiality that might arise between we . as I cannot , like , find it in my heart to bestow all my tediousness upon the reader , I will not go on to bear he with a minute detail of all the discoveries and proceeding of this and the follow day . no doubt he will be amply satisfied with a slight sketch of the different member of the family , and a general view of the first year or two of my sojourn among they . to begin with the head : be , by all account , a blustering , roystering , country squire : a devot fox - hunter , a skilful horse - jockey and farrier , a active , practical farmer , and a hearty bon vivant . by all account , I say ; for , except on , when he go to church , I never see he from month to month : unless , in cross the hall or walk in the grounds , the figure of a tall , stout gentleman , with scarlet cheek and crimson nose , happen to come across I ; on which occasion , if he pass near enough to speak , a unceremonious nod , accompany by a ' , , ' or some such brief salutation , be usually vouchsaf . frequently , indeed , he lould laugh reach I from afar ; and oftener still I hear he swear and blasphem against the footman , groom , coachman , or some other hapless dependant . be a handsome , dashing lady of forty , who certainly require neither rouge nor padde to add to she charms ; and whose chief enjoyment be , or seem to be , in give or frequent party , and in dressing at the very top of the fashion . I do not see she till eleven o'clock on the morning after my arrival ; when she honoure I with a visit , just as my mother might step into the kitchen to see a new servant - girl : yet not so , either , for my mother would have see she immediately after she arrival , and not wait till the next day ; and , moreover , she would have address she in a more kind and friendly manner , and give she some word of comfort as well as a plain exposition of she duty ; but do neither the one nor the other . she just step into the schoolroom on she return from ordering dinner in the housekeeper 's room , bade I good - morning , stood for two minute by the fire , say a few word about the weather and the ' rather rough ' journey I must have have yesterday ; pett she youngest child - - a boy of ten -- who have just be wip he mouth and hand on she gown , after indulge in some savoury morsel from the housekeeper 's store ; tell I what a sweet , good boy he be ; and then sail out , with a self - complacent smile upon she face : think , no doubt , that she have do quite enough for the present , and have be delightfully condescende into the bargain . she child evidently hold the same opinion , and I alone think otherwise . after this she look in upon I once or twice , during the absence of my pupil , to enlighten I concern my duty towards they . for the girl she seem anxious only to render they as superficially attractive and showily accomplish as they could possibly be make , without present trouble or discomfort to themselves ; and I be to act accordingly -- to study and strive to amuse and oblige , instruct , refine , and polish , with the least possible exertion on they part , and no exercise of authority on mine . with regard to the two boy , it be much the same ; only instead of accomplishment , I be to get the greatest possible quantity of latin grammar and 's into they head , in order to fit they for school -- the greatest possible quantity at least without trouble to themselves . might be a ' little high - spirit , ' and might be a little ' nervous and tedious -- ' ' but at all event , , ' say she , 'I hope you will keep you temper , and be mild and patient throughout ; especially with the dear little charle ; he be so extremely nervous and susceptible , and so utterly unaccustomed to anything but the tenderest treatment . you will excuse my name these thing to you ; for the fact be , I have hithertoo find all the governess , even the very best of they , faulty in this particular . they want that meek and quiet spirit , which , or some of they , say be better than the putting on of apparel -- you will know the passage to which I allude , for you be a clergyman 's daughter . but I have no doubt you will give satisfaction in this respect as well as the rest . and remember , on all occasion , when any of the young people do anything improper , if persuasion and gentle remonstrance will not do , let one of the other come and tell I ; for I can speak to they more plainly than it would be proper for you to do . and make they as happy
happy as you can , , and I dare say you will do very well . ' I observ that while be so extremely solicitous for the comfort and happiness of she child , and continually talk about it , she never once mention mine ; though they be at home , surround by friend , and I a alien among strangers ; and I do not yet know enough of the world , not to be considerably surprised at this anomaly . , otherwise , be about sixteen when I come , and decidedly a very pretty girl ; and in two year longer , as time more completely develop she form and add to she carriage and deportment , she become positively beautiful ; and that in no common degree . she be tall and slender , yet not thin ; perfectly form , exquisitely fair , though not without a brilliant , healthy bloom ; she hair , which she wear in a profusion of long ringlet , be of a very light brown inclin to yellow ; she eye be pale blue , but so clear and bright that few would wish they darker ; the rest of she feature be small , not quite regular , and not remarkably otherwise : but altogether you could not hesitate to pronounce she a very lovely girl . I wish I could say as much for mind and disposition as I can for she form and face . yet think not I have any dreadful disclosure to make : she be lively , light - hear , and could be very agreeable , with those who do not cross she will . towards I , when I first come , she be cold and haughty , then insolent and overbearing ; but , on a further acquaintance , she gradually lay aside she air , and in time become as deeply attach to I as it be possible for she to be to one of my character and position : for she seldom lose sight , for above half a hour at a time , of the fact of my be a hireling and a poor curate 's daughter . and yet , upon the whole , I believe she respecte I more than she herself be aware of ; because I be the only person in the house who steadily profess good principle , habitually speak the truth , and generally endeavoure to make inclination bow to duty ; and this I say , not , of course , in commendation of myself , but to show the unfortunate state of the family to which my service be , for the present , devote . there be no member of it in whom I regret this sad want of principle so much as herself ; not only because she have take a fancy to I , but because there be so much of what be pleasant and prepossesse in herself , that , in spite of she failings , I really like she -- when she do not rouse my indignation , or ruffle my temper by great a display of she fault . these , however , I would fain persuade myself be rather the effect of she education than she disposition : she have never be perfectly teach the distinction between right and wrong ; she have , like she brother and sister , be suffer , from infancy , to tyrannize over nurse , governess , and servants ; she have not be teach to moderate she desire , to control she temper or bridle she will , or to sacrifice she own pleasure for the good of other . she temper be naturally good , she be never violent or morose , but from constant indulgence , and habitual scorn of reason , she be often testy and capricious ; she mind have never be cultivate : she intellect , at best , be somewhat shallow ; she possess considerable vivacity , some quickness of perception , and some talent for music and the acquisition of language , but till fifteen she have trouble herself to acquire nothing ; -- then the love of display have rouse she faculty , and induce she to apply herself , but only to the more showy accomplishment . and when I come it be the same : everything be neglect but french , german , music , singe , dancing , fancy - work , and a little drawing -- such drawing as might produce the greatest show with the smallest labour , and the principal part of which be generally do by I . for music and singe , besides my occasional instruction , she have the attendance of the best master the country afforde ; and in these accomplishment , as well as in dancing , she certainly attaine great proficiency . to music , indeed , she devote too much of she time , as , governess though I be , I frequently tell she ; but she mother think that if she like it , she could not give too much time to the acquisition of so attractive a art . of fancy - work I know nothing but what I gather from my pupil and my own observation ; but no sooner be I initiate , than she make I useful in twenty different way : all the tedious part of she work be shift on to my shoulders ; such as stretch the frame , stitch in the canva , sort the wool and silk , put in the grounds , count the stitch , rectify mistakes , and finish the piece she be tired of . at sixteen , be something of a romp , yet not more so than be natural and allowable for a girl of that age , but at seventeen , that propensity , like all
all other thing , begin to give way to the rule passion , and soon be swallow up in the all - absorb ambition to attract and dazzle the other sex . but enough of she : now let we turn to she sister . be a veritable hoyden , of whom little need be say . she be about two year and a half younger than she sister ; she feature be larger , she complexion much darker . she might possibly make a handsome woman ; but she be far too big - boned and awkward ever to be call a pretty girl , and at present she care little about it . know all she charms , and think they even greater than they be , and value they more highly than she ought to have do , have they be three time as great ; think she be well enough , but car little about the matter ; still less do she care about the cultivation of she mind , and the acquisition of ornamental accomplishment . the manner in which she learn she lesson and practise she music be calculate to drive any governess to despair . short and easy as she tasnks be , if do at all , they be slur over , at any time and in any way ; but generally at the least convenient time , and in the way least beneficial to herself , and least satisfactory to I : the short half - hour of practising be horribly strum through ; she , meantime , unsparingly abuse I , either for interrupt she with correction , or for not rectify she mistake before they be make , or something equally unreasonable . once or twice , I venture to remonstrate with she seriously for such irrational conduct ; but on each of those occasion , I receive such reprehensive expostulation from she mother , as convince I that , if I wish to keep the situation , I must even let go on in she own way . when she lesson be over , however , she ill - humour be generally over too : while ride she spirited pony , or rom with the dog or she brother and sister , but especially with she dear brother , she be as happy as a lark . as a animal , be all right , full of life , vigour , and activity ; as a intelligent being , she be barbarously ignorant , indocile , careless and irrational ; and , consequently , very distressing to one who have the task of cultivating she understanding , reform she manners , and aid she to acquire those ornamental attainment which , unlike she sister , she despise as much as the rest . she mother be partly aware of she deficiency , and give I many a lecture as to how I should try to form she taste , and endeavou to rouse and cherish she dormant vanity ; and , by insinuating , skilful flattery , to win she attention to the desire object -- which I would not do ; and how I should prepare and smooth the path of learn till she could glide along it without the least exertion to herself : which i could not , for nothing can be teach to any purpose without some little exertion on the part of the learner . as a moral agent , be reckless , headstrong , violent , and unamenable to reason . one proof of the deplorable state of she mind be , that from she father 's example she have learn to swear like a trooper . she mother be greatly shocked at the ' unlady - like trick , ' and wonder ' how she have pick it up . ' ' but you can soon break she of it , , ' say she : ' it be only a habit ; and if you will just gently remind she every time she do so , I be sure she will soon lay it aside . ' I not only ' gently remind ' she , I try to impress upon she how wrong it be , and how distresse to the ear of decent people : but all in vain : I be only answer by a careless laugh , and , , , how shocked you be ! I be so glad ! ' or , ' well ! I can not help it ; papa should not have teach I : I learn it all from he ; and maybe a bit from the coachman . ' she brother , alias , be about eleven when I come : a fine , stout , healthy boy , frank and good - natured in the main , and might have be a decent lad have he be properly educated ; but now he be as rough as a young bear , boisterous , unruly , unprincipled , untatch , unteachable -- at least , for a governess under he mother 's eye . he master at school might be able to manage he better -- for to school he be send , greatly to my relief , in the course of a year ; in a state , it be true , of scandalous ignorance as to , as well as the more useful though more neglect thing : and this , doubtless , would all be laid to the account of he education have be entrust to a ignorant female teacher , who have presume to take in hand what she be wholly incompetent to perform . I be not deliver from he brother till full twelve month after , when he also be despatch in the same state of disgraceful ignorance as the former . master Charles be he mother 's peculiar darling . he be little
little more than a year younger than , but much smaller , paler , and less active and robust ; a pettish , cowardly , capricious , selfish little fellow , only active in do mischief , and only clever in inventing falsehood : not simply to hide he fault , but , in mere malicious wantonness , to bring odium upon other . in fact , master be a very great nuisance to I : it be a trial of patience to live with he peaceably ; to watch over he be worse ; and to teach he , or pretend to teach he , be inconceivable . at ten year old , he could not read correctly the easiest line in the simplest book ; and as , accord to he mother 's principle , he be to be tell every word , before he have time to hesitate or examine its orthography , and never even to be inform , as a stimulant to exertion , that other boy be more forward than he , it be not surprising that he make but little progress during the two year I have charge of he education . he minute portion of latin grammar , & c. , be to be repeat over to he , till he choose to say he know they , and then he be to be help to say they ; if he make mistakes in he little easy sum in arithmetic , they be to be show he at once , and the sum do for he , instead of he be leave to exercise he faculty in find they out himself ; so that , of course , he take no pain to avoid mistakes , but frequently set down he figure at random , without any calculation at all . I do not invariably confine myself to these rule : it be against my conscience to do so ; but I seldom could venture to deviate from they in the slightest degree , without incurr the wrath of my little pupil , and subsequently of he mamma ; to whom he would relate my transgression maliciously exaggerate , or adorn with embellishment of he own ; and often , in consequence , be I on the point of lose or resign my situation . but , for they sake at home , I smother my pride and suppress my indignation , and manage to struggle on till my little tormentor be despatch to school ; he father declare that home education be ' no go ; for he , it be plain ; he mother spoil he outrageously , and he governess could make no hand of he at all . ' a few more observation about and its ongoing , and I have do with dry description for the present . the house be a very respectable one ; superior to 's , both in age , size , and magnificence : the garden be not so tastefully lay out ; but instead of the smooth - shaven lawn , the young tree guard by paling , the grove of upstart poplar , and the plantation of fir , there be a wide park , stock with deer , and beautify by fine old tree . the surround country itself be pleasant , as far as fertile field , flourish tree , quiet green lane , and smile hedge with wild - flower scatter along they bank , could make it ; but it be depressingly flat to one born and nurture among the rug hill of - . we be situate nearly two mile from the village church , and , consequently , the family carriage be put in requisition every morning , and sometimes oftener . and generally think it sufficient to show themselves at church once in the course of the day ; but frequently the child prefer go a second time to wander about the grounds all the day with nothing to do . if some of my pupil choose to walk and take I with they , it be well for I ; for otherwise my position in the carriage be to be crush into the corner farthest from the open window , and with my back to the horse : a position which invariably make I sick ; and if I be not actually oblige to leave the church in the middle of the service , my devotion be disturb with a feeling of languor and sickliness , and the torment fear of its become worse : and a depressing headache be generally my companion throughout the day , which would otherwise have be one of welcome rest , and holy , calm enjoyment . ' it be very odd , , that the carriage should always make you sick : it never make I , ' remark , ' nor I either , ' say she sister ; ' but I dare say it would , if I sit where she do -- such a nasty , horrid place , ; I wonder how you can bear it ! ' 'I be oblige to bear it , since no choice be leave I , '-- I might have answer ; but in tenderness for they feeling I only reply ! it be but a short way , and if I be not sick in church , I do not mind it . ' if I be call upon to give a description of the usual division and arrangement of the day , I should find it a very difficult matter . I have all my meal in the schoolroom with my pupil , at such time as sui they fancy : sometimes they would ring for dinner before it be half cook ; sometimes they would keep it wait on the table for above a hour , and then be out of humwe because
because the potatoe be cold , and the gravy cover with cake of solid fat ; sometimes they would have tea at four ; frequently , they would storm at the servants because it be not in precisely at five ; and when these order be obey , by way of encouragement to punctuality , they would keep it on the table till seven or eight . they hour of study be manage in much the same way ; my judgment or convenience be never once consult . and would determine 'to get all the plaguy business over before breakfast , ' and send the maid to call I up at half - past five , without any scruple or apology ; sometimes , I be tell to be ready precisely at six , and , have dress in a hurry , come down to a empty room , and after wait a long time in suspense , discover that they have change they mind , and be still in bed ; or , perhaps , if it be a fine summer morning , would come to tell I that the young lady and gentleman have take a holiday , and be go out ; and then I be keep wait for breakfast till I be almost ready to faint : they have fortify themselves with something before they go . often they would do they lesson in the open air ; which I have nothing to say against : except that I frequently catch cold by sit on the damp grass , or from exposure to the evening dew , or some insidious dratch , which seem to have no injuriious effect on they . it be quite right that they should be hardy ; yet , surely , they might have be teach some consideration for other who be less so . but I must not blame they for what be , perhaps , my own fault ; for I never make any particular objection to sit where they please ; foolishly choose to risk the consequence , rather than trouble they for my convenience . they indecorous manner of do they lesson be quite as remarkable as the caprice display in they choice of time and place . while receive my instruction , or repeat what they have learn , they would lounge upon the sofa , lie on the rug , stretch , yawn , talk to each other , or look out of the window ; whereas , I could not so much as stir the fire , or pick up the handkerchief I have drop , without be rebuk for inattention by one of my pupil , or tell that ' mamma would not like I to be so careless . ' the servant , see in what little estimation the governess be hold by both parent and child , regulate they behaviour by the same standard . I have frequently stand up for they , at the risk of some injury to myself , against the tyranny and injustice of they young master and mistress ; and I always endeavoure to give they as little trouble as possible : but they entirely neglect my comfort , despise my request , and slighte my direction . all servant , I be convinced , would not have do so ; but domestic in general , be ignorant and little accustom to reason and reflection , be too easily corrupt by the carelessness and bad example of those above they ; and these , I think , be not of the best order to begin with . I sometimes feel myself degrad by the life I lead , and asham of submit to so many indignity ; and sometimes I think myself a fool for caring so much about they , and fear I must be sadly want in humility , or that charity which ' suffereth long and be kind , seeketh not she own , be not easily provoke , beareth all thing , endureth all thing . ' but , with time and patience , matter begin to be slightly ameliorate : slowly , it be true , and almost imperceptibly ; but I get rid of my male pupil ( that be no trifling advantage ) , and the girl , as I intimate before concern one of they , become a little less insolent , and begin to show some symptom of esteem . ' be a queer creature : she never flatter , and do not praise they half enough ; but whenever she do speak favourably of they , or anything belong to they , they could be quite sure she approbation be sincere . she be very obliging , quiet , and peaceable in the main , but there be some thing that put she out of temper : they do not much care for that , to be sure , but still it be better to keep she in tune ; as when she be in a good humour she would talk to they , and be very agreeable and amuse sometimes , in she way ; which be quite different to 's , but still very well for a change . she have she own opinion on every subject , and keep steadily to they -- very tiresome opinion they often be ; as she be always think of what be right and what be wrong , and have a strange reverence for matter connect with religion , and a unaccountable liking to good people . ' -- the ' come out ' at eighteen , be to emerge from the quiet obscurity of the schoolroom into the full blaze of the fashionable world -- as much of it , at least , as could be have out of ; for she papa could not be persuaded to leave he rural pleasur and pursuit , even for
for a few week 's residence in town . she be to make she debut on the third of , at a magnificent ball , which she mamma propose to give to all the nobility and choice gentry of of --- and its neighbourhood for twenty mile round . of course , she look forward to it with the wildest impatience , and the most extravagant anticipation of delight . ' , ' say she , one evening , a month before the all - important day , as I be peruse a long and extremely interesting letter of my sister 's -- which I have just glance at in the morning to see that it contain no very bad news , and keep till now , unable before to find a quiet moment for read it , do put away that dull , stupid letter , and listen to I ! I be sure my talk must be far more amusing than that . ' she seat herself on the low stool at my foot ; and I , suppresse a sigh of vexation , begin to fold up the epistle . ' you should tell the good people at home not to bear you with such long letter , ' say she ; ' and , above all , do bid they write on proper note - paper , and not on those great vulgar sheet . you should see the charming little lady - like note write to she friend . ' ' the good people at home , ' reply I , ' know very well that the longer they letter be , the better I like they . I should be very sorry to receive a charme little lady - like note from any of they ; and I think you be too much of a lady yourself , , to talk about the " vulgarity " of writing on a large sheet of paper . ' ' well , I only say it to tease you . but now I want to talk about the ball ; and to tell you that you positively must put off you holiday till it be over . ' ' why so ?--i shall not be present at the ball . ' ' no , but you will see the room deck out before it begin , and hear the music , and , above all , see I in my splendid new dress . I shall be so charme , you will be ready to worship I -- you really must stay . ' 'I should like to see you very much ; but I shall have many opportunity of see you equally charme , on the occasion of some of the numberless ball and party that be to be , and I can not disappoind my friend by postpone my return so long . ' 'Oh , never mind you friend ! tell they we will not let you go . ' ' but , to say the truth , it would be a disappointment to myself : I long to see they as much as they to see I -- perhaps more . ' ' well , but it be such a short time . ' ' Nearly a fortnight by my computation ; and , besides , I can not bear the thought of a spend from home : and , moreover , my sister be go to be married . ' ' be she -- when ? ' ' not till next month ; but I want to be there to assist she in make preparation , and to make the best of she company while we have she . ' ' why do not you tell I before ? ' 'I have only get the news in this letter , which you stigmatize as dull and stupid , and will not let I read . ' whom be she to be marry ? ' , the vicar of a neighbour parish . ' ' be he rich ? ' ' no ; only comfortable . ' ' be he handsome ? ' ' no ; only decent . ' ' young ? ' ' no ; only middle . ' 'Oh , mercy ! what a wretch ! what sort of a house be it ? ' 'a quiet little vicarage , with a ivy -clad porch , a old - fashioned garden , and -- ' 'Oh , stop !-- you will make I sick . how can she bear it ? ' 'I expect she will not only be able to bear it , but to be very happy . you do not ask I if be a good , wise , or amiable man ; I could have answer yes , to all these question -- at least so think , and I hope she will not find herself mistaken . ' ' but --miserable creature ! how can she think of spend she life there , coop up with that nasty old man ; and no hope of change ? ' ' he be not old : he be only six or seven and thirty ; and she herself be twenty - eight , and as sober as if she be fifty . ' 'Oh ! that be better then -- they be well matched ; but do they call he the " worthy vicar " ? ' 'I do not know ; but if they do , I believe he merit the epithet . ' ' , how shocke ! and will she wear a white apron and make pie and pudding ? ' 'I do not know about the white apron , but I dare say she will make pie and pudding now and then ; but that will be no great hardship , as she have do it before . ' ' and will she go
go about in a plain shawl , and a large straw bonnet , carry tract and bone soup to she husband 's poor parishioners ? ' 'I be not clear about that ; but I dare say she will do she best to make they comfortable in body and mind , in accordance with we mother 's example . ' -- the ball ' now , , ' exclaim , immediately I enter the schoolroom , after have take off my outdoor garment , upon return from my four week ' recreation , ' now -- shut the door , and sit down , and I will tell you all about the ball . ' ' no -- damn it , no ! ' shoute . ' hold you tongue , can not ye ? and let I tell she about my new mare -- such a splendour , ! a fine blood mare --' ' do be quiet , ; and let I tell my news first . ' ' no , no , ; you will be such a damn long time over it -- she shall hear I first -- I will be hang if she do not ! ' 'I be sorry to hear , , that you have not get rid of that shocking habit yet . ' ' well , I can not help it : but I will never say a wicked word again , if you will only listen to I , and tell to hold she confounded tongue . ' remonstrate , and I think I should have be tear in piece between they ; but have the loudest voice , she sister at length give in , and suffer she to tell she story first : so I be doom to hear a long account of she splendid mare , its breeding and pedigree , its pace , its action , its spirit , & c. , and of she own amazing skill and courage in ride it ; conclude with a assertion that she could clear a five - barr gate ' like winking , ' that papa say she might hunt the next time the hound meet , and have order a bright scarlet hunting - habit for she . 'Oh , ! what story you be tell ! ' exclaim she sister . ' well , ' answer she , no whit abash , 'I know I could clear a five - barr gate , if I try , and papa will say I may hunt , and mamma will order the habit when I ask it . ' 'Well , now get along , ' reply ; ' and do , dear , try to be a little more lady - like . grey , I wish you would tell she not to use such shocking word ; she will call she horse a mare : it be so inconceivably shocke ! and then she use such dreadful expression in describe it : she must have learn it from the grooms . it nearly put I into fit when she begin . ' 'I learn it from papa , you ass ! and he jolly friend , ' say the young lady , vigorously crack a hunting - whip , which she habitually carry in she hand . 'I be as good judge of horseflesh as the best of 'm . ' ' well , now get along , you shock girl ! I really shall take a fit if you go on in such a way . and now , , attend to I ; I be go to tell you about the ball . you must be die to hear about it , I know . oh , such a ball ! you never see or hear , or read , or dreamt of anything like it in all you life . the decoration , the entertainment , the supper , the music be indescribable ! and then the guest ! there be two nobleman , three baronet , and five title lady , and other lady and gentleman innumerable . the lady , of course , be of no consequence to I , except to put I in a good humour with myself , by show how ugly and awkward most of they be ; and the best , mamma tell I , -- the most transcendent beautie among they , be nothing to I . as for I , -- I be so sorry you do not see I ! I be charming -- be not I , ? ' ' . ' ' no , but I really be -- at least so mamma say -- and and . say she be sure no gentleman could set eye on I without fall in love that minute ; and so I may be allow to be a little vain . I know you think I a shocking , conceit , frivolous girl ; but then , you know , I do not attribute it all to my personal attraction : I give some praise to the hairdresser , and some to my exquisitely lovely dress -- you must see it to - morrow -- white gauze over pink satin -- and so Sweetly make ! and a necklace and bracelet of beautiful , large pearl ! ' 'I have no doubt you look very charming : but should that delight you so very much ? ' 'Oh , no !-- not that alone : but , then , I be so much admired ; and I make so many conquest in that one night -- you would be astonished to hear -- ' ' but what good will they do you ? ' ' what good ! think of any woman ask that ! ' ' well , I should think one conquest would be enough ; and too much , unless the
the subjugation be mutual . ' 'Oh , but you know I never agree with you on those point . now , wait a bit , and I will tell you my principal admirer -- those who make themselves very conspicuous that night and after : for I have be to two party since . unfortunately the two nobleman , --- and ---, be marry , or I might have condescende to be particularly gracious to they ; as it be , I do not : though ---, who hate he wife , be evidently much struck with I . he ask I to dance with he twice -- he be a charming dancer , by - the - by , and so be I : you can not think how well I do -- I be astonished at myself . my lord be very complimentary too -- rather too much so in fact -- and I think proper to be a little haughty and repellent ; but I have the pleasure of see he nasty , cross wife ready to perish with spite and vexation -- ' 'Oh , ! you do not mean to say that such a thing could really give you pleasure ? however cross or -- ' ' well , I know it be very wrong ; -- but never mind ! I mean to be good some time -- only do not preach now , there be a good creature . I have not tell you half yet . let I see . oh ! I be go to tell you how many unmistakeable admirer I have :- be one ,-- and be old codger , only fit companion for papa and mamma . be young , rich , and gay ; but a ugly beast , nevertheless : however , mamma say I should not mind that after a few month ' acquaintance . then , there be , 's younger son ; rather good - look , and a pleasant fellow to flirt with : but be a younger son , that be all he be good for ; then there be young , rich enough , but of no family , and a great stupid fellow , a mere country booby ! and then , we good rector , : a humble admirer he ought to consider himself ; but I fear he have forget to number humility among he stock of Christian virtue . ' ' be at the ball ? ' ' yes , to be sure . do you think he be too good to go ? ' 'i thought be might consider it unclerical . ' ' by no means . he do not profane he cloth by dancing ; but it be with difficulty he could refrain , poor man : he look as if he be die to ask my hand just for one set ; and -- oh ! by - the - by -- he have get a new curate : that seedy old fellow have get he long - wish - for live at last , and be gone . ' ' and what be the new one like ? ' 'Oh , such a beast ! he name be . I can give you he description in three word -- a insensate , ugly , stupid blockhead . that be four , but no matter -- enough of he now . ' then she return to the ball , and give I a further account of she deportment there , and at the several party she have since attend ; and further particular respect and . , , and , and the ineffaceable impression she have wrotch upon each of they . ' well , which of the four do you like best ? ' say I , suppresse my third or fourth yawn . 'I detest they all ! ' reply she , shak she bright ringlet in vivacious scorn . ' that mean , I suppose , " I like they all " -- but which most ? ' ' no , I really detest they all ; but be the handsomest and most amusing , and the cleverest , the wickedest , and the most stupid . but the one I be to have , I suppose , if I be doom to have any of they , be . ' ' surely not , if he be so wicked , and if you dislike he ? ' ' oh , I do not mind he be wick : he be all the better for that ; and as for dislik he -- I should not greatly object to be of , if I must marry . but if I could be always young , I would be always single . I should like to enjoy myself thoroughly , and coquet with all the world , till I be on the verge of be call a old maid ; and then , to escape the infamy of that , after have make ten thousand conquest , to break all they heart save one , by marry some high - bear , rich , indulgent husband , whom , on the other hand , fifty lady be die to have . ' ' well , as long as you entertain these view , keep single by all means , and never marry at all : not even to escape the infamy of old - maidenhood . ' -- the Church ' well , , what do you think of the new curate ? ' ask , on we return from church the after the recommencement of we duty . 'I can scarcely tell , ' be my reply : 'I have not even hear he preach . ' ' well , but you see he , do not you ? ' ' yes , but I can not pretend to
to judge of a man 's character by a single cursory glance at he face . ' ' but be not he ugly ? ' ' he do not strike I as be particularly so ; I do not dislike that cast of countenance : but the only thing I particularly notice about he be he style of reading ; which appear to I good -- infinitely better , at least , than 's . he read the as if he be bent on give full effect to every passage ; it seem as if the most careless person could not have help attend , nor the most ignorant have fail to understand ; and the prayer he read as if he be not read at all , but pray earnestly and sincerely from he own heart . ' 'Oh , yes , that be all he be good for : he can plod through the service well enough ; but he have not a single idea beyond it . ' ' how do you know ? ' 'Oh ! I know perfectly well ; I be a excellent judge in such matters . do you see how he go out of church ? stump along -- as if there be nobody there but himself -- never look to the right hand or the left , and evidently think of nothing but just get out of the church , and , perhaps , home to he dinner : he great stupid head could contain no other idea . ' 'I suppose you would have have he cast a glance into the squire 's pew , ' say I , laugh at the vehemence of she hostility . ' indeed ! I should have be highly indignant if he have da to do such a thing ! ' reply she , haughtily toss she head ; then , after a moment 's reflection , she add , well ! I suppose he be good enough for he place : but I be glad I be not dependent on he for amusement -- that be all . do you see how hurry out to get a bow from I , and be in time to put we into the carriage ? ' ' yes , ' answer I ; internally add , ' and I think it somewhat derogatory to he dignity as a clergyman to come fly from the pulpit in such eager haste to shake hand with the squire , and hand he wife and daughter into they carriage : and , moreover , I owe he a grudge for nearly shutt I out of it ' ; for , in fact , though I be stand before he face , close beside the carriage step , wait to get in , he would persist in put they up and close the door , till one of the family stop he by call out that the governess be not in yet ; then , without a word of apology , he depart , wish they good - morning , and leave the footman to finish the business . .-- never speak to I , neither do or , nor or , nor or he sister , nor any other lady or gentleman who frequent that church : nor , in fact , any one that visit at . order the carriage again , in the afternoon , for herself and she sister : she say it be too cold for they to enjoy themselves in the garden ; and besides , she believe would be at church . ' for , ' say she , smile slyly at she own fair image in the glass , ' he have be a most exemplary attendent at church these last few Sunday : you would think he be quite a good . and you may go with we , : I want you to see he ; he be so greatly improve since he return from abroad -- you can not think ! and besides , then you will have a opportunity of see the beautiful again , and of hear he preach . ' I do hear he preach , and be decidedly pleased with the evangelical truth of he doctrine , as well as the earnest simplicity of he manner , and the clearness and force of he style . it be truly refresh to hear such a sermon , after be so long accustom to the dry , prosy discourse of the former curate , and the still less edifying harangue of the rector . would come sail up the aisle , or rather sweep along like a whirlwind , with he rich silk gow fly behind he and rust against the pew door , mount the pulpit like a conqueror ascend he triumphal car ; then , sinke on the velvet cushion in a attitude of study grace , remain in silent prostration for a certain time ; then mutter over a collect , and gabble through the 's prayer , rise , draw off one bright lavender glove , to give the congregation the benefit of he sparkling ring , lightly pass he finger through he well - curl hair , flourish a cambric handkerchief , recite a very short passage , or , perhaps , a mere phrase of Scripture , as a head - piece to he discourse , and , finally , deliver a composition which , as a composition , might be consider good , though far too study and too artificial to be pleasing to I : the proposition be well lay down , the argument logically conduct ; and yet , it be sometimes hard to listen quietly throughout , without some slight demonstration of disapproval or impatience . he favourite subject be church discipline , rite and ceremony , apostolical succession , the duty of reverence and obedience to the clergy
clergy , the atrocious criminality of dissent , the absolute necessity of obserive all the form of godliness , the reprehensible presumption of individual who attempt to think for themselves in matter connect with religion , or to be guide by they own interpretation of Scripture , and , occasionally ( to please he wealthy parishioners ) the necessity of deferential obedience from the poor to the rich -- support he maxim and exhortation throughout with quotation from the father : with whom he appear to be far better acquaint than with the and , and whose importance he seem to consider at least equal to theirs . but now and then he give we a sermon of a different order -- what some would call a very good one ; but sunless and severe : represent the Deity as a terrible taskmaster rather than a benevolent father . yet , as I listen , I feel inclin to think the man be sincere in all he say : he must have change he view , and become decidedly religious , gloomy and austere , yet still devout . but such illusion be usually dissipate , on come out of church , by hear he voice in jocund colloquy with some of the or , or , perhaps , the themselves ; probably laugh at he own sermon , and hope that he have give the rascally people something to think about ; perchance , exult in the thought that old would now lay aside the sinful indulgence of she pipe , which have be she daily solace for upward of thirty year : that would be frightene out of he Sabbath evening walk , and would be sorely trouble in he conscience , and shake in he sure and certain hope of a joyful resurrection at the last day . thus , I could not but conclude that be one of those who ' bind heavy burden , and grievous to be borne , and lay they upon man 's shoulders , while they themselves will not move they with one of they finger ' ; and who ' make the word of of none effect by they tradition , teaching for doctrine the commandment of man . ' I be well please to observe that the new curate resemble he , as far as I could see , in none of these particular . ' well , , what do you think of he now ? ' say , as we take we place in the carriage after service . ' no harm still , ' reply I . ' no harm ! ' repeat she in amazement . ' what do you mean ? ' 'I mean , I think no worse of he than I do before . ' ' no worse ! I should think not indeed -- quite the contrary ! be he not greatly improve ? ' 'Oh , yes ; very much indeed , ' reply I ; for I have now discover that it be she mean , not . that gentleman have eagerly come forward to speak to the young lady : a thing he would hardly have venture to do have they mother be present ; he have likewise politely hand they into the carriage . he have not attempt to shut I out , like ; neither , of course , have he offer I he assistance ( I should not have accept it , if he have ) , but as long as the door remain open he have stand smirk and chat with they , and then lift he hat and depart to he own abode : but I have scarcely notice he all the time . my companion , however , have be more observant ; and , as we roll along , they discuss between they not only he look , word , and action , but every feature of he face , and every article of he apparel . ' you sha not have he all to yourself , , ' say at the close of this discussion ; 'i like he : I know he would make a nice , jolly companion for I . ' ' well , you be quite welcome to he , , ' reply she sister , in a tone of affected indifference . ' and I be sure , ' continue the other , ' he admire I quite as much as he do you ; do not he , ? ' 'I do not know ; I be not acquaint with he sentiment . ' ' well , but he do though . ' ' my ! nobody will ever admire you till you get rid of you rough , awkward manners . ' 'Oh , stuff ! like such manners ; and so do papa 's friend . ' ' well , you may captivate old man , and younger son ; but nobody else , I be sure , will ever take a fancy to you . ' 'I do not care : I be not always grab after money , like you and mamma . if my husband be able to keep a few good horse and dog , I shall be quite satisfied ; and all the rest may go to the devil ! ' ' well , if you use such shocking expression , I be sure no real gentleman will ever venture to come near you . really , grey , you should not let she do so . ' 'I can not possibly prevent it , . ' ' and you be quite mistaken , , in suppose that admire you : I assure you he do nothing of the kind . ' be begin a angry reply ; but , happily , we journey be now at a end ; and the contention be cut short by the
the footman open the carriage - door , and let down the step for we descent . -- the Cottager as I have now only one regular pupil -- though she contrive to give I as much trouble as three or four ordinary one , and though she sister still take lesson in German and draw -- I have considerably more time at my own disposal than I have ever be bless with before , since I have take upon I the governess 's yoke ; which time I devote partly to correspondence with my friend , partly to reading , study , and the practice of music , singe , & c. , partly to wander in the grounds or adjacent field , with my pupil if they want I , alone if they do not . often , when they have no more agreeable occupation at hand , the would amuse themselves with visit the poor cottager on they father 's estate , to receive they flattering homage , or to hear the old story or gossip news of the garrulous old woman ; or , perhaps , to enjoy the purer pleasure of make the poor people happy with they cheering presence and they occasional gift , so easily bestow , so thankfully receive . sometimes , I be call upon to accompany one or both of the sister in these visit ; and sometimes I be desire to go alone , to fulfil some promise which they have be more ready to make than to perform ; to carry some small donation , or read to one who be sick or seriously dispose : and thus I make a few acquaintance among the cottager ; and , occasionally , I go to see they on my own account . I generally have more satisfaction in go alone than with either of the young lady ; for they , chiefly owe to they defective education , comport themselves towards they inferior in a manner that be highly disagreeable for I to witness . they never , in thought , exchange place with they ; and , consequently , have no consideration for they feeling , regard they as a order of being entirely different from themselves . they would watch the poor creature at they meal , make uncivil remark about they food , and they manner of eat ; they would laugh at they simple notion and provincial expression , till some of they scarcely durst venture to speak ; they would call the grave elderly man and woman old fool and silly old blockhead to they face : and all this without meane to offend . I could see that the people be often hurt and annoye by such conduct , though they fear of the ' grand lady ' prevent they from testify any resentment ; but they never perceive it . they think that , as these cottager be poor and untatch , they must be stupid and brutish ; and as long as they , they superior , condescende to talk to they , and to give they shilling and half - crown , or article of clothing , they have a right to amuse themselves , even at they expense ; and the people must adore they as angels of light , condescende to minister to they necessity , and enlighten they humble dwelling . I make many and various attempt to deliver my pupil from these delusive notion without alarme they pride -- which be easily offended , and not soon appease -- but with little apparent result ; and I know not which be the more reprehensible of the two : be more rude and boisterous ; but from 's womanly age and lady - like exterior better thing be expect : yet she be as provokingly careless and inconsiderate as a giddy child of twelve . one bright day in the last week of , I be walk in the park , enjoy the threefold luxury of solitude , a book , and pleasant weather ; for have set out on she daily ride , and be go in the carriage with she mamma to pay some morning call . but it struck I that I ought to leave these selfish pleasure , and the park with its glorious canopy of bright blue sky , the west wind sound through its yet leafless branch , the snow - wreat still linger in its hollow , but melte fast beneath the sun , and the graceful deer browse on its moist herbage already assume the freshness and verdure of spring -- and go to the cottage of one , a widow , whose son be at work all day in the field , and who be afflict with a inflammation in the eyes ; which have for some time incapacitate she from read : to she own great grief , for she be a woman of a serious , thoughtful turn of mind . I accordingly go , and find she alone , as usual , in she little , close , dark cottage , redolent of smoke and confin air , but as tidy and clean as she could make it . she be seat beside she little fire ( consist of a few red cinder and a bit of stick ) , busily knitt , with a small sackcloth cushion at she foot , place for the accommodation of she gentle friend the cat , who be seat thereon , with she long tail half encircle she velvet paws , and she half - close eye dreamily gazing on the low , crooke fender . ' well , , how be you to - day ? ' ' why , middle , , I ' myseln -- my eye be no better , but I be a deal easier I ' my mind nor I have be ,
, ' reply she , rise to welcome I with a contente smile ; which I be glad to see , for have be somewhat afflict with religious melancholy . I congratulate she upon the change . she agree that it be a great blessing , and express herself ' right down thankful for it ' ; add , ' if it please to spare my sight , and make I so as I can read my again , I think I shall be as happy as a queen . ' 'i hope he will , , ' reply I ; ' and , meantime , I will come and read to you now and then , when I have a little time to spare . ' with expressions of grateful pleasure , the poor woman move to get I a chair ; but , as I save she the trouble , she busy herself with stirr the fire , and add a few more stick to the decay ember ; and then , take she well -use from the shelf , dust it carefully , and give it I . on my ask if there be any particular part she should like I to read , she answer - ' well , , if it be all the same to you , I should like to hear that chapter in the First Epistle of , that say , " be love , and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in , and in he . " ' with a little searching , I find these word in the fourth chapter . when I come to the seventh verse she interrupt I , and , with needless apology for such a liberty , desire I to read it very slowly , that she might take it all in , and dwell on every word ; hope I would excuse she , as she be but a ' simple body . ' ' the wisest person ,' I reply , ' might think over each of these verse for a hour , and be all the better for it ; and I would rather read they slowly than not . ' accordingly , I finish the chapter as slowly as need be , and at the same time as impressively as I could ; my auditor listen most attentively all the while , and sincerely thanke I when I have do . I sit still about half a minute to give she time to reflect upon it ; when , somewhat to my surprise , she break the pause by ask I how I like ? 'I do not know ,' I reply , a little start by the suddenness of the question ; 'I think he preach very well . ' 'Ay , he do so ; and talk well too . ' ' do he ? ' ' he do . maybe , you have not see he -- not to talk to he much , yet ? ' ' no , I never see any one to talk to -- except the young lady of the . ' 'Ah ; they be nice , kind young lady ; but they can not talk as he do . ' ' then he come to see you , ? ' ' he do , ; and I 'se thankful for it . he come to see all we poor body a deal ofter nor , or thg rector ever do ; an' it be well he do , for he be always welcome : we can not say as much for thg rector -- there be 'at say they be fair fear on he . when he come into a house , they say he be sure to find summut wrong , and begin a - call th'ey as soon as he cross th's doorstun : but maybe he think it he duty like to tell them what be wrong . and very oft he come of ' purpose to reprove folk for not come to church , or not knee a ' stand when other folk do , or go to the chapel , or summut of ' that sort : but I can not say 'at he ever fund much fault wi' I . he come to see I once or twice , afore come , when I be so ill trouble in my mind ; and as I have only very poor health beside , I make bold to send for he -- and he come right enough . I be sore distressed , -- thank , it be ower now -- but when I take my , I could get no comfort of it at all . that very chapter ' at you have just be read trouble I as much as atch -- " he that loveth not , knoweth not . " it seem fearsome to I ; for I feel that I love neither nor man as I should do , and could not , if I try ever so . and th ' chapter afore , where it say ,--" he that be bear of can not commit sin . " and another place where it say , -- " Love be the fulfilling of the Law . " and many , many other , : I should fair weary you out , if I be to tell they all . but all seem to condemn I , and to show I 'at I be not in the right way ; and as I know not how to get into it , I send we to to be as kind as look in on I some day and when he come , I tell he all my trouble . ' ' and what do he say , ? ' ' why , , he seem to scorn I . I might be misto
misto 'en -- but he like give a sort of a whistle , and I see a bit of a smile on he face ; and he say , " oh , it be all stuff ! you have be among the , my good woman . " but I tell he I would never be near the . and then he say , -- " well , " say he , " you must come to church , where you will hear the Scripture properly explain , instead of sit poring over you at home . " ' but I tell he I always use come to church when I have my health ; but this very cold winter weather I hardly durst venture so far -- and I so bad wig th ' rheumatic and all . ' but he say , " it will do you rheumatiz good to hobble to church : there be nothing like exercise for the rheumatiz . you can walk about the house well enough ; why can not you walk to church ? the fact be , " say he , " you be get too fond of you ease . it be always easy to find excuse for shirk one 's duty . " ' but then , you know , , it be not so . however , I tell he I would try . " but please , sir , " say I , " if I do go to church , what the better shall I be ? I want to have my sins blot out , and to feel that they be remember no more against I , and that the love of be she abroad in my heart ; and if I can get no good by read my a ' say my prayer at home , what good shall I get by go to church ? " ' ' " the church , " say he , " be the place appoint by for he worship . it be you duty to go there as often as you can . if you want comfort , you must seek it in the path of duty , " -- an' a deal more he say , but I can not remember all he fine word . however , it all come to this , that I be to come to church as oft as ever I could , and bring my prayer - book with I , a ' read up all the sponser after the clerk , a ' stand , a ' kneel , a ' sit , a ' do all as I should , and take the 's Supper at every opportunity , a ' hearke he sermon , and 's , a ' it 'uld be all right : if I go on do my duty , I should get a blessing at last . ' " but if you get no comfort that way , " say he , " it be all up . " ' " then , sir , " say I , " should you think I be a reprobate ? " ' " why , " say he -- he say , " if you do you best to get to heaven and can not manage it , you must be one of those that seek to enter in at the strait gate and shall not be able . " ' a ' then he ask I if I would see any of the ladie of ' thg hall about that mornin ' ; so I tell he where I have see the young miss go on th' ;-- an' he kick my poor cat right across ' floor , a ' go after th'ey as gay as a lark : but I be very sad . that last word of ' he fair sunk into my heart , a ' lay there like a lump of ' lead , till I be weary to bear it . ' Howsever , I foller he advice : I think he mean it all for th ' best , though he have a queer way with he . but you know , , he be rich a ' young , and such like can not right understand the thought of a poor old woman such as I . but , howsever , I do my best to do all as he bade I -- but maybe I be plague you , , wi' my chatter . ' 'Oh , no , ! go on , and tell I all . ' ' well , my rheumatiz get better -- I know not whether wi's go to church or not , but one frosty I get this cold I ' my eye . ' inflammation do not come on all at once like , but bit by bit -- but I be not go to tell you about my eye , I be talk about my trouble of ' mind ; -- and to tell the truth , grey , I do not think it be anyways ease by come to church -- nuy to speak on , at least : I like get my health better ; but that do not mmend my soul . I hearken and hearken the ministers , and read a ' read at my prayer - book ; but it be all like sound brass and a tinkling cymbal : the sermon I could not understand , a ' thg prayer - book only serve to show I how wick I be , that I could read such good word an's never be no better for it , and oftend feel it a sore labour an' a heavy task beside , instead of a blessing and a privilege as all good do . it seem like as all be barren a ' dark
dark to I . and then , they dreadful word , " many shall seek to enter in , and shall not be able . " they like as they fair dry up my sperrit . ' but one , when give out about the sacrament , I notice where he say , " if there be any of you that can not quiet he own conscience , but requireth further comfort or counsel , let he come to I , or some other discreet and learn minister of 's word , and open he grief ! " so next morning , afore service , I just look into the vestry , a ' begin a - talking to th' rector again . I hardly could fashion to take such a liberty , but I think when my soul be at stake I should not stick at a trifle . but he say he have not time to attend to I then . ' " and , indeed , " say he , " I have nothing to say to you but what I have say before . take the sacrament , of course , and go on do you duty ; and if that will not serve you , nothing will . so do not bother I any more . " ' so then , I go away . but I hear -- be there , -- this be he first at , you know , a ' he be I ' th's vestry in he surplice , help th' rector on with he gown --' ' yes , . ' ' and I hear he ask who I be , a ' he say , " oh , she be a canting old fool . " ' and I be very ill grieved , ; but I go to my seat , and I try to do my duty as aforetime : but I like get no peace . An' I even take the sacrament ; but I feel as though I be eat and drink to my own damnation all th ' time . so I go home , sorely trouble . ' but next day , afore I would get fettle up -- for indeed , , I ' no heart to swee a ' fettling , a ' wash pots ; so I sit I down I ' th ' muck -- who should come in but ! I start sid stuff then , a ' sweep a ' do ; and I expect he would begin a - call I for my idle way , as would a ' do ; but I be misto 'en : he only bid I good - mornin ' like , in a quiet dacent way . so I duste he a chair , a ' fettle up th' fireplace a bit ; but I have not forget thg rector 's word , so say I , " I wonder , sir , you should give yourself that trouble , to come so far to see a ' canting old fool , ' such as I . " ' he seem take aback at that ; but he would fain persuade I ' at the rector be only in jest ; and when that would not do , he say , " well , , you should not think so much about it : be a little out of humwe just then : you know we be none of we perfect -- even speak unadvisedly with he lip . but now sit down a minute , if you can spare the time , and tell I all you doubt and fear ; and I will try to remove they . " ' so I sit I down anent he . he be quite a stranger , you know , , and even younger nor , I believe ; and I have think he not so pleasant - look as he , and rather a bit crossish , at first , to look at ; but he spake so civil like -- and when th ' cat , poor thing , jump on to he knee , he only strok she , and give a bit of a smile : so I think that be a good sign ; for once , when she do so to th' rector , he knock she off , like as it might be in scorn and anger , poor thing . but you can not expect a cat to know manners like a , you know , . ' ' no ; of course not , . but what do say then ? ' ' he say nuy ; but he listen to I as steady a ' patient as could be , an's never a bit of ' scorn about he ; so I go on , a ' tell he all , just as I have tell you -- a ' more too . ' " well , " say he , " be quite right in tell you to persevere in do you duty ; but in advise you to go to church and attend to the service , and so on , he do not mean that be the whole of a 's duty : he only think you might there learn what more be to be do , and be lead to take delight in those exercise , instead of find they a task and a burden . and if you have ask he to explain those word that trouble you so much , I think he would have tell you , that if many shall seek to enter in at the strait gate and shall not be able , it be they own sins that hinder they ; just as a man with a large sack on he back might wish to pass through a narrow doorway
doorway , and find it impossible to do so unless he would leave he sack behind he . but you , , I dare say , have no sins that you would not gladly throw aside , if you know how ? " ' " indeed , sir , you speak truth , " say I . ' " well , " say he , " you know the first and great commandment -- and the second , which be like unto it -- on which two commandment hang all the law and the prophet ? you say you can not love ; but it strike I that if you rightly consider who and what he be , you can not help it . he be you father , you best friend : every bless , everything good , pleasant , or useful , come from ; and everything evil , everything you have reason to hate , to shin , or to fear , come from -- he enemy as well as ours . and for this cause be manifest in the flesh , that he might destroy the work of the : in one word , be love ; and the more of love we have within we , the nearer we be to and the more of he spirit we possess . " ' " well , sir , " I say , " if I can always think on these thing , I think I might well love : but how can I love my neighbour , when they vex I , and be so contrary and sinful as some on th'ey be ? " ' " it may seem a hard matter , " say he , " to love we neighbour , who have so much of what be evil about they , and whose fault so often awaken the evil that linger within ourselves ; but remember that he make they , and he love they ; and whosoever loveth he that begat , loveth he that be beget also . and if so loveth we , that he give he only beget to die for we , we ought also to love one another . but if you can not feel positive affection for those who do not care for you , you can at least try to do to they as you would they should do unto you : you can endeaavor to pity they failings and excuse they offence , and to do all the good you can to those about you . and if you accustom yourself to this , , the very effort itself will make you love they in some degree -- to say nothing of the goodwill you kindness would beget in they , though they might have little else that be good about they . if we love and wish to serve , let we try to be like , to do he work , to labour for he glory -- which be the good of man -- to hasten the coming of he kingdom , which be the peace and happiness of all the world : however powerless we may seem to be , in do all the good we can through life , the humblest of we may do much towards it : and let we dwell in love , that he may dwell in we and we in . the more happiness we bestow , the more we shall receive , even here ; and the greater will be we reward in heaven when we rest from we labour . " I believe , , they be he very word , for I have think th'ey ower many a time . a ' then he take that , a ' read bits here and there , a ' explain th'ey as clear as the day : and it seem like as a new light break in on my soul ; an' I feel fair aglow about my heart , a ' only wish poor a ' all the world could ha ' be there , a ' hear it all , and rejoice wi' I . ' after he be gone , , one of ' thg neighbour , come in and wante I to help she to wash . I tell she I could not just then , for I have not set on thg potaty for th ' dinner , nor wash up th' breakfast stuff yet . so then she begin a - call I for my nasty idle way . I be a little bit vex at first , but I never say nothing wrong to she : I only tell she like all in a quiet way , 'at I would have th's new parson to see I ; but I would get do as quick as ever I could , a ' then come a ' help she . so then she soften down ; and my heart like as it warm towards she , a ' in a bit we be very good friend . a ' so it be , , " a soft answer turneth away wrath ; but grievous word stir up anger . " it be not only in they you speak to , but in yourself . ' ' very true , , if we could always remember it . ' 'Ay , if we could ! ' ' and do ever come to see you again ? ' ' yes , many a time ; and since my eye have be so bad , he be sit a ' read to I by the half - hour together : but you know , , he have other folk to see , and other thing to do -- bless he ! a ' that next he preach such a sermon ! he text be , " come unto I all ye
ye that labour and be heavy laden , and I will give you rest , " and they twill bless verse that follow . you be not there , , you be with you friend then -- but it make I so happy ! and I be happy now , thank ! an' I take a pleasure , now , in do little bits of ' job for my neighbour -- such as a poor old body ' at 's half blind can do ; and they take it kindly of I , just as he say . you see , , I be knitt a pair of ' stocking now ; -- they be for : he be a queerish old body , a ' we have have many a bout at threaping , one anent t'other ; a ' at time we have differ sorely . so I think I could not do better nor knit he a pair of ' warm stocking ; an' I have feel to like he a deal better , poor old man , sin' I begin . it be turn out just as say . ' ' well , I be very glad to see you so happy , , and so wise : but I must go now ; I shall be want at the , ' say I ; and bid she good - bye , I depart , promise to come again when I have time , and feel nearly as happy as herself . at another time I go to read to a poor labourer who be in the last stage of consumption . the young lady have be to see he , and somehow a promise of reading have be extract from they ; but it be too much trouble , so they beg I to do it instead . I go , willingly enough ; and there too I be gratify with the praise of , both from the sick man and he wife . the former tell I that he derive great comfort and benefit from the visit of the new parson , who frequently come to see he , and be ' another guess sort of man ' to ; who , before the other 's arrival at , have now and then pay he a visit ; on which occasion he would always insist upon have the cottage - door keep open , to admit the fresh air for he own convenience , without consider how it might injure the sufferer ; and have open he prayer - book and hastily read over a part of the for the , would hurry away again : if he do not stay to administer some harsh rebuke to the afflict wife , or to make some thoughtless , not to say heartless , observation , rather calculate to increase than diminish the trouble of the suffer pair . ' whereas , ' say the man , ' ' ull pray with I quite in a different fashion , a ' talk to I as kind as owt ; a ' oft read to I too , a ' sit beside I just like a brother . ' ' just for all the world ! ' exclaim he wife ; 'an ' about a three wik sin ' , when he seed how poor shiver wi's cold , a ' what pitiful fire we keep , he ax if wer stock of coal be nearly done . I tell he it be , a ' we be ill set to get more : but you know , mum , I do not think of ' he help we ; but , howsever , he send we a sack of ' coal next day ; a ' we have have good fire ever sin ' : and a great blessing it be , this winter time . but that be he way , : when he come into a poor body 's house a - seein ' sick folk , he like notice what they must stand I ' need on ; a ' if he think they can not readily get it therseln , he never say nowt about it , but just get it for 'em . a ' it be not everybody 'at 'uld do that , 'at have as little as he have : for you know , mum , he be nowt at all to live on but what he get fra's th' rector , a ' that be little enough they say . ' I remember then , with a species of exultation , that he have frequently be style a vulgar brute by the amiable , because he wear a silver watch , and clothes not quite so bright and fresh as 's . in return to the I feel very happy , and thank that I have now something to think about ; something to dwell on as a relief from the weary monotony , the lonely drudgery , of my present life : for I be lonely . never , from month to month , from year to year , except during my brief interval of rest at home , do I see one creature to whom I could open my heart , or freely speak my thought with any hope of sympathy , or even comprehension : never one , unless it be poor , with whom I could enjoy a single moment of real social intercourse , or whose conversation be calculate to render I better , wiser , or happier than before ; or who , as far as I could see , could be greatly benefite by mine . my only companion have be unamiable child , and ignorant , wrong - head girl ; from whose fatigue folly , unbroken solitude be often a relief most earnestly desire and dearly prize . but to
to be restrict to such associate be a serious evil , both in its immediate effect and the consequence that be likely to ensue . never a new idea or stirring think come to I from without ; and such as rise within I be , for the most part , miserably crush at once , or doom to sicke or fade away , because they could not see the light . Habitual associate be know to exercise a great influence over each other 's mind and manners . those whose action be for ever before we eye , whose word be ever in we ears , will naturally lead we , albeit against we will , slowly , gradually , imperceptibly , perhaps , to act and speak as they do . I will not presume to say how far this irresistible power of assimilation extend ; but if one civilised man be doom to pass a dozen year amid a race of intractable savage , unless he have power to improve they , I greatly question whether , at the close of that period , he would not have become , at least , a barbarian himself . and I , as I could not make my young companion better , fear exceedingly that they would make I worse -- would gradually bring my feeling , habit , capacitie , to the level of they own ; without , however , impart to I they lightheartedness and cheerful vivacity . already , I seem to feel my intellect deteriorate , my heart petrify , my soul contract ; and I tremble lest my very moral perception should become deadened , my distinctions of right and wrong confound , and all my better faculty be sunk , at last , beneath the baneful influence of such a mode of life . the gross vapour of earth be gather around I , and close in upon my inward heaven ; and thus it be that rise at length upon I , appear like the morning star in my horizon , to save I from the fear of utter darkness ; and I rejoice that I have now a subject for contemplation that be above I , not beneath . I be glad to see that all the world be not make up of , , , , & c. ; and that human excellence be not a mere dream of the imagination . when we hear a little good and no harm of a person , it be easy and pleasant to imagine more : in short , it be needless to analyse all my thought ; but be now become a day of peculiar delight to I ( I be now almost broken - in to the back corner in the carriage ) , for I like to hear he -- and I like to see he , too ; though I know he be not handsome , or even what be call agreeable , in outward aspect ; but , certainly , he be not ugly . in stature he be a little , a very little , above the middle size ; the outline of he face would be pronounce too square for beauty , but to I it announce decision of character ; he dark brown hair be not carefully curl , like 's , but simply brush aside over a broad white forehead ; the eyebrow , I suppose , be too project , but from under those dark brows there gleam a eye of singular power , bry in colour , not large , and somewhat deep - set , but strikingly brilliant , and full of expression ; there be character , too , in the mouth , something that bespeak a man of firm purpose and a habitual thinker ; and when he smile -- but I will not speak of that yet , for , at the time I mention , I have never see he smile : and , indeed , he general appearance do not impress I with the idea of a man give to such a relaxation , nor of such a individual as the cottager describe he . I have early form my opinion of he ; and , in spite of 's objurgation : be fully convinced that he be a man of strong sense , firm faith , and ardent piety , but thoughtful and stern : and when I find that , to he other good quality , be add that of true benevolence and gentle , considerate kindness , the discovery , perhaps , delighte I the more , as I have not be prepare to expect it . -- the shower the next visit i pay to be in the second week in : for , though I have many spare minute during the day , I seldom could look upon a hour as entirely my own ; since , where everything be leave to the caprice of and she sister , there could be no order or regularity . whatever occupation I choose , when not actually busy about they or they concern , I have , as it be , to keep my loin gird , my shoe on my foot , and my staff in my hand ; for not to be immediately forthcome when call for , be regard as a grave and inexcusable offence : not only by my pupil and they mother , but by the very servant , who come in breathless haste to call I , exclaim , ' you be to go to the schoolroom directly , mum , the young lady be waiting !! ' Climax of horror ! actually wait for they governess !!! but this time I be pretty sure of a hour or two to myself ; for be prepare for a long ride , and be dress for a
a dinner - party at 's : so I take the opportunity of repair to the widow 's cottage , where I find she in some anxiety about she cat , which have be absent all day . I comforte she with as many anecdote of that animal 's roving propensity as I could recollect . 'I be fear of ' th ' gamekeeper , ' say she : ' that be all 'at I think on . if th ' young gentleman have be at home , I should a ' think they have be set they dog at she , a ' worry she , poor thing , as they do many a poor thing 's cat ; but I have not that to be fear on now . ' 's eye be better , but still far from well : she have be try to make a shirt for she son , but tell I she could only bear to do a little bit at it now and then , so that it progress but slowly , though the poor lad want it sadly . so I propose to help she a little , after I have read to she , for I have plenty of time that evening , and need not return till dusk . she thankfully accept the offer . ' a ' you will be a bit of ' company for I too , , ' say she ; ' I like as I feel lonesome without my cat . ' but when I have finish reading , and do the half of a seam , with 's capacious brass thimble fitte on to my finger by means of a roll of paper , I be disturb by the entrance of , with the identical cat in he arm . I now see that he could smile , and very pleasantly too . 'I have do you a piece of good service , ,' he begin : then see I , he acknowledge my presence by a slight bow . I should have be invisible to , or any other gentleman of those part . 'I have deliver you cat ,' he continue , ' from the hand , or rather the gun , of 's gamekeeper . ' ' bless you , sir ! ' cry the grateful old woman , ready to weep for joy as she receive she favourite from he arm . ' take care of it , ' say he , ' and do not let it go near the rabbit - warren , for the gamekeeper swear he will shoot it if he see it there again : he would have do so to - day , if I have not be in time to stop he . I believe it be rain , , ' add he , more quietly , observe that I have put aside my work , and be prepare to depart . ' do not let I disturb you -- I sha not stay two minute . ' ' you will both stay while this shower get owered , ' say , as she stir the fire , and place another chair beside it ; ' what ! there be room for all . ' 'I can see better here , thank you , , ' reply I , take my work to the window , where she have the goodness to suffer I to remain unmolested , while she get a brush to remove the cat 's hair from 's coat , carefully wip the rain from he hat , and give the cat its supper , busily talk all the time : now thank she clerical friend for what he have do ; now wonder how the cat have find out the warren ; and now lament the probable consequence of such a discovery . he listen with a quiet , good - natured smile , and at length take a seat in compliance with she pressing invitation , but repeat that he do not mean to stay . 'I have another place to go to , ' say he , ' and I see ' ( glance at the book on the table ) ' someone else have be read to you . ' ' yes , sir ; have be as kind as read I a chapter ; an' now she be help I with a shirt for we -- but I be fear she will be cold there . will not you come to th ' fire , ? ' ' no , thank you , , I be quite warm . I must go as soon as this shower be over . ' 'Oh , ! you say you could stop while dusk ! ' cry the provoke old woman , and seize he hat . ' Nay , sir , ' exclaim she , ' pray do not go now , while it rain so fast . ' ' but it strike I I be keep you visitor away from the fire . ' ' no , you be not , , ' reply I , hope there be no harm in a falsehood of that description . 'no , sure ! ' cry . ' what , there be lot of ' room ! ' ' , ' say he , half - jestingly , as if he feel it necessary to change the present subject , whether he have anything particular to say or not , 'I wish you would make my peace with the squire , when you see he . he be by when I rescue 's cat , and do not quite approve of the deed . I tell he I think he might better spare all he rabbit than she she cat , for which audacious assertion he treat I to some rather ungentlemanly language ; and I fear I
I retort a trifle too warmly . ' 'Oh , lawful sir ! I hope you do not fall out wi' th ' maister for sake of ' my cat ! he can not bide answer again -- can th ' maister . ' 'Oh ! it be no matter , : I do not care about it , really ; I say nothing very uncivil ; and I suppose be accustom to use rather strong language when he be heat . ' 'Ay , sir : it be a pity . ' ' and now , I really must go . I have to visit a place a mile beyond this ; and you would not have I to return in the dark : besides , it have nearly do rain now -- so good - evening , . good -evening , . ' ' good - evening , ; but do not depend upon I for make you peace with , for I never see he -- to speak to . ' ' do not you ; it can not be help then , ' reply he , in dolorous resignation : then , with a peculiar half - smile , he add , ' but never mind ; I imagine the squire have more to apologise for than I ;' and leave the cottage . I go on with my sewing as long as I could see , and then bay good - evening ; check she too lively gratitude by the undeniable assurance that I have only do for she what she would have do for I , if she have be in my place and I in hers . I hasten back to , where , have enter the schoolroom , I find the tea - table all in confusion , the tray flood with slop , and in a most ferocious humour . ' , whatever have you be about ? I have have tea half a hour ago , and have to make it myself , and drink it all alone ! I wish you would come in sooner ! ' 'I have be to see . I think you would not be back from you ride . ' ' how could I ride in the rain , I should like to know . that damn pelting shower be vexatious enough -- come on when I be just in full swing : and then to come and find nobody in to tea ! and you know I can not make the tea as I like it . ' 'I do not think of the shower , ' reply I ( and , indeed , the thought of its drive she home have never enter my head ) . ' no , of course ; you be under shelter yourself , and you never think of other people . ' I bear she coarse reproach with astonishing equanimity , even with cheerfulness ; for I be sensible that I have do more good to than harm to she : and perhaps some other thought assist to keep up my spirit , and impart a relish to the cup of cold , overdrawn tea , and a charm to the otherwise unsightly table ; and -- I have almost say -- to 's unamiable face . but she soon betake herself to the stable , and leave I to the quiet enjoyment of my solitary meal . -- the now always go twice to church , for she so love admiration that she could not bear to lose a single opportunity of obtain it ; and she be so sure of it wherever she show herself , that , whether and be there or not , there be certain to be somebody present who would not be insensible to she charms , besides the rector , whose official capacity generally oblige he to attend . usually , also , if the weather permit , both she and she sister would walk home ; , because she hate the confinement of the carriage ; she , because she dislike the privacy of it , and enjoy the company that generally enliven the first mile of the journey in walking from the church to 's park - gate : near which commence the private road to , which lay in the opposite direction , while the highway conduct in a straightforward course to the still more distant mansion of . thus there be always a chance of be accompany , so far , either by , with or without , or , with perhaps one or both of he sister , and any gentleman visitor they might have . whether I walk with the young lady or ride with they parent , depend upon they own capricious will : if they choose to ' take ' I , I go ; if , for reason best know to themselves , they choose to go alone , I take my seat in the carriage . I like walk better , but a sense of reluctance to obtrude my presence on anyone who do not desire it , always keep I passive on these and similar occasion ; and I never inquire into the cause of they varying whim . indeed , this be the best policy -- for to submit and oblige be the governess 's part , to consult they own pleasure be that of the pupil . but when I do walk , the first half of journey be generally a great nuisance to I . as none of the before - mention ladie and gentleman ever notice I , it be disagreeable to walk beside they , as if listen to what they say , or wish to be think one of they , while they talk over I , or across ; and if they eye , in speak , chance to fall on I
I , it seem as if they look on vacancy -- as if they either do not see I , or be very desirous to make it appear so . it be disagreeable , too , to walk behind , and thus appear to acknowledge my own inferiority ; for , in truth , I consider myself pretty nearly as good as the best of they , and wish they to know that I do so , and not to imagine that I look upon myself as a mere domestic , who know she own place too well to walk beside such fine lady and gentleman as they be -- though she young lady might choose to have she with they , and even condescmend to converse with she when no better company be at hand . thus -- I be almost asham to confess it -- but indeed I give myself no little trouble in my endeavour ( if I do keep up with they ) to appear perfectly unconscious or regardless of they presence , as if I be wholly absorb in my own reflection , or the contemplation of surround object ; or , if I linger behind , it be some bird or insect , some tree or flower , that attract my attention , and have duly examine that , I would pursue my walk alone , at a leisurely pace , until my pupil have bidden adieu to they companion and turn off into the quiet private road . one such occasion I particularly well remember ; it be a lovely afternoon about the close of ; and he sister have send they carriage back empty , in order to enjoy the bright sunshine and balmy air in a sociable walk home along with they visitor , and - else ( a couple of military fop ) , and the , who , of course , contrive to join they . such a party be highly agreeable to ; but not find it equally suitable to my taste , I presently fall back , and begin to botanise and entomologise along the green bank and budding hedge , till the company be considerably in advance of I , and I could hear the sweet song of the happy lark ; then my spirit of misanthropy begin to melt away beneath the soft , pure air and genial sunshine ; but sad thought of early childhood , and yearning for departed joy , or for a brighter future lot , arise instead . as my eye wander over the steep bank cover with young grass and green - leave plant , and surmount by budding hedge , I long intensely for some familiar flower that might recall the woody dale or green hill - side of home : the brown moorland , of course , be out of the question . such a discovery would make my eye gush out with water , no doubt ; but that be one of my greatest enjoyment now . at length I descry , high up between the twisted root of a oak , three lovely primrose , pee so sweetly from they hiding - place that the tear already start at the sight ; but they grow so high above I , that I try in vain to gather one or two , to dream over and to carry with I : I could not reach they unless I climb the bank , which I be deter from do by hear a footstep at that moment behind I , and be , therefore , about to turn away , when I be start by the word , ' allow I to gather they for you , , ' speak in the grave , low tone of a well - know voice . immediately the flower be gather , and in my hand . it be , of course -- who else would trouble himself to do so much for I ? 'I thank he ; whether warmly or coldly , I can not tell : but certain I be that I do not express half the gratitude I feel . it be foolish , perhaps , to feel any gratitude at all ; but it seem to I , at that moment , as if this be a remarkable instance of he good - nature : a act of kindness , which I could not repay , but never should forget : so utterly unaccustomed be I to receive such civility , so little prepare to expect they from anyone within fifty mile of . yet this do not prevent I from feel a little uncomfortable in he presence ; and I proceed to follow my pupil at a much quicker pace than before ; though , perhaps , if have take the hint , and let I pass without another word , I might have repeat it a hour after : but he do not . a somewhat rapid walk for I be but a ordinary pace for he . ' you young lady have leave you alone , ' say he . ' yes , they be occupy with more agreeable company . ' ' then do not trouble yourself to overtake they . ' I slacken my pace ; but next moment regret have do so : my companion do not speak ; and I have nothing in the world to say , and fear he might be in the same predicament . at length , however , he break the pause by ask , with a certain quiet abruptness peculiar to himself , if I like flower . ' yes ; very much ,' I answer , ' wild - flowers especially . ' '_I_ like wild - flower , ' say he ; ' other I do not care about , because I have no particular associations connect with they -- except one
one or two . what be you favourite flowers ? ' ' Primrose , bluebell , and heath - blossom . ' ' not violet ? ' 'no ; because , as you say , I have no particular associations connect with they ; for there be no sweet violet among the hill and valley round my home . ' ' it must be a great consolation to you to have a home , , ' observe my companion after a short pause : ' however remote , or however seldom visit , still it be something to look to . ' ' it be so much that I think I could not live without it , ' reply I , with a enthusiasm of which I immediately repent ; for I think it must have sound essentially silly . 'Oh , yes , you could , ' say he , with a thoughtful smile . ' the tie that bind we to life be tougher than you imagine , or than anyone can who have not feel how roughly they may be pull without breaking . you might be miserable without a home , but even you could live ; and not so miserably as you suppose . the human heart be like india -rubber ; a little swell it , but a great deal will not burst it . if " little more than nothing will disturb it , little less than all thing will suffice " to break it . as in the outer member of we frame , there be a vital power inherent in itself that strengthen it against external violence . every blow that shake it will serve to hare it against a future stroke ; as constant labour thickend the skin of the hand , and strengthen its muscle instead of waste they away : so that a day of arduous toil , that might excoriate a lady 's palm , would make no sensible impression on that of a hardy ploughman . 'I speak from experience -- partly my own . there be a time when I think as you do -- at least , I be fully persuade that home and its affections be the only thing that make life tolerable : that , if deprive of these , existence would become a burden hard to be endure ; but now I have no home -- unless you would dignify my two hire room at by such a name ; -- and not twelve month ago I lose the last and dearest of my early friend ; and yet , not only I live , but I be not wholly destitute of hope and comfort , even for this life : though I must acknowledge that I can seldom enter even a humble cottage at the close of day , and see its inhabitant peaceably gather around they cheerful hearth , without a feeling almost of envy at they domestic enjoyment . ' ' you do not know what happiness lie before you yet , ' say I : ' you be now only in the commencement of you journey . ' ' the best of happiness , ' reply he , ' be mine already -- the power and the will to be useful . ' we now approach a stile communicate with a footpath that conduct to a farm - house , where , I suppose , purpose to make himself ' useful ;' for he presently take leave of I , cross the stile , and traverse the path with he usual firm , elastic tread , leave I to ponder he word as I continue my course alone . I have hear before that he have lose he mother not many month before he come . she then be the last and dearest of he early friend ; and he have no home . I pitie he from my heart : I almost weep for sympathy . and this , I think , account for the shade of premature thoughtfulness that so frequently cloude he brow , and obtain for he the reputation of a morose and sull disposition with the charitable and all she kin . ' but ,' think I , ' he be not so miserable as I should be under such a deprivation : he lead a active life ; and a wide field for useful exertion lie before he . he can make friend ; and he can make a home too , if he please ; and , doubtless , he will please some time . grant the partner of that home may be worthy of he choice , and make it a happy one -- such a home as he deserve to have ! and how delightful it would be to -- ' but no matter what I think . I begin this book with the intention of conceal nothing ; that those who like might have the benefit of peruse a fellow - creature 's heart : but we have some thought that all the angels in heaven be welcome to behold , but not we brother - man -- not even the best and kindest amongst they . by this time the have take themselves to they own abode , and the have turn down the private road , whither I hasten to follow they . I find the two girl warm in a animated discussion on the respective merit of the two young officer ; but on see I break off in the middle of a sentence to exclaim , with malicious glee - ' oh - ho , ! you be come at last , be you ? no wonder you linger so long behind ; and no wonder you always stand up so vigorously for when I abuse he . ah - ha ! I see it all now ! ' ' now , come ,
, , do not be foolish , ' say I , attempt a good - nature laugh ; ' you know such nonsense can make no impression on I . ' but she still go on talk such intolerable stuff -- she sister help she with appropriate fiction coin for the occasion -- that I think it necessary to say something in my own justification . ' what folly all this be ! ' I exclaim . ' if 's road happen to be the same as mine for a few yard , and if he choose to exchange a word or two in passing , what be there so remarkable in that ? I assure you , I never speak to he before : except once . ' ' where ? where ? and when ? ' cry they eagerly . 's cottage . ' 'Ah - ha ! you have meet he there , have you ? ' exclaim , with exultant laughter . 'Ah ! now , , I have find out why she be so fond of go to 's ! she go there to flirt with . ' ' really , that be not worth contradicting -- I only see he there once , I tell you -- and how could I know he be come ? ' Irritate as I be at they foolish mirth and vexatious imputation , the uneasiness do not continue long : when they have have they laugh out , they return again to the captain and lieutenant ; and , while they dispute and comment upon they , my indignation rapidly cool ; the cause of it be quickly forget , and I turn my thought into a pleasanter channel . thus we proceed up the park , and enter the hall ; and as I ascend the stair to my own chamber , I have but one think within I : my heart be fill to overflow with one single earnest wish . have enter the room , and shut the door , I fall upon my knee and offer up a fervent but not impetuous prayer : ' thy will be do ,' I strove to say throughout ; but , ' Father , all thing be possible with , and may it be , ' be sure to follow . that wish -- that prayer -- both man and woman would have scorne I for --' but , , thou will not despise ! ' I say , and feel that it be true . it seem to I that another 's welfare be at least as ardently implor for as my own ; nay , even that be the principal object of my heart 's desire . I might have be deceive myself ; but that idea give I confidence to ask , and power to hope I do not ask in vain . as for the primrose , I keep two of they in a glass in my room until they be completely wither , and the housemaid throw they out ; and the petal of the other I press between the leaf of my -- I have they still , and mean to keep they always . chapter XIV-- the the follow day be as fine as the preceding one . after , have gallop and blundere through a few unprofitable lesson , and vengeably thump the piano for a hour , in a terrible humour with both I and it , because she mamma would not give she a holiday , have betake herself to she favourite place of resort , the yard , the stable , and the dog - kennel ; and be go forth to enjoy a quiet ramble with a new fashionable novel for she companion , leave I in the schoolroom hard at work upon a water - colour drawing which I have promise to do for she , and which she insist upon my finishing that day . at my foot lay a little rough terrier . it be the property of ; but she hate the animal , and intend to sell it , allege that it be quite spoiled . it be really a excellent dog of its kind ; but she affirm it be fit for nothing , and have not even the sense to know its own mistress . the fact be she have purchase it when but a small puppy , insist at first that no one should touch it but herself ; but soon become tired of so helpless and troublesome a nursling , she have gladly yielded to my entreaty to be allow to take charge of it ; and I , by carefully nurse the little creature from infancy to adolescence , of course , have obtain its affections : a reward I should have greatly value , and look upon as far outweigh all the trouble I have have with it , have not poor snap 's grateful feeling expose he to many a harsh word and many a spiteful kick and pinch from he owner , and be he not now in danger of be 's put away ' in consequence , or transfer to some rough , stony - hear master . but how could I help it ? I could not make the dog hate I by cruel treatment , and she would not propitiate he by kindness . however , while I thus sit , work away with my pencil , come , half - sailing , half - bustling , into the room . ' , ' she begin ,--' dear ! how can you sit at you drawing such a day as this ? ' ( she think I be do it for my own pleasure . ) 'I wonder you do not put on you bonnet and go out with the young lady . ' 'I think , ma 'am ,
, be read ; and be amuse herself with she dog . ' ' if you would try to amuse yourself a little more , I think she would not be drive to seek amusement in the companionship of dog and horse and grooms , so much as she be ; and if you would be a little more cheerful and conversable with , she would not so often go wander in the field with a book in she hand . however , I do not want to vex you , ' add she , see , I suppose , that my cheek burn and my hand tremble with some unamiable emotion . ' do , pray , try not to be so touchy -- there be no speaking to you else . and tell I if you know where be go : and why she like to be so much alone ? ' ' she say she like to be alone when she have a new book to read . ' ' but why can not she read it in the park or the garden ?--why should she go into the field and lane ? and how be it that that so often find she out ? she tell I last week he would walk he horse by she side all up ; and now I be sure it be he I see , from my dressing - room window , walk so briskly past the park - gate , and on towards the field where she so frequently go . I wish you would go and see if she be there ; and just gently remind she that it be not proper for a young lady of she rank and prospect to be wander about by herself in that manner , expose to the attention of anyone that presume to address she ; like some poor neglect girl that have no park to walk in , and no friend to take care of she : and tell she that she papa would be extremely angry if he know of she treat in the familiar manner that I fear she do ; and -- oh ! if you -- if any governess have but half a mother 's watchfulness -- half a mother 's anxious care , I should be save this trouble ; and you would see at once the necessity of keep you eye upon she , and make you company agreeable to -- well , go -- go ; there be no time to be lose , ' cry she , see that I have put away my drawing material , and be wait in the doorway for the conclusion of she address . accord to she prognostication , I find in she favourite field just without the park ; and , unfortunately , not alone ; for the tall , stately figure of be slowly saunter by she side . here be a poser for I . it be my duty to interrupt the tete - a - tete : but how be it to be do ? could not to be drive away by so insignificant person as I ; and to go and place myself on the other side of , and intrude my unwelcome presence upon she without notice she companion , be a piece of rudeness I could not be guilty of : neither have I the courage to cry aloud from the top of the field that she be want elsewhere . so I take the intermediate course of walk slowly but steadily towards they ; resolve , if my approach fail to scare away the beau , to pass by and tell she mamma wante she . she certainly look very charming as she stroll , linger along under the budding horse - chestnut tree that stretch they long arm over the park - paling ; with she close book in one hand , and in the other a graceful sprig of myrtle , which serve she as a very pretty plaything ; she bright ringlet escape profusely from she little bonnet , and gently stir by the breeze , she fair cheek flush with gratified vanity , she smile blue eye , now slyly glance towards she admirer , now gaze downward at she myrtle sprig . but snap , run before I , interrupt she in the midst of some half - pert , half - playful repartee , by catche hold of she dress and vehemently tugge thereat ; till , with he cane , administer a resounding thwack upon the animal 's skull , and send it yelp back to I with a clamorous outcry that afforde the reverend gentleman great amusement : but see I so near , he think , I suppose , he might as well be take he departure ; and , as I stoop to caress the dog , with ostentatious pity to show my disapproval of he severity , I hear he say : ' when shall I see you again , ? ' ' at church , I suppose , ' reply she , ' unless you business chance to bring you here again at the precise moment when I happen to be walk by . ' 'I could always manage to have business here , if I know precisely when and where to find you . ' ' but if I would , I could not inform you , for I be so immethodical , I never can tell to - day what I shall do to - morrow . ' ' then give I that , meantime , to comfort I , ' say he , half jestingly and half in earnest , extend he hand for the sprig of myrtle . ' no , indeed , I sha not . ' ' do ! pray do ! I shall be the most miserable of man if
if you do not . you can not be so cruel as to deny I a favour so easily grant and yet so highly prize ! ' plead he as ardently as if he life depend on it . by this time I stand within a very few yard of they , impatiently wait he departure . ' there then ! take it and go , ' say . he joyfully receive the gift , murmure something that make she blush and toss she head , but with a little laugh that show she displeasure be entirely affect ; and then with a courteous salutation withdrew . ' do you ever see such a man , ? ' say she , turn to I ; 'I be so glad you come ! I think I never should , get rid of he ; and I be so terribly afraid of papa see he . ' ' have he be with you long ? ' 'no , not long , but he be so extremely impertinent : and he be always hang about , pretend he business or he clerical duty require he attendance in these part , and really watch for poor I , and pounce upon I wherever he see I . ' ' well , you mamma think you ought not to go beyond the park or garden without some discreet , matronly person like I to accompany you , and keep off all intruder . she descry hurrie past the park - gate , and forthwith despatch I with instruction to seek you up and to take care of you , and likewise to warn --' 'Oh , 's so tiresome ! as if I could not take care of myself . she bother I before about ; and I tell she she might trust I : I never should forget my rank and station for the most delightful man that ever breathe . I wish he would go down on he knee to - morrow , and implore I to be he wife , that I might just show she how mistake she be in suppose that I could ever -- oh , it provoke I so ! to think that I could be such a fool as to fall in ! it be quite beneath the dignity of a woman to do such a thing . love ! I detest the word ! as apply to one of we sex , I think it a perfect insult . a preference I might acknowledge ; but never for one like poor , who have not seven hundred a year to bless himself with . I like to talk to he , because he be so clever and amuse -- I wish be half as nice ; beside , I must have to flirt with , and no one else have the sense to come here ; and when we go out , will not let I flirt with anybody but -- if he be there ; and if he be not there , I be bound hand and foot , for fear somebody should go and make up some exaggerate story , and put it into he head that I be engage , or likely to be engage , to somebody else ; or , what be more probable , for fear he nasty old mother should see or hear of my ongoing , and conclude that I be not a fit wife for she excellent son : as if the said son be not the greatest scamp in ; and as if any woman of common decency be not a world too good for he . ' ' be it really so , ? and do you mamma know it , and yet wish you to marry he ? ' 'To be sure , she do ! she know more against he than I do , I believe : she keep it from I lest I should be discourage ; not know how little I care about such thing . for it be no great matter , really : he will be all right when he be marry , as mamma say ; and reform rake make the best husband , everybody know . I only wish he be not so ugly -- that be all _i_ think about : but then there be no choice here in the country ; and papa will not let we go to --' ' but I should think would be far better . ' ' and so he would , if he be lord of -- there be not a doubt of it : but the fact be , I must have , whoever share it with I . ' ' but think you like he all this time ; you do not consider how bitterly he will be disappoint when he find himself mistaken . ' 'no , indeed ! it will be a proper punishment for he presumption -- for ever Dar to think I could like he . I should enjoy nothing so much as lift the veil from he eyes . ' ' the sooner you do it the better then . ' ' no ; I tell you , I like to amuse myself with he . besides , he do not really think I like he . I take good care of that : you do not know how cleverly I manage . he may presume to think he can induce I to like he ; for which i shall punish he as he deserve . ' ' well , mind you do not give too much reason for such presumption -- that be all , ' reply I . but all my exhortation be in vain : they only make she somewhat more solicitous to disguise she wish and she thought from I . she talk no more to I about the
the rector ; but I could see that she mind , if not she heart , be fix upon he still , and that she be intent upon obtain another interview : for though , in compliance with she mother 's request , I be now constitute the companion of she ramble for a time , she still persist in wander in the field and lane that lay in the nearest proximity to the road ; and , whether she talk to I or read the book she carry in she hand , she keep continually pause to look round she , or gaze up the road to see if anyone be come ; and if a horseman trot by , I could tell by she unqualified abuse of the poor equestrian , whoever he might be , that she hate he because he be not . ' surely , ' think I , ' she be not so indifferent to he as she believe herself to be , or would have other to believe she ; and she mother 's anxiety be not so wholly causeless as she affirm . ' three day pass away , and he do not make he appearance . on the afternoon of the fourth , as we be walk beside the park - paling in the memorable field , each furnish with a book ( for I always take care to provide myself with something to be do when she do not require I to talk ) , she suddenly interrupt my study by exclaim - , ! do be so kind as to go and see , and take he wife half - a - crown from I -- I should have give or send it a week ago , but quite forgot . there ! ' say she , throw I she purse , and speak very fast --' never mind get it out now , but take the purse and give they what you like ; I would go with you , but I want to finish this volume . I will come and meet you when I have do it . be quick , will you -- and -- oh , wait ; have not you better read to he a bit ? run to the house and get some sort of a good book . anything will do . ' I do as I be desire ; but , suspect something from she hurried manner and the suddenness of the request , I just glance back before I quit the field , and there be about to enter at the gate below . by send I to the house for a book , she have just prevent my meet he on the road . ' never mind ! ' think I , ' there will be no great harm do . poor will be glad of the half - crown , and perhaps of the good book too ; and if the rector do steal 's heart , it will only humble she pride a little ; and if they do get marry at last , it will only save she from a worse fate ; and she will be quite a good enough partner for he , and he for she . ' be the consumptive labourer whom I mention before . he be now rapidly wear away . , by she liberality , obtain literally the blessing of he that be ready to perish ; for though the half - crown could be of very little service to he , he be glad of it for the sake of he wife and child , so soon to be widowed and fatherless . after I have sit a few minute , and read a little for the comfort and edification of himself and he afflict wife , I leave they ; but I have not proceed fifty yard before I encounter , apparently on he way to the same abode . he greet I in he usual quiet , unaffected way , stop to inquire about the condition of the sick man and he family , and with a sort of unconscious , brotherly disregard to ceremony take from my hand the book out of which I have be read , turn over its page , make a few brief but very sensible remark , and restore it ; then tell I about some poor sufferer he have just be visit , talk a little about , make a few observation upon my little rough friend the terrier , that be frisk at he foot , and finally upon the beauty of the weather , and depart . I have omit to give a detail of he word , from a notion that they would not interest the reader as they do I , and not because I have forgote they . no ; I remember they well ; for I think they over and over again in the course of that day and many succeed one , I know not how often ; and recal every intonation of he deep , clear voice , every flash of he quick , brown eye , and every gleam of he pleasant , but too transient smile . such a confession will look very absurd , I fear : but no matter : I have write it : and they that read it will not know the writer . while I be walk along , happy within , and pleas with all around , come hasten to meet I ; she buoyant step , flush cheek , and radiant smile show that she , too , be happy , in she own way . run up to I , she put she arm through mine , and without wait to recover breath , begin --' now , , think yourself highly honoure , for I be come to tell you
you my news before I have breathe a word of it to anyone else . ' ' well , what be it ? ' 'Oh , such news ! in the first place , you must know that come upon I just after you be gone . I be in such a way for fear papa or mamma should see he ; but you know I could not call you back again , and so !-- oh , dear ! I can not tell you all about it now , for there be , I see , in the park , and I must go and open my budget to she . but , however , be most uncommonly audacious , unspeakably complimentary , and unprecedentedly tender -- try to be so , at least -- he do not succeed very well in that , because it be not he vein . I will tell you all he say another time . ' ' but what do you say -- I be more interested in that ? ' 'I will tell you that , too , at some future period . I happen to be in a very good humour just then ; but , though I be complaisant and gracious enough , I take care not to compromise myself in any possible way . but , however , the conceited wretch choose to interpret my amiability of temper he own way , and at length presume upon my indulgence so far -- what do you think ?-- he actually make I a offer ! ' ' and you -- ' ' I proudly draw myself up , and with the greatest coolness express my astonishment at such a occurrence , and hope he have see nothing in my conduct to justify he expectation . you should have how he countenance fell ! he go perfectly white in the face . I assure he that I esteem he and all that , but could not possibly accede to he proposal ; and if I do , papa and mamma could never be bring to give they consent . ' ' " but if they could , " say he , " would yours be want ? " ' " certainly , , " I reply , with a cool decision which quell all hope at once . oh , if you have see how dreadfully mortify he be -- how crush to the earth by he disappointment ! really , I almost pitie he myself . ' one more desperate attempt , however , he make . after a silence of considerable duration , during which he struggle to be calm , and I to be grave -- for I feel a strong propensity to laugh -- which would have ruin all -- he say , with the ghost of a smile -- " but tell I plainly , , if I have the wealth of , or the prospects of he eldest son , would you still refuse I ? answer I truly , upon you honour . " ' " certainly , " say I . " that would make no difference whatever . " ' it be a great lie , but he look so confident in he own attraction still , that I determine not to leave he one stone upon another . he look I full in the face ; but I keep my countenance so well that he could not imagine I be say anything more than the actual truth . ' " then it be all over , I suppose , " he say , look as if he could have die on the spot with vexation and the intensity of he despair . but he be angry as well as disappointed . there be he , suffer so unspeakably , and there be I , the pitiless cause of it all , so utterly impenetrable to all the artillery of he look and word , so calmly cold and proud , he could not but feel some resentment ; and with singular bitterness he begin -- " I certainly do not expect this , . I might say something about you past conduct , and the hope you have lead I to foster , but I forbear , on condition -- " ' " no condition , ! " say I , now truly indignant at he insolence . ' " then let I beg it as a favour , " he reply , lower he voice at once , and take a humbler tone : " let I entreat that you will not mention this affair to anyone whatever . if you will keep silence about it , there need be no unpleasantness on either side -- nothing , I mean , beyond what be quite unavoidable : for my own feeling I will endeaavor to keep to myself , if I can not annihilate they -- I will try to forgive , if I can not forget the cause of my suffering . I will not suppose , , that you know how deeply you have injure I . I would not have you aware of it ; but if , in addition to the injury you have already do I -- pardon I , but , whether innocently or not , you have do it -- and if you add to it by give publicity to this unfortunate affair , or name it at all , you will find that I too can speak , and though you scorn my love , you will hardly scorn my -- " ' he stop , but he bit he bloodless lip , and look so terribly fierce that I be quite frightened . however , my pride upheld I still , and I answer disdainfully ; " I do not know what motive you suppose I could have for name it to
to anyone , ; but if I be dispose to do so , you would not deter I by threat ; and it be scarcely the part of a gentleman to attempt it . " ' " I , , " say he , " I have love you so intensely - - I do still adore you so deeply , that I would not willingly offend you ; but though I never have love , and never can love any woman as I have love you , it be equally certain that I never be so ill - treat by any . on the contrary , I have always find you sex the kindest and most tender and oblige of 's creation , till now . " ( think of the conceited fellow say that ! ) " and the novelty and harshness of the lesson you have teach I to - day , and the bitterness of be disappoint in the only quarter on which the happiness of my life depend , must excuse any appearance of asperity . if my presence be disagreeable to you , , " he say ( for I be look about I to show how little I care for he , so he think I be tired of he , I suppose ) --" if my presence be disagreeable to you , , you have only to promise I the favour I name , and I will relieve you at once . there be many lady -- some even in this parish -- who would be delighted to accept what you have so scornfully trample under you foot . they would be naturally inclin to hate one whose surpass loveliness have so completely estrange my heart from they and blind I to they attraction ; and a single hint of the truth from I to one of these would be sufficient to raise such a talk against you as would seriously injure you prospect , and diminish you chance of success with any other gentleman you or you mamma might design to entangle . " ' " what do you mean , sir ? " say I , ready to stamp with passion . ' " I mean that this affair from begin to end appear to I like a case of arrant flirtation , to say the least of it -- such a case as you would find it rather inconvenient to have blazon through the world : especially with the additions and exaggeration of you female rival , who would be too glad to publish the matter , if I only give they a handle to it . but I promise you , on the faith of a gentleman , that no word or syllable that could tend to you prejudice shall ever escape my lip , provide you will -- " ' " well , well , I will not mention it , " say I . " you may rely upon my silence , if that can afford you any consolation . " ' " you promise it ? " ' " yes , " I answer ; for I want to get rid of he now . ' " farewell , then ! " say he , in a most doleful , heart - sick tone ; and with a look where pride vainly struggle against despair , he turn and go away : longe , no doubt , to get home , that he might shut himself up in he study and cry -- if he do not burst into tear before he get there . ' ' but you have break you promise already , ' say I , truly horrify at she perfidy . 'Oh ! it be only to you ; I know you will not repeat it . ' ' certainly , I shall not : but you say you be go to tell you sister ; and she will tell you brothers when they come home , and immediately , if you do not tell she yourself ; and will blazon it , or be the means of blazon it , throughout the country . ' 'no , indeed , she will not . we shall not tell she at all , unless it be under the promise of the strictest secrecy . ' ' but how can you expect she to keep she promise better than she more enlightened mistress ? ' ' well , well , she sha not hear it then , ' say , somewhat snappishly . ' but you will tell you mamma , of course , ' pursue I ; ' and she will tell you papa . ' ' of course I shall tell mamma -- that be the very thing that please I so much . I shall now be able to convince she how mistaken she be in she fear about I . ' 'Oh , that be it , be it ? I be wonder what it be that delighte you so much . ' ' yes ; and another thing be , that I have humble so charmingly ; and another -- why , you must allow I some share of female vanity : I do not pretend to be without that most essential attribute of we sex -- and if you have see poor 's intense eagerness in make he ardent declaration and he flatter proposal , and he agony of mind , that no effort of pride could conceal , on be refuse , you would have allow I have some cause to be gratify . ' ' the greater he agony , I should think , the less you cause for gratification . ' 'Oh , nonsense ! ' cry the young lady , shak herself with vexation . ' you either can not understand I , or you will not . if I have not confidence in
in you magnanimity , I should think you envie I . but you will , perhaps , comprehend this cause of pleasure -- which be as great as any -- namely , that I be delighte with myself for my prudence , my self - command , my heartlessness , if you please . I be not a bit take by surprise , not a bit confused , or awkward , or foolish ; I just act and speak as I ink to have do , and be completely my own mistress throughout . and here be a man , decidedly good -looking -- and call he bewitchingly handsome I suppose they be two of the ladie he pretend would be so glad to have he ; but , however , he be certainly a very clever , witty , agreeable companion -- not what you call clever , but just enough to make he entertaine ; and a man one need not be asham of anywhere , and would not soon grow tired of ; and to confess the truth , I rather like he -- better even , of late , than -- and he evidently idolise I ; and yet , though he come upon I all alone and unprepared , I have the wisdom , and the pride , and the strength to refuse he -- and so scornfully and coolly as I do : I have good reason to be proud of that . ' ' and be you equally proud of have tell he that he have the wealth of would make no difference to you , when that be not the case ; and of have promise to tell no one of he misadventure , apparently without the slightest intention of keep you promise ? ' ' of course ! what else could I do ? you would not have have I -- but I see , , you be not in a good temper . here be ; I will see what she and have to say about it . ' she leave I , offend at my want of sympathy , and think , no doubt , that I envy she . I do not -- at least , I firmly believe I do not . I be sorry for she ; I be amaze , disgust at she heartless vanity ; I wonder why so much beauty should be give to those who make so bad a use of it , and deny to some who would make it a benefit to both themselves and other . but , know best , I conclude . there be , I suppose , some man as vain , as selfish , and as heartless as she be , and , perhaps , such woman may be useful to punish they . -- the , dear ! I wish have not be so precipitate ! ' say next day at four p.m. , as , with a portentous yawn , she lay down she worsted - work and look listlessly towards the window . ' there be no inducement to go out now ; and nothing to look forward to . the day will be so long and dull when there be no party to enlive they ; and there be none this week , or next either , that I know of . ' ' Pity you be so cross to he , ' observ , to whom this lamentation be address . ' he will never come again : and I suspect you like he after all . I hope you would have take he for you beau , and leave dear to I . ' ' Humph ! my beau must be a indeed , , the admired of all beholder , if I be to be contente with he alone . I be sorry to lose , I confess ; but the first decent man , or number of man , that come to supply he place , will be more than welcome . it be to - morrow -- I do wonder how he will look , and whether he will be able to go through the service . most likely he will pretend he be get a cold , and make do it all . ' ' not he ! ' exclaim , somewhat contemptuously . ' fool as he be , he be not so soft as that come to . ' she sister be slightly offended ; but the event prove be right : the disappointed lover perform he pastoral duty as usual . , indeed , affirm he look very pale and deject : he might be a little paler ; but the difference , if any , be scarcely perceptible . as for he dejection , I certainly do not hear he laugh ringing from the vestry as usual , nor he voice loud in hilarious discourse ; though I do hear it uplifted in rate the sexton in a manner that make the congregation stare ; and , in he transit to and from the pulpit and the communion - table , there be more of solemn pomp , and less of that irreverent , self - confident , or rather self - delighte imperiousness with which he usually sweep along -- that air that seem to say , ' you all reverence and adore I , I know ; but if anyone do not , I defy he to the tooth ! ' but the most remarkable change be , that he never once suffer he eye to wander in the direction of Murray's pew , and do not leave the church till we be go . have receive a very severe blow ; but he pride impell he to use every effort to conceal the effect of it . he have be disappoint in he certain hope of obtain not only
only a beautiful , and , to he , highly attractive wife , but one whose rank and fortune might give brilliance to far inferior charms : he be likewise , no doubt , intensely mortify by he repulse , and deeply offend at the conduct of throughout . it would have give he no little consolation to have know how disappointed she be to find he apparently so little move , and to see that he be able to refrain from cast a single glance at she throughout both service ; though , she declare , it show he be think of she all the time , or he eye would have fall upon she , if it be only by chance : but if they have so chance to fall , she would have affir it be because they could not resist the attraction . it might have please he , too , in some degree , to have see how dull and dissatisfie she be throughout that week ( the greater part of it , at least ) , for lack of she usual source of excitement ; and how often she regret have ' use he up so soon , ' like a child that , have devoure it be plumcake too hastily , sits suck its finger , and vainly lament its greediness . at length I be call upon , one fine morning , to accompany she in a walk to the village . Ostensibly she go to get some shade of wool , at a tolerably respectable shop that be chiefly support by the ladie of the vicinity : really -- I trust there be no breach of charity in suppose that she go with the idea of meet either with the rector himself , or some other admirer by the way ; for as we go along , she keep wonder ' what would do or say , if we meet he , ' & c . & c. ; as we pass 's park - gate , she ' wonder whether he be at home -- great stupid blockhead ' ; as 's carriage pass we , she ' wonder what be do this fine day ' ; and then begin to abuse he elder brother for be 's such a fool as to get married and go and live in . ' ' why , ' say I , 'I think you want to live in yourself . ' ' yes , because it be so dull here : but then he make it still duller by take himself off : and if he be not marry I might have he instead of that odious . ' then , obserive the print of a horse 's foot on the somewhat miry road , she ' wonder whether it be a gentleman 's horse , ' and finally conclude it be , for the impressions be too small to have be make by a ' great clumsy cart - horse ' ; and then she ' wonder who the rider could be , ' and whether we should meet he come back , for she be sure he have only pass that morning ; and lastly , when we enter the village and see only a few of its humble inhabitant move about , she ' wonder why the stupid people could not keep in they house ; she be sure she do not want to see they ugly face , and dirty , vulgar clothes -- it be not for that she come to ! ' amid all this , I confess , I wonder , too , in secret , whether we should meet , or catch a glimpse of somebody else ; and as we pass he lodging , I even go so far as to wonder whether he be at the window . on enter the shop , desire I to stand in the doorway while she transact she business , and tell she if anyone pass . but alas ! there be no one visible besides the villager , except and come down the single street , apparently return from a walk . ' stupid thing ! ' mutter she , as she come out after have conclude she bargain . ' why could not they have they dolt of a brother with they ? even he would be better than nothing . ' she greet they , however , with a cheerful smile , and protestation of pleasure at the happy meeting equal to they own . they place themselves one on each side of she , and all three walk away chat and laugh as young lady do when they get together , if they be but on tolerably intimate term . but I , feel myself to be one too many , leave they to they merriment and lag behind , as usual on such occasion : I have no relish for walking beside or like one deaf and dumb , who could neither speak nor be speak to . but this time I be not long alone . it struck I , first , as very odd , that just as I be think about he should come up and accost I ; but afterwards , on due reflection , I think there be nothing odd about it , unless it be the fact of he speak to I ; for on such a morning and so near he own abode , it be natural enough that he should be about ; and as for my thinking of he , I have be do that , with little intermission , ever since we set out on we journey ; so there be nothing remarkable in that . ' you be alone again , , ' say he . ' yes . ' ' what kind of people be those lady -- the ?
? ' 'I really do not know . ' ' that be strange -- when you live so near and see they so often ! ' ' well , I suppose they be lively , good - tempere girl ; but I imagine you must know they better than I do , yourself , for I never exchange a word with either of they . ' ' indeed ? they do not strike I as be particularly reserve . ' ' very likely they be not so to people of they own class ; but they consider themselves as move in quite a different sphere from I ! ' he make no reply to this : but after a short pause , he say ,-- 'I suppose it be these thing , , that make you think you could not live without a home ? ' ' not exactly . the fact be I be too socially dispose to be able to live contentedly without a friend ; and as the only friend I have , or be likely to have , be at home , if it -- or rather , if they be gone -- I will not say I could not live -- but I would rather not live in such a desolate world . ' ' but why do you say the only friend you be likely to have ? be you so unsociable that you can not make friend ? ' ' no , but I never make one yet ; and in my present position there be no possibility of do so , or even of form a common acquaintance . the fault may be partly in myself , but I hope not altogether . ' ' the fault be partly in society , and partly , I should think , in you immediate neighbour : and partly , too , in yourself ; for many lady , in you position , would make themselves be notice and account of . but you pupil should be companion for you in some degree ; they can not be many year younger than yourself . ' 'Oh , yes , they be good company sometimes ; but I can not call they friend , nor would they think of bestow such a name on I -- they have other companion better suit to they taste . ' ' perhaps you be too wise for they . how do you amuse yourself when alone -- do you read much ? ' ' reading be my favourite occupation , when I have leisure for it and book to read . ' from speaking of boonks in general , he pass to different book in particular , and proceed by rapid transitions from to , till several matter , both of taste and opinion , have be discuss considerably within the space of half a hour , but without the embellishment of many observation from himself ; he be evidently less bent upon communicate he own thought and predilection , than on discover mine . he have not the tact , or the art , to effect such a purpose by skilfully draw out my sentiment or idea through the real or apparent statement of he own , or lead the conversation by imperceptible gradation to such topics as he wish to advert to : but such gentle abruptness , and such single - minded straightforwardness , could not possibly offend I . ' and why should he interest himself at all in my moral and intellectual capacity : what be it to he what I think or feel ? ' I ask myself . and my heart throb in answer to the question . but and soon reach they home . as they stand parley at the park - gate , attempt to persuade to come in , I wish would go , that she might not see he with I when she turn round ; but , unfortunately , he business , which be to pay one more visit to poor , lead he to pursue the same path as we do , till nearly the close of we journey . when , however , he see that have take leave of she friend and I be about to join she , he would have leave I and pass on at a quicker pace ; but , as he civilly lift he hat in pass she , to my surprise , instead of return the salute with a stiff , ungracious bow , she accost he with one of she sweetest smile , and , walk by he side , begin to talk to he with all imaginable cheerfulness and affability ; and so we proceed all three together . after a short pause in the conversation , make some remark address particularly to I , as refer to something we have be talk of before ; but before I could answer , reply to the observation and enlarge upon it : he rejoin ; and , from thence to the close of the interview , she engross he entirely to herself . it might be partly owe to my own stupidity , my want of tact and assurance : but I feel myself wronge : I tremble with apprehension ; and I listen with envy to she easy , rapid flow of utterance , and see with anxiety the bright smile with which she look into he face from time to time : for she be walk a little in advance , for the purpose ( as I judge ) of be see as well as heard . if she conversation be light and trivial , it be amuse , and she be never at a loss for something to say , or for suitable word to express it in . there be nothing pert or flippant in she manner now , as when she walk with
with , there be only a genle , playful kind of vivacity , which I think must be peculiarly pleasing to a man of 's disposition and temperament . when he be go she begin to laugh , and mutter to herself , 'I think I could do it ! ' ' do what ? ' I ask . ' fix that man . ' ' what in the world do you mean ? ' 'I mean that he will go home and dream of I . I have shoot he through the heart ! ' ' how do you know ? ' ' by many infallible proof : more especially the look he give I when he go away . it be not a impudent look -- I exonerate he from that -- it be a look of reverential , tender adoration . , ha ! he be not quite such a stupid blockhead as I think he ! ' I make no answer , for my heart be in my throat , or something like it , and I could not trust myself to speak . 'O , avert it ! ' I cry , internally --' for he sake , not for mine ! ' make several trivial observation as we pass up the park , to which ( in spite of my reluctance to let one glimpse of my feeling appear ) I could only answer by monosyllable . whether she intend to torment I , or merely to amuse herself , I could not tell -- and do not much care ; but I think of the poor man and he one lamb , and the rich man with he thousand flock ; and I dread I know not what for , independently of my own blighted hope . right glad be I to get into the house , and find myself alone once more in my own room . my first impulse be to sink into the chair beside the bed ; and lay my head on the pillow , to seek relief in a passionate burst of tear : there be a imperative craving for such a indulgence ; but , alas ! I must restrain and swallow back my feeling still : there be the bell -- the odious bell for the schoolroom dinner ; and I must go down with a calm face , and smile , and laugh , and talk nonsense -- yes , and eat , too , if possible , as if all be right , and I be just return from a pleasant walk . -- the be one of the gloomiest of day - - a day of thick , dark cloud , and heavy showers . none of the be dispose to attend church in the afternoon , except : she be bend upon go as usual ; so she order the carriage , and I go with she : nothing loth , of course , for at church I might look without fear of scorn or censure upon a form and face more pleasing to I than the most beautiful of 's creations ; I might listen without disturbance to a voice more charming than the sweetest music to my ear ; I might seem to hold communion with that soul in which I feel so deeply interested , and imbibe it be purest thought and holiest aspiration , with no alloy to such felicity except the secret reproach of my conscience , which would too often whisper that I be deceive my own self , and mock with the service of a heart more bent upon the creature than the Creator . sometimes , such thought would give I trouble enough ; but sometimes I could quiet they with think -- it be not the man , it be he goodness that I love . ' whatsoever thing be pure , whatsoever thing be lovely , whatsoever thing be honest and of good report , think on these thing . ' we do well to worship in he work ; and I know none of they in which so many of he attribute -- so much of he own spirit shine , as in this his faithful servant ; whom to know and not to appreciate , be obtuse insensibility in I , who have so little else to occupy my heart . almost immediately after the conclusion of the service , leave the church . we have to stand in the porch , for it be rain , and the carriage be not yet come . I wonder at she come forth so hastily , for neither young nor be there ; but I soon find it be to secure a interview with as he come out , which he presently do . have salute we both , he would have pass on , but she detain he ; first with observation upon the disagreeable weather , and then with ask if he would be so kind as to come some time to - morrow to see the granddaughter of the old woman who keep the porter 's lodge , for the girl be ill of a fever , and wish to see he . he promise to do so . ' and at what time will you be most likely to come , ? the old woman will like to know when to expect you -- you know such people think more about have they cottage in order when decent people come to see they than we be apt to suppose . ' here be a wonderful instance of consideration from the . name a hour in the morning at which he would endeaavor , to be there . by this time the carriage be ready , and the footman be wait , with a open umbrella , to escort through the churchyard . I be about to follow ; but
but have a umbrella too , and offer I the benefit of its shelter , for it be rain heavily . ' no , thank you , I do not mind the rain ,' I say . I always lack common sense when take by surprise . ' but you do not like it , I suppose ?-- a umbrella will do you no harm at any rate ,' he reply , with a smile that show he be not offend ; as a man of worse temper or less penetration would have be at such a refusal of he aid . I could not deny the truth of he assertion , and so go with he to the carriage ; he even offer I he hand on get in : a unnecessary piece of civility , but I accept that too , for fear of give offence . one glance he give , one little smile at parting -- it be but for a moment ; but therein I read , or think I read , a meaning that kindle in my heart a brighter flame of hope than have ever yet arisen . 'I would have send the footman back for you , , if you would wait a moment -- you need not have take 's , ' observe , with a very unamiable cloud upon she pretty face . 'I would have come without a umbrella , but offer I the benefit of he , and I could not have refuse it more than I do without offend he , ' reply I , smile placidly ; for my inward happiness make that amusing , which would have woun I at another time . the carriage be now in motion . bend forwards , and look out of the window as we be pass . he be pace homeward along the causeway , and do not turn he head . ' stupid ass ! ' cry she , throw herself back again in the seat . ' you do not know what you have lose by not look this way ! ' ' what have he lost ? ' 'a bow from I , that would have raise he to the seventh heaven ! ' I make no answer . I see she be out of humour , and I derive a secret gratification from the fact , not that she be vex , but that she think she have reason to be so . it make I think my hope be not entirely the offspring of my wish and imagination . 'I mean to take up instead of , ' say my companion , after a short pause , resum something of she usual cheerfulness . ' the ball at take place on , you know ; and mamma think it very likely that will propose to I then : such thing be often do in the privacy of the ball - room , when gentleman be most easily ensnar , and lady must enchant . but if I be to be marry so soon , I must make the best of the present time : I be determine shall not be the only man who shall lay he heart at my foot , and implore I to accept the worthless gift in vain . ' ' if you mean to be one of you victim , ' say I , with affect indifference , ' you will have to make such overture yourself that you will find it difficult to draw back when he ask you to fulfil the expectation you have raise . ' 'I do not suppose he will ask I to marry he , nor should I desire it : that would be rather too much presumption ! but I intend he to feel my power . he have feel it already , indeed : but he shall acknowledge it too ; and what visionary hope he may have , he must keep to himself , and only amuse I with the result of they -- for a time . ' 'Oh ! that some kind spirit would whisper those word in he ear ,' I inwardly exclaim . I be far too indignant to hazard a reply to she observation aloud ; and nothing more be say about that day , by I or in my hearing . but next morning , soon after breakfast , come into the schoolroom , where she sister be employ at she study , or rather she lesson , for study they be not , and say , ' , I want you to take a walk with I about eleven o'clock . ' 'Oh , I can not , ! I have to give order about my new bridle and saddle - cloth , and speak to the rat - catcher about he dog : miss grey must go with you . ' ' no , I want you , ' say ; and call she sister to the window , she whisper a explanation in she ear ; upon which the latter consent to go . I remember that eleven be the hour at which propose to come to the porter 's lodge ; and remember that , I beheld the whole contrivance . accordingly , at dinner , I be entertain with a long account of how have overtake they as they be walk along the road ; and how they have have a long walk and talk with he , and really find he quite a agreeable companion ; and how he must have be , and evidently be , deligh with they and they amazing condescension , &c . & c . -- as I be in the way of confession I may as well acknowledge that , about this time , I pay more attention to dress than ever I have do before . this be not say much
much -- for hithertoo I have be a little neglectful in that particular ; but now , also , it be no uncommon thing to spend as much as two minute in the contemplation of my own image in the glass ; though I never could derive any consolation from such a study . I could discover no beauty in those mark feature , that pale hollow cheek , and ordinary dark brown hair ; there might be intellect in the forehead , there might be expression in the dark grey eye , but what of that ?-- a low Grecian brow , and large black eye devoid of sentiment would be esteem far preferable . it be foolish to wish for beauty . Sensible people never either desire it for themselves or care about it in other . if the mind be but well cultivate , and the heart well dispose , no one ever care for the exterior . so say the teacher of we childhood ; and so say we to the child of the present day . all very judicious and proper , no doubt ; but be such assertion support by actual experience ? we be naturally dispose to love what give we pleasure , and what more pleasing than a beautiful face -- when we know no harm of the possessor at least ? a little girl love she bird -- why ? because it live and feel ; because it be helpless and harmless ? a toad , likewise , life and feel , and be equally helpless and harmless ; but though she would not hurt a toad , she can not love it like the bird , with its graceful form , soft feather , and bright , speak eye . if a woman be fair and amiable , she be praise for both quality , but especially the former , by the bulk of mankind : if , on the other hand , she be disagreeable in person and character , she plainness be commonly inveigh against as she greatest crime , because , to common observer , it give the greatest offence ; while , if she be plain and good , provide she be a person of retired manners and secluded life , no one ever know of she goodness , except she immediate connections . other , on the contrary , be dispose to form unfavourable opinion of she mind , and disposition , if it be but to excuse themselves for they instinctive dislike of one so unfavoured by nature ; and visa versa with she whose angel form conceal a vicious heart , or shed a false , deceitful charm over defect and foible that would not be tolerate in another . they that have beauty , let they be thankful for it , and make a good use of it , like any other talent ; they that have it not , let they conseal themselves , and do the best they can without it : certainly , though liable to be over-estimated , it be a gift of , and not to be despise . many will feel this who have feel that they could love , and whose heart tell they that they be worthy to be love again ; while yet they be debar , by the lack of this or some such seem trifle , from give and receive that happiness they seem almost make to feel and to impart . as well might the humble glowworm despise that power of give light without which the roving fly might pass she and repass she a thousand time , and never rest beside she : she might hear she win darling buzzing over and around she ; he vainly seek she , she longe to be find , but with no power to make she presence know , no voice to call he , no wing to follow he flight ; -- the fly must seek another mate , the worm must live and die alone . such be some of my reflection about this period . I might go on prosing more and more , I might dive much deeper , and disclose other thought , propose question the reader might be puzzl to answer , and deduce argument that might startle he prejudice , or , perhaps , provoke he ridicule , because he could not comprehend they ; but I forbear . now , therefore , let we return to . she accompany she mamma to the ball on ; of course splendidly attire , and delighte with she prospect and she charms . as be nearly ten mile distant from , they have to set out pretty early , and I intend to have spend the evening with , whom I have not see for a long time ; but my kind pupil take care I should spend it neither there nor anywhere else beyond the limit of the schoolroom , by give I a piece of music to copy , which keep I closely occupy till bed - time . about eleven next morning , as soon as she have leave she room , she come to tell I she news . have indeed propose to she at the ball ; a event which reflect great credit on she mamma 's sagacity , if not upon she skill in contrivance . I rather incline to the belief that she have first laid she plan , and then predict they success . the offer have be accept , of course , and the bridegroom elect be come that day to settle matter with . be pleased with the thought of become mistress of ; she be elate with the prospect of the bridal ceremony and its attendant splendour and eclat , the honeymoon spend abroad , and the subsequent gaiety she expect to enjoy in and elsewhere ;
; she appear pretty well pleas too , for the time be , with himself , because she have so lately see he , dance with he , and be flatter by he ; but , after all , she seem to shrink from the idea of be so soon unit : she wish the ceremony to be delay some month , at least ; and I wish it too . it seem a horrible thing to hurry on the inauspicious match , and not to give the poor creature time to think and reason on the irrevocable step she be about to take . I make no pretension to mother 's watchful , anxious care , ' but I be amaze and horrify at 's heartlessness , or want of thought for the real good of she child ; and by my unheeded warning and exhortation , I vainly strove to remedy the evil . only laugh at what I say ; and I soon find that she reluctance to a immediate union arise chiefly from a desire to do what execution she could among the young gentleman of she acquaintance , before she be incapacitate from further mischief of the kind . it be for this cause that , before confid to I the secret of she engagement , she have extract a promise that I would not mention a word on the subject to any one . and when I see this , and when I beheld she plunge more recklessly than ever into the depth of heartless coquetry , I have no more pity for she . ' come what will ,' I think , ' she deserve it . can not be too bad for she ; and the sooner she be incapacitate from deceive and injure other the better . ' the wedding be fix for the first of . between that and the critical ball be little more than six week ; but , with 's accomplish skill and resolute exertion , much might be do , even within that period ; especially as spend most of the interim in ; whither he go up , it be say , to settle affair with he lawyer , and make other preparations for the approach nuptial . he endeavoure to supply the want of he presence by a pretty constant fire of billet - doux ; but these do not attract the neighbour 's attention , and open they eye , as personal visit would have do ; and old 's haughty , sour spirit of reserve withheld she from spread the news , while she indifferent health prevent she come to visit she future daughter - in - law ; so that , altogether , this affair be keep far closer than such thing usually be . would sometimes show she lover 's epistle to I , to convince I what a kind , devoted husband he would make . she show I the letter of another individual , too , the unfortunate , who have not the courage , or , as she express it , the ' spunk , ' to plead he cause in person , but whom one denial would not satisfy : he must write again and again . he would not have do so if he could have see the grimace he fair idol make over he move appeal to she feeling , and hear she scornful laughter , and the opprobrious epithet she heape upon he for he perseverance . ' why do not you tell he , at once , that you be engage ? ' I ask . ' oh , I do not want he to know that , ' reply she . ' if he know it , he sister and everybody would know it , and then there would be a end of my -- ahem ! and , beside , if I tell he that , he would think my engagement be the only obstacle , and that I would have he if I be free ; which I could not bear that any man should think , and he , of all other , at least . besides , I do not care for he letter , ' she add , contemptuously ; ' he may write as often as he please , and look as great a calf as he like when I meet he ; it only amuse I . ' meantime , young be pretty frequent in he visit to the house or transit past it ; and , judge by 's execration and reproach , she sister pay more attention to he than civility require ; in other word , she carry on as animate a flirtation as the presence of she parent would admit . she make some attempt to bring once more to she foot ; but find they unsuccessful , she repay he haughty indifference with still loftier scorn , and speak of he with as much disdain and detestation as she have formerly do of he curate . but , amid all this , she never for a moment lose sight of . she embrace every opportunity of meet he , try every art to fascinate he , and pursue he with as much perseverance as if she really love he and no other , and the happiness of she life depend upon elicit a return of affection . such conduct be completely beyond my comprehension . have I see it depict in a novel , I should have think it unnatural ; have I hear it describe by other , I should have deem it a mistake or a exaggeration ; but when I see it with my own eye , and suffer from it too , I could only conclude that excessive vanity , like drunkenness , hardend the heart , enslave the faculty , and pervert the feeling ;
; and that dog be not the only creature which , when gorge to the throat , will yet gloat over what they can not deavor , and grudge the smallest morsel to a starve brother . she now become extremely beneficent to the poor cottager . she acquaintance among they be more widely extend , she visit to they humble dwelling be more frequent and excursive than they have ever be before . hereby , she earn among they the reputation of a condescending and very charitable young lady ; and they encomium be sure to be repeat to : whom also she have thus a daily chance of meeting in one or other of they abode , or in she transit to and fro ; and often , likewise , she could gather , through they gossip , to what place he be likely to go at such and such a time , whether to baptize a child , or to visit the a , the sick , the sad , or the dying ; and most skilfully she lay she plan accordingly . in these excursion she would sometimes go with she sister -- whom , by some means , she have persuade or bribe to enter into she scheme -- sometimes alone , never , now , with I ; so that I be debar the pleasure of see , or hear he voice even in conversation with another : which would certainly have be a very great pleasure , however hurtful or however fraught with pain . I could not even see he at church : for , under some trivial pretext , choose to take possession of that corner in the family pew which have be mine ever since I come ; and , unless I have the presumption to station myself between and , I must sit with my back to the pulpit , which I accordingly do . now , also , I never walk home with my pupil : they say they mamma think it do not look well to see three people out of the family walk , and only two go in the carriage ; and , as they greatly prefer walking in fine weather , I should be honoure by go with the senior . ' and besides , ' say they , ' you can not walk as fast as we do ; you know you be always lagge behind . ' I know these be false excuse , but I make no objection , and never contradict such assertion , well know the motives which dictat they . and in the afternoon , during those six memorable week , I never go to church at all . if I have a cold , or any slight indisposition , they take advantage of that to make I stay at home ; and often they would tell I they be not go again that day , themselves , and then pretend to change they mind , and set off without tell I : so manage they departure that I never discover the change of purpose till too late . upon they return home , on one of these occasion , they entertain I with a animated account of a conversation they have have with as they come along . ' and he ask if you be ill , , ' say ; ' but we tell he you be quite well , only you do not want to come to church -- so he will think you be turn wicked . ' all chance meeting on week - day be likewise carefully prevent ; for , lest I should go to see poor or any other person , take good care to provide sufficient employment for all my leisure hour . there be always some draw to finish , some music to copy , or some work to do , sufficient to incapacitate I from indulging in anything beyond a short walk about the grounds , however she or she sister might be occupi . one morning , have seek and waylay , they return in high glee to give I a account of they interview . ' and he ask after you again , ' say , in spite of she sister 's silent but imperative intimation that she should hold she tongue . ' he wonder why you be never with we , and think you must have delicate health , as you come out so seldom . ' ' he do not -- what nonsense you be talk ! ' 'Oh , , what a lie ! he do , you know ; and you say -- do not , -- hang it !-- I will not be pinch so ! and , , tell he you be quite well , but you be always so bury in you book that you have no pleasure in anything else . ' ' what a idea he must have of I ! ' I think . ' and ,' I ask , ' do old ever inquire about I ? ' ' yes ; and we tell she you be so fond of read and draw that you can do nothing else . ' ' that be not the case though ; if you have tell she I be so busy I could not come to see she , it would have be nearer the truth . ' 'I do not think it would , ' reply , suddenly kindl up ; 'I be sure you have plenty of time to yourself now , when you have so little teaching to do . ' it be no use begin to dispute with such indulged , unreasoning creature : so I hold my peace . I be accustom , now , to keep silence when thing distasteful to my ear be uttere ; and now , too , I
I be use to wear a placid smile countenance when my heart be bitter within I . only those who have feel the like can imagine my feeling , as I sit with a assumption of smiling indifference , listen to the account of those meeting and interview with , which they seem to find such pleasure in describe to I ; and hear thing assert of he which , from the character of the man , I know to be exaggeration and perversion of the truth , if not entirely false -- thing derogatory to he , and flatter to they -- especially to -- which I burn to contradict , or , at least , to show my doubt about , but da not ; lest , in express my disbelief , I should display my interest too . other thing I hear , which I feel or fear be indeed too true : but I must still conceal my anxiety respect he , my indignation against they , beneath a careless aspect ; other , again , mere hint of something say or do , which I long to hear more of , but could not venture to inquire . so pass the weary time . I could not even comfort myself with say , ' she will soon be married ; and then there may be hope . ' after she marriage the holiday would come ; and when I return from home , most likely , would be go , for I be tell that he and the rector could not agree ( the rector 's fault , of course ) , and he be about to remove to another place . no -- besides my hope in , my only consolation be in think that , though he know it not , I be more worthy of he love than , charme and engage as she be ; for I could appreciate he excellence , which she could not : I would devote my life to the promotion of he happiness ; she would destroy he happiness for the momentary gratification of she own vanity . 'Oh , if he could but know the difference ! ' I would earnestly exclaim . ' but no ! I would not have he see my heart : yet , if he could but know she hollowness , she worthless , heartless frivolity , he would then be safe , and I should be -- almost happy , though I might never see he more ! ' I fear , by this time , the reader be well nigh disgust with the folly and weakness I have so freely laid before he . I never disclose it then , and would not have do so have my own sister or my mother be with I in the house . I be a close and resolute dissembler -- in this one case at least . my prayer , my tear , my wish , fear , and lamentation , be witness by myself and heave alone . when we be harass by sorrow or anxiety , or long oppress by any powerful feeling which we must keep to ourselves , for which we can obtain and seek no sympathy from any living creature , and which yet we cannot , or will not wholly crush , we often naturally seek relief in poetry -- and often find it , too -- whether in the effusion of other , which seem to harmonize with we exist case , or in we own attempt to give utterance to those thought and feeling in strain less musical , perchance , but more appropriate , and therefore more penetrating and sympathetic , and , for the time , more soothing , or more powerful to rouse and to unbure the oppressed and swollen heart . before this time , at and here , when suffer from home - sick melancholy , I have seek relief twice or thrice at this secret source of consolation ; and now I fly to it again , with greater avidity than ever , because I seem to need it more . I still preserve those relic of past suffering and experience , like pillars of witness set up in travelling through the vale of life , to mark particular occurrence . the footstep be obliterate now ; the face of the country may be change ; but the pillar be still there , to remind I how all thing be when it be rear . Lest the reader should be curiious to see any of these effusion , I will favour he with one short specimen : cold and languid as the line may seem , it be almost a passion of grief to which they owed they being :- oh , they have rob I of the hope my spirit hold so dear ; they will not let I hear that voice my soul delights to hear . they will not let I see that face I so delight to see ; and they have take all thy smile , and all thy love from I . well , let they seize on all they can ; - one treasure still be mine , - a heart that love to think on thee , and feel the worth of thine . yes , at least , they could not deprive I of that : I could think of he day and night ; and I could feel that he be worthy to be think of . nobody know he as I do ; nobody could appreciate he as I do ; nobody could love he as I -- could , if I might : but there be the evil . what business have I to think so much of one that never think of I ? be it not foolish ? be it not wrong ?
? yet , if I find such deep delight in think of he , and if I keep those thought to myself , and trouble no one else with they , where be the harm of it ? I would ask myself . and such reasoning prevent I from make any sufficient effort to shake off my fetter . but , if those thought bring delight , it be a painful , trouble pleasure , too near akin to anguish ; and one that do I more injury than I be aware of . it be a indulgence that a person of more wisdom or more experience would doubtless have deny herself . and yet , how dreary to turn my eye from the contemplation of that bright object and force they to dwell on the dull , grey , desolate prospect around : the joyless , hopeless , solitary path that lay before I . it be wrong to be so joyless , so desponding ; I should have make my friend , and to do he will the pleasure and the business of my life ; but faith be weak , and passion be too strong . in this time of trouble I have two other cause of affliction . the first may seem a trifle , but it cost I many a tear : snap , my little dumb , rough - visage , but bright - eyed , warm - hear companion , the only thing I have to love I , be take away , and deliver over to the tender mercy of the village rat - catcher , a man notorious for he brutal treatment of he canine slave . the other be serious enough ; my letter from home give intimation that my father 's health be worse . no boding fear be express , but I be grow timid and despondent , and could not help fear that some dreadful calamity await we there . I seem to see the black cloud gather round my native hill , and to hear the angry muttering of a storm that be about to burst , and desolate we hearth . -- and mourn the 1st of arrive at last : and be transmute into . most splendidly beautiful she look in she bridal costume . upon she return from church , after the ceremony , she come fly into the schoolroom , flush with excitement , and laugh , half in mirth , and half in reckless desperation , as it see to I . ' now , , I be ! ' she exclaim . ' it be do , my fate be seal : there be no drawing back now . I be come to receive you congratulation and bid you good - by ; and then I be off for , , , , -- oh , dear ! what a deal I shall see and hear before I come back again . but do not forget I : I sha not forget you , though I have be a naughty girl . come , why do not you congratulate I ? ' 'I can not congratulate you ,' I reply , ' till I know whether this change be really for the better : but I sincerely hope it be ; and I wish you true happiness and the best of blessing . ' ' well , good - by , the carriage be wait , and they be call I . ' she give I a hasty kiss , and be hurrie away ; but , suddenly return , embrace I with more affection than I think she capable of evincing , and depart with tear in she eye . poor girl ! I really love she then ; and forgave she from my heart all the injury she have do I -- and other also : she have not half know it , I be sure ; and I pray to pardon she too . during the remainder of that day of festal sadness , I be leave to my own device . be too much unhinged for any steady occupation , I wander about with a book in my hand for several hour , more think than reading , for I have many thing to think about . in the evening , I make use of my liberty to go and see my old friend once again ; to apologize for my long absence ( which must have see so neglectful and unkind ) by tell she how busy I have be ; and to talk , or read , or work for she , whichever might be most acceptable , and also , of course , to tell she the news of this important day : and perhaps to obtain a little information from she in return , respecte 's expect departure . but of this she seem to know nothing , and I hope , as she do , that it be all a false report . she be very glad to see I ; but , happily , she eye be now so nearly well that she be almost independent of my service . she be deeply interested in the wedding ; but while I amuse she with the detail of the festive day , the splendour of the bridal party and of the bride herself , she often sigh and shake she head , and wish good might come of it ; she seem , like I , to regard it rather as a theme for sorrow than rejoicing . I sit a long time talk to she about that and other thing -- but no one come . shall I confess that I sometimes look towards the door with a half -expectant wish to see it open and give entrance to , as have happen once before ? and that , return through
through the lane and field , I often pause to look round I , and walk more slowly than be at all necessary -- for , though a fine evening , it be not a hot one -- and , finally , feel a sense of emptiness and disappointment at have reach the house without meet or even catche a distant glimpse of any one , except a few labourer return from they work ? , however , be approach : I should see he then : for now that be go , I could have my old corner again . I should see he , and by look , speech , and manner , I might judge whether the circumstance of she marriage have very much afflict he . happily I could perceive no shadow of a difference : he wear the same aspect as he have wear two month ago -- voice , look , manner , all alike unchanged : there be the same keen - sight , unclouded truthfulness in he discourse , the same forcible clearness in he style , the same earnest simplicity in all he say and do , that make itself , not mark by the eye and ear , but feel upon the heart of he audience . I walk home with ; but he do not join . be now sadly at a loss for amusement , and wofully in want of a companion : she brother at school , she sister marry and go , she too young to be admit into society ; for which , from 's example , she be in some degree begin to acquire a taste -- a taste at least for the company of certain class of gentleman ; at this dull time of year -- no hunting go on , no shooting even -- for , though she might not join in that , it be something to see she father or the gamekeeper go out with the dog , and to talk with they on they return , about the different bird they have bag . now , also , she be deny the solace which the companionship of the coachman , grooms , horse , greyhound , and pointer might have afforde ; for she mother have , notwithstand the disadvantage of a country life , so satisfactorily dispose of she elder daughter , the pride of she heart have begin seriously to turn she attention to the younger ; and , be truly alarme at the roughness of she manners , and think it high time to work a reform , have be rouse at length to exert she authority , and prohibit entirely the yard , stable , kennel , and coach - house . of course , she be not implicitly obey ; but , indulgent as she have hithertoo be , when once she spirit be roused , she temper be not so gentle as she require that of she governess to be , and she will be not to be thwart with impunity . after many a scene of contention between mother and daughter , many a violent outbreak which I be asham to witness , in which the father 's authority be often call in to confirm with oath and threat the mother 's slighte prohibition -- for even he could see that ' Tilly , though she would have make a fine lad , be not quite what a young lady ought to be '-- at length find that she easiest plan be to keep clear of the forbidden region ; unless she could now and then steal a visit without she watchful mother 's knowledge . amid all this , let it not be imagine that I escape without many a reprimand , and many a implied reproach , that lose none of its sting from not be openly word ; but rather woun the more deeply , because , from that very reason , it seem to preclude self - defence . frequently , I be tell to amuse with other thing , and to remind she of she mother 's precept and prohibition . I do so to the best of my power : but she would not be amuse against she will , and could not against she taste ; and though I go beyond mere reminding , such gentle remonstrance as I could use be utterly ineffectual . ' ! it be the Strangest thing . I suppose you can not help it , if it be not in you nature -- but I wonder you can not win the confidence of that girl , and make you society at least as agreeable to she as that of or ! ' ' they can talk the best about the thing in which she be most interested ,' I reply . ' well ! that be a strange confession , however , to come from she Governess ! who be to form a young lady 's taste , I wonder , if the governess do not do it ? I have know governess who have so completely identify themselves with the reputation of they young lady for elegance and propriety in mind and manners , that they would blush to speak a word against they ; and to hear the slightest blame impute to they pupil be worse than to be censure in they own person -- and I really think it very natural , for my part . ' ' do you , ma 'am ? ' ' yes , of course : the young lady 's proficiency and elegance be of more consequence to the governess than she own , as well as to the world . if she wish to prosper in she vocation she must devote all she energie to she business : all she idea and all she ambition will tend to the accomplishment of
of that one object . when we wish to decide upon the merit of a governess , we naturally look at the young lady she profess to have educated , and judge accordingly . the governess know this : she know that , while she live in obscurity herself , she pupil 's virtue and defect will be open to every eye ; and that , unless she lose sight of herself in they cultivation , she need not hope for success . you see , , it be just the same as any other trade or profession : they that wish to prosper must devote themselves body and soul to they calling ; and if they begin to yield to indolence or self - indulgence they be speedily distance by wiser competitor : there be little to choose between a person that ruin she pupil by neglect , and one that corrupt they by she example . you will excuse my drop these little hint : you know it be all for you own good . many lady would speak to you much more strongly ; and many would not trouble themselves to speak at all , but quietly look out for a substitute . that , of course , would be the easiest plan : but I know the advantages of a place like this to a person in you situation ; and I have no desire to part with you , as I be sure you would do very well if you will only think of these thing and try to exert yourself a little more : then , I be convince , you would soon acquire that delicate tact which alone be want to give you a proper influence over the mind of you pupil . ' I be about to give the lady some idea of the fallacy of she expectation ; but she sai away as soon as she have conclude she speech . have say what she wish , it be no part of she plan to await my answer : it be my business to hear , and not to speak . however , as I have say , at length yield in some degree to she mother 's authority ( pity it have not be exert before ) ; and be thus deprive of almost every source of amusement , there be nothing for it but to take long ride with the groom and long walk with the governess , and to visit the cottage and farmhouse on she father 's estate , to kill time in chatting with the old man and woman that inhabit they . in one of these walks , it be we chance to meet . this be what I have long desire ; but now , for a moment , I wish either he or I be away : I feel my heart throb so violently that I dread lest some outward sign of emotion should appear ; but I think he hardly glance at I , and I be soon calm enough . after a brief salutation to both , he ask if she have lately hear from she sister . ' yes , ' reply she . ' she be at when she write , and very well , and very happy . ' she speak the last word emphatically , and with a glance impertinently sly . he do not seem to notice it , but reply , with equal emphasis , and very seriously - ' I hope she will continue to be so . ' ' do you think it likely ? ' I venture to inquire : for have start off in pursuit of she dog , that be chase a leveret . 'I can not tell , ' reply he . ' may be a better man than I suppose ; but , from all I have hear and see , it seem a pity that one so young and gay , and -- and interesting , to express many thing by one word -- whose greatest , if not she only fault , appear to be thoughtlessness -- no trifling fault to be sure , since it render the possessor liable to almost every other , and expose he to so many temptation -- but it seem a pity that she should be throw away on such a man . it be she mother 's wish , I suppose ? ' ' yes ; and she own too , I think , for she always laugh at my attempt to dissuade she from the step . ' ' you do attempt it ? then , at least , you will have the satisfaction of know that it be no fault of yours , if any harm should come of it . as for . Murray , I do not know how she can justify she conduct : if I have sufficient acquaintance with she , I would ask she . ' ' it seem unnatural : but some people think rank and wealth the chief good ; and , if they can secure that for they child , they think they have do they duty . ' ' true : but be it not strange that person of experience , who have be marry themselves , should judge so falsely ? ' now come panting back , with the lacerated body of the young hare in she hand . ' be it you intention to kill that hare , or to save it , ? ' ask , apparently puzzl at she gleeful countenance . 'I pretend to want to save it , ' she answer , honestly enough , 'as it be so glaringly out of season ; but I be better pleased to see it lol . however , you can both witness that I could not help it : be determined to have she ;
; and he clutch she by the back , and kill she in a minute ! be not it a noble chase ? ' ' very ! for a young lady after a leveret . ' there be a quiet sarcasm in the tone of he reply which be not lose upon she ; she shrug she shoulders , and , turn away with a significant ' ! ' ask I how i have enjoy the fun . I reply that I see no fun in the matter ; but admit that I have not observe the transaction very narrowly . ' do not you see how it double -- just like a old hare ? and do not you hear it scream ? ' 'I be happy to say I do not . ' ' it cry out just like a child . ' ' poor little thing ! what will you do with it ? ' ' come along -- I shall leave it in the first house we come to . I do not want to take it home , for fear papa should scold I for let the dog kill it . ' be now gone , and we too go on we way ; but as we return , after have deposit the hare in a farm - house , and demolish some spice - cake and currant - wine in exchange , we meet he return also from the execution of he mission , whatever it might be . he carry in he hand a cluster of beautiful bluebell , which he offer to I ; observe , with a smile , that though he have see so little of I for the last two month , he have not forget that bluebell be number among my favourite flower . it be do as a simple act of goodwill , without compliment or remarkable courtesy , or any look that could be construe into ' reverential , tender adoration ' ( vide ) ; but still , it be something to find my unimportant say so well remember : it be something that he have notice so accurately the time I have cease to be visible . 'I be tell , ' say he , ' that you be a perfect bookworm , : so completely absorb in you study that you be lose to every other pleasure . ' ' yes , and it be quite true ! ' cry . ' no , : do not believe it : it be a scandalous libel . these young lady be too fond of make random assertion at the expense of they friend ; and you ought to be careful how you listen to they . ' 'I hope this assertion be groundless , at any rate . ' ' why ? do you particularly object to lady study ? ' ' no ; but I object to anyone so devote himself or herself to study , as to lose sight of everything else . except under peculiar circumstance , I consider very close and constant study as a waste of time , and a injury to the mind as well as the body . ' ' well , I have neither the time nor the inclination for such transgression . ' we parte again . well ! what be there remarkable in all this ? why have I record it ? because , reader , it be important enough to give I a cheerful evening , a night of pleasing dream , and a morning of felicitous hope . shallow - brain cheerfulness , foolish dream , unfounded hope , you would say ; and I will not venture to deny it : suspicion to that effect arise too frequently in my own mind . but we wish be like tinder : the flint and steel of circumstance be continually strike out spark , which vanish immediately , unless they chance to fall upon the tinder of we wish ; then , they instantly ignite , and the flame of hope be kindle in a moment . but alas ! that very morning , my flicker flame of hope be dismally quench by a letter from my mother , which speak so seriously of my father 's increase illness , that I fear there be little or no chance of he recovery ; and , close at hand as the holiday be , I almost tremble lest they should come too late for I to meet he in this world . two day after , a letter from tell I he life be despair of , and he end seem fast approaching . then , immediately , I seek permission to anticipate the vacation , and go without delay . stare , and wonder at the unwonted energy and boldness with which I urge the request , and think there be no occasion to hurry ; but finally give I leave : state , however , that there be ' no need to be in such agitation about the matter -- it might prove a false alarm after all ; and if not -- why , it be only in the common course of nature : we must all die some time ; and I be not to suppose myself the only afflict person in the world ; ' and conclude with say I might have the phaeton to take I to O - . ' and instead of , , be thankful for the Privilege you enjoy . there be many a poor clergyman whose family would be plunge into ruin by the event of he death ; but you , you see , have influential friend ready to continue they patronage , and to show you every consideration . ' I thank she for she ' consideration , ' and fly to my room to make some hurrie preparation for my departure
departure . my bonnet and shawl be on , and a few thing hastily cramm into my largest trunk , I descende . but I might have do the work more leisurely , for no one else be in a hurry ; and I have still a considerable time to wait for the phaeton . at length it come to the door , and I be off : but , oh , what a dreary journey be that ! how utterly different from my former passage homeward ! be too late for the last coach to -, I have to hire a cab for ten mile , and then a car to take I over the rugged hill . it be half - past ten before I reach home . they be not in bed . my mother and sister both meet I in the passage -- sad -- silent -- pale ! I be so much shocked and terror - stricke that I could not speak , to ask the information I so much long yet dread to obtain . ' Agnes ! ' say my mother , struggle to repress some strong emotion . 'Oh , ! ' cry , and burst into tear . ' how be he ? ' I ask , gas for the answer . ' dead ! ' it be the reply I have anticipate : but the shock seem none the less tremendous . -- the letter my father 's mortal remain have be consign to the tomb ; and we , with sad face and sombre garment , sit lingering over the frugal breakfast - table , revolve plan for we future life . my mother 's strong mind have not give way beneath even this affliction : she spirit , though crush , be not break . 's wish be that I should go back to , and that we mother should come and live with she and at the vicarage : she affir that he wish it no less than herself , and that such a arrangement could not fail to benefit all party ; for my mother 's society and experience would be of inestimable value to they , and they would do all they could to make she happy . but no argument or entreaty could prevail : my mother be determine not to go . not that she question , for a moment , the kind wish and intention of she daughter ; but she affir that so long as spare she health and strength , she would make use of they to earn she own livelihood , and be chargeable to no one ; whether she dependence would be feel as a burden or not . if she could afford to reside as a lodger in -- vicarage , she would choose that house before all other as the place of she abode ; but not be so circumstanced , she would never come under its roof , except as a occasional visitor : unless sickness or calamity should render she assistance really needful , or until age or infirmity make she incapable of maintain herself . ' no , , ' say she , 'if and you have anything to spare , you must lay it aside for you family ; and and I must gather honey for ourselves . thanks to my have have daughter to educate , I have not forget my accomplishment . willing , I will check this vain repining , ' she say , while the tear course one another down she cheek in spite of she effort ; but she wip they away , and resolutely shak back she head , continue , 'I will exert myself , and look out for a small house , commodiously situate in some populous but healthy district , where we will take a few young lady to board and educate -- if we can get they -- and as many day pupil as will come , or as we can manage to instruct . you father 's relation and old friend will be able to send we some pupil , or to assist we with they recommendation , no doubt : I shall not apply to my own . what say you to it , ? will you be willing to leave you present situation and try ? ' ' quite willing , mamma ; and the money I have save will do to furnish the house . it shall be take from the bank directly . ' ' when it be want : we must get the house , and settle on preliminary first . ' offer to lend the little she possess ; but my mother decline it , say that we must begin on a economical plan ; and she hope that the whole or part of mine , add to what we could get by the sale of the furniture , and what little we dear papa have contrive to lay aside for she since the debt be pay , would be sufficient to last we till ; when , it be hope , something would accrue from we united labour . it be finally settle that this should be we plan ; and that inquiry and preparation should immediately be set on foot ; and while my mother busy herself with these , I should return to at the close of my four week ' vacation , and give notice for my final departure when thing be in train for the speedy commencement of we school . we be discuss these affair on the morning I have mention , about a fortnight after my father 's death , when a letter be bring in for my mother , on beholding which the colour mount to she face -- lately pale enough with anxious watchings and excessive sorrow . ' from my father ! ' murmure she ,
, as she hastily tore off the cover . it be many year since she have hear from any of she own relation before . naturally wonder what the letter might contain , I watch she countenance while she read it , and be somewhat surprised to see she bite she lip and knit she brows as if in anger . when she have do , she somewhat irreverently cast it on the table , say with a scornful smile ,--'Your grandpapa have be so kind as to write to I . he say he have no doubt I have long repent of my " unfortunate marriage , " and if I will only acknowledge this , and confess I be wrong in neglect he advice , and that I have justly suffer for it , he will make a lady of I once again -- if that be possible after my long degradation -- and remember my girl in he will . get my desk , Agnes , and send these thing away : I will answer the letter directly . but first , as I may be deprive you both of a legacy , it be just that I should tell you what I mean to say . I shall say that he be mistaken in suppose that I can regret the birth of my daughter ( who have be the pride of my life , and be likely to be the comfort of my old age ) , or the thirty year I have pass in the company of my best and dearest friend ; -- that , have we misfortune be three time as great as they be ( unless they have be of my bringing on ) , I should still the more rejoice to have share they with you father , and administer what consolation I be able ; and , have he suffering in illness be ten time what they wear , I could not regret have watch over and laboure to relieve they ; -- that , if he have marry a richer wife , misfortune and trial would no doubt have come upon he still ; while I be egotist enough to imagine that no other woman could have cheer he through they so well : not that I be superior to the rest , but I be make for he , and he for I ; and I can no more repent the hour , day , year of happiness we have spend together , and which neither could have have without the other , than I can the privilege of have be he nurse in sickness , and he comfort in affliction . ' will this do , child ? -- or shall I say we be all very sorry for what have happene during the last thirty year , and my daughter wish they have never be bear ; but since they have have that misfortune , they will be thankful for any trifle they grandpapa will be kind enough to bestow ? ' of course , we both applaude we mother 's resolution ; clear away the breakfast thing ; I bring the desk ; the letter be quickly write and despatch ; and , from that day , we hear no more of we grandfather , till we see he death announce in the newspaper a considerable time after -- all he worldly possession , of course , be leave to we wealthy unknown cousins . -- the Farewell a house in ---, the fashionable watering - place , be hire for we seminary ; and a promise of two or three pupil be obtain to commence with . I return to about the middle of , leave my mother to conclude the bargain for the house , to obtain more pupil , to sell off the furniture of we old abode , and to fit out the new one . we often pity the poor , because they have no leisure to mourn they depart relative , and necessity oblige they to labour through they severest affliction : but be not active employment the best remedy for overwhelming sorrow -- the surest antidote for despair ? it may be a rough comforter : it may seem hard to be harass with the care of life when we have no relish for its enjoyment ; to be goad to labour when the heart be ready to break , and the vex spirit implore for rest only to weep in silence : but be not labour better than the rest we covet ? and be not those petty , torment car less hurtful than a continual brooding over the great affliction that oppress we ? besides , we can not have care , and anxiety , and toil , without hope -- if it be but the hope of fulfil we joyless task , accomplish some needful project , or escape some further annoyance . at any rate , I be glad my mother have so much employment for every faculty of she action- loving frame . we kind neighbour lament that she , once so exalt in wealth and station , should be reduce to such extremity in she time of sorrow ; but I be persuade that she would have suffer thrice as much have she be leave in affluence , with liberty to remain in that house , the scene of she early happiness and late affliction , and no stern necessity to prevent she from incessantly brood over and lament she bereavement . I will not dilate upon the feeling with which i leave the old house , the well - know garden , the little village church -- then doubly dear to I , because my father , who , for thirty year , have teach and pray within its wall , lay slumber now beneath its flag -- and the old bare
bare hill , delightful in they very desolation , with the narrow vale between , smile in green wood and sparkl water -- the house where I be bear , the scene of all my early associations , the place where throughout life my earthly affections have be centre ; -- and leave they to return no more ! true , I be go back to , where , amid many evils , one source of pleasure yet remain : but it be pleasure mingl with excessive pain ; and my stay , alas ! be limit to six week . and even of that precious time , day after day slip by and I do not see he : except at church , I never see he for a fortnight after my return . it seem a long time to I : and , as I be often out with my rambling pupil , of course hope would keep rise , and disappointment would ensue ; and then , I would say to my own heart , ' here be a convincing proof -- if you would but have the sense to see it , or the candour to acknowledge it -- that he do not care for you . if he only think as much about you as you do about he , he would have contrive to meet you many time ere this : you must know that , by consult you own feeling . therefore , have do with this nonsense : you have no ground for hope : dismiss , at once , these hurtful thought and foolish wish from you mind , and turn to you own duty , and the dull blank life that lie before you . you might have know such happiness be not for you . ' but I see he at last . he come suddenly upon I as I be cross a field in return from a visit to , which I have take the opportunity of pay while be ride she matchless mare . he must have hear of the heavy loss I have sustain : he express no sympathy , offer no condolence : but almost the first word he uttere be ,--' how be you mother ? ' and this be no matter - of - course question , for I never tell he that I have a mother : he must have learn the fact from other , if he know it at all ; and , besides , there be sincere goodwill , and even deep , touch , unobtrusive sympathy in the tone and manner of the inquiry . I thank he with due civility , and tell he she be as well as could be expect . ' what will she do ? ' be the next question . many would have deem it a impertinent one , and give a evasive reply ; but such a idea never enter my head , and I give a brief but plain statement of my mother 's plan and prospect . ' then you will leave this place shortly ? ' say he . ' yes , in a month . ' he pause a minute , as if in thought . when he speak again , I hope it would be to express he concern at my departure ; but it be only to say ,--'I should think you will be willing enough to go ? ' ' yes -- for some thing ,' I reply . ' for some thing only -- I wonder what should make you regret it ? ' I be annoye at this in some degree ; because it embarrass I : I have only one reason for regret it ; and that be a profound secret , which he have no business to trouble I about . ' why , ' say I -- ' why should you suppose that I dislike the place ? ' ' you tell I so yourself , ' be the decisive reply . ' you say , at least , that you could not live contentedly , without a friend ; and that you have no friend here , and no possibility of make one -- and , besides , I know you must dislike it . ' ' but if you remember rightly , I say , or mean to say , I could not live contentedly without a friend in the world : I be not so unreasonable as to require one always near I . I think I could be happy in a house full of enemy , if -- ' but no ; that sentence must not be continue -- I pause , and hastily add ,--'And , besides , we can not well leave a place where we have liv for two or three year , without some feeling of regret . ' ' will you regret to part with , you sole remain pupil and companion ? ' 'I dare say I shall in some degree : it be not without sorrow I part with she sister . ' 'I can imagine that . ' ' well , be quite as good -- better in one respect . ' ' what be that ? ' ' she be honest . ' ' and the other be not ? ' 'I should not call she dishonest ; but it must be confess she be a little artful . ' be she see she be giddy and vain -- and now ,' he add , after a pause , 'I can well believe she be artful too ; but so excessively so as to assume a aspect of extreme simplicity and unguarded openness . yes , ' continue he , musingly , ' that account for some little thing that puzzl I a trifle before . ' after that , he turn the conversation to more general
general subject . he do not leave I till we have nearly reach the park - gate : he have certainly step a little out of he way to accompany I so far , for he now go back and disappear down , the entrance of which we have pass some time before . Assuredly I do not regret this circumstance : if sorrow have any place in my heart , it be that he be go at last -- that he be no longer walk by my side , and that that short interval of delightful intercourse be at a end . he have not breathe a word of love , or drop one hint of tenderness or affection , and yet I have be supremely happy . to be near he , to hear he talk as he do talk , and to feel that he think I worthy to be so speak to -- capable of understanding and duly appreciate such discourse -- be enough . ' yes , , I could indeed be happy in a house full of enemie , if I have but one friend , who truly , deeply , and faithfully love I ; and if that friend be you -- though we might be far apart -- seldom to hear from each other , still more seldom to meet -- though toil , and trouble , and vexation might surround I , still -- it would be too much happiness for I to dream off ! yet who can tell , ' say I within myself , as I proceed up the park , -- ' who can tell what this one month may bring forth ? I have liv nearly three - and - twenty year , and I have suffer much , and taste little pleasure yet ; be it likely my life all through will be so clouded ? be it not possible that may hear my prayer , disperse these gloomy shadow , and grant I some beam of heaven 's sunshine yet ? will he entirely deny to I those blessing which be so freely give to other , who neither ask they nor acknowledge they when receive ? may I not still hope and trust ? I do hope and trust for a while : but , alas , alas ! the time eb away : one week follow another , and , except one distant glimpse and two transient meeting -- during which scarcely anything be say -- while I be walk with , I see nothing of he : except , of course , at church . and now , the last be come , and the last service . I be often on the point of melt into tear during the sermon -- the last I be to hear from he : the best I should hear from anyone , I be well assure . it be over -- the congregation be depart ; and I must follow . I have then see he , and hear he voice , too , probably for the last time . in the churchyard , be pounce upon by the two . they have many inquiry to make about she sister , and I know not what besides . I only wish they would have do , that we might hasten back to : I longe to seek the retirement of my own room , or some sequester nook in the grounds , that I might deliver myself up to my feeling - - to weep my last farewell , and lament my false hope and vain delusion . only this once , and then adieu to fruitless dreaming -- thenceforth , only sober , solid , sad reality should occupy my mind . but while I thus resolve , a low voice close beside I say -- 'I suppose you be go this week , ? ' ' yes ,' I reply . I be very much start ; and have I be at all hysterically inclined , I certainly should have commit myself in some way then . thank , I be not . ' well , ' say , 'I want to bid you good - bye -- it be not likely I shall see you again before you go . ' ' good - bye , ,' I say . oh , how I struggle to say it calmly ! I give he my hand . he retain it a few seconds in he . ' it be possible we may meet again , ' say he ; ' will it be of any consequence to you whether we do or not ? ' ' yes , I should be very glad to see you again . ' I could say no less . he kindly press my hand , and go . now , I be happy again -- though more inclin to burst into tear than ever . if I have be force to speak at that moment , a succession of sob would have inevitably ensue ; and as it be , I could not keep the water out of my eye . I walk along with , turn aside my face , and neglect to notice several successive remark , till she bawl out that I be either deaf or stupid ; and then ( have recover my self - possession ) , as one awaken from a fit of abstraction , I suddenly look up and ask what she have be say . -- the School I leave , and go to join my mother in we new abode at - . I find she well in health , resign in spirit , and even cheerful , though subdue and sober , in she general demeanour . we have only three boarder and half a dozen day - pupil to commence with ; but by due care
care and diligence we hope ere long to increase the number of both . I set myself with befitting energy to discharge the duty of this new mode of life . I call it NEW , for there be , indeed , a considerable difference between work with my mother in a school of we own , and work as a hireling among strangers , despise and trample upon by old and young ; and for the first few week I be by no means unhappy . ' it be possible we may meet again , ' and ' will it be of any consequence to you whether we do or not ?'-- those word still ring in my ear and rest on my heart : they be my secret solace and support . 'I shall see he again . -- he will come ; or he will write . ' no promise , in fact , be too bright or too extravagant for hope to whisper in my ear . I do not believe half of what she tell I : I pretend to laugh at it all ; but I be far more credulous than I myself suppose ; otherwise , why do my heart leap up when a knock be hear at the front door , and the maid , who open it , come to tell my mother a gentleman wish to see she ? and why be I out of humour for the rest of the day , because it prove to be a music - master come to offer he service to we school ? and what stop my breath for a moment , when the postman have bring a couple of letter , my mother say , ' here , , this be for you , ' and throw one of they to I ? and what make the hot blood rush into my face when I see it be direct in a gentleman 's hand ? and why -- oh ! why do that cold , sickening sense of disappointment fall upon I , when I have tear open the cover and find it be only a letter from , which , for some reason or other , she husband have direct for she ? be it then come to this -- that I should be disappointed to receive a letter from my only sister : and because it be not write by a comparative stranger ? dear ! and she have write it so kindly - - and think I should be so pleased to have it !-- I be not worthy to read it ! and I believe , in my indignation against myself , I should have put it aside till I have school myself into a better frame of mind , and be become more deserving of the honour and privilege of its perusal : but there be my mother look on , and wishful to know what news it contain ; so I read it and deliver it to she , and then go into the schoolroom to attend to the pupil : but amidst the care of copy and sum -- in the interval of correcting error here , and reprove dereliction of duty there , I be inwardly take myself to task with far sterner severity . ' what a fool you must be , ' say my head to my heart , or my sterner to my softer self ; --'how could you ever dream that he would write to you ? what grounds have you for such a hope -- or that he will see you , or give himself any trouble about you -- or even think of you again ? ' ' what grounds ?' -- and then hope set before I that last , short interview , and repeat the word I have so faithfully treasure in my memory . ' well , and what be there in that ?-- who ever hang he hope upon so frail a twig ? what be there in those word that any common acquaintance might not say to another ? of course , it be possible you might meet again : he might have say so if you have be go to ; but that do not imply any intention of see you -- and then , as to the question that follow , anyone might ask that : and how do you answer ?-- merely with a stupid , commonplace reply , such as you would have give to , or anyone else you have be on tolerably civil term with . ' ' but , then , ' persist , ' the tone and manner in which he speak . ' 'Oh , that be nonsense ! he always speak impressively ; and at that moment there be the and just before , and other people pass by , and he be oblige to stand close beside you , and to speak very low , unless he wish everybody to hear what he say , which -- though it be nothing at all particular -- of course , he would rather not . ' but then , above all , that emphatic , yet gentle pressure of the hand , which seem to say , ' trust I ;' and many other thing besides -- too delightful , almost too flattering , to be repeat even to one 's self . ' Egregious folly -- too absurd to require contradiction --mere invention of the imagination , which you ought to be asham of . if you would but consider you own unattractive exterior , you unamiable reserve , you foolish diffidence -- which must make you appear cold , dull , awkward , and perhaps ill - tempere too ; -- if you have but rightly consider these from the beginning , you would never have harboured such presumptuous thought : and
and now that you have be so foolish , pray repent and amend , and let we have no more of it ! ' I can not say that I implicitly obey my own injunction : but such reason as this become more and more effective as time wore on , and nothing be see or hear of ; until , at last , I give up hoping , for even my heart acknowledge it be all in vain . but still , I would think of he : I would cherish he image in my mind ; and treasure every word , look , and gesture that my memory could retain ; and brood over he excellence and he peculiarity , and , in fact , all I have see , hear , or imagine respect he . ' Agnes , this sea air and change of scene do you no good , I think : I never see you look so wretched . it must be that you sit too much , and allow the car of the schoolroom to worry you . you must learn to take thing easy , and to be more active and cheerful ; you must take exercise whenever you can get it , and leave the most tiresome duty to I : they will only serve to exercise my patience , and , perhaps , try my temper a little . ' so say my mother , as we sit at work one morning during the holiday . I assure she that my employment be not at all oppressive ; that I be well ; or , if there be anything amiss , it would be go as soon as the try month of spring be over : when summer come I should be as strong and hearty as she could wish to see I : but inwardly she observation start I . I know my strength be decline , my appetite have fail , and I be grow listless and despond ; -- and if , indeed , he could never care for I , and I could never see he more -- if I be forbidden to minister to he happiness -- forbidden , for ever , to taste the joy of love , to bless , and to be bless -- then , life must be a burden , and if my heavenly Father would call I away , I should be glad to rest . but it would not do to die and leave my mother . Selfish , unworthy daughter , to forget she for a moment ! be not she happiness commit in a great measure to my charge ?-- and the welfare of we young pupil too ? should I shrink from the work that have set before I , because it be not fit to my taste ? do not he know best what I should do , and where I ought to labour ?-- and should I long to quit he service before I have finish my task , and expect to enter into he rest without have laboured to earn it ? ' no ; by he help I will arise and address myself diligently to my appointed duty . if happiness in this world be not for I , I will endeaavor to promote the welfare of those around I , and my reward shall be hereafter . ' so say I in my heart ; and from that hour I only permit my thought to wander to -- or at least to dwell upon he now and then -- as a treat for rare occasion : and , whether it be really the approach of summer or the effect of these good resolution , or the lapse of time , or all together , tranquillity of mind be soon restore ; and bodily health and vigour begin likewise , slowly , but surly , to return . Early in , I receive a letter from , late . she have write to I twice or thrice before , from the different stage of she bridal tour , always in good spirit , and professe to be very happy . I wonder every time that she have not forget I , in the midst of so much gaiety and variety of scene . at length , however , there be a pause ; and it seem she have forget I , for upward of seven month pass away and no letter . of course , I do not break my heart about that , though I often wonder how she be get on ; and when this last epistle so unexpectedly arrive , I be glad enough to receive it . it be date from , where she be come to settle down at last , have previously divide she time between the continent and the metropolis . she make many apology for have neglect I so long , assure I she have not forget I , and have often intend to write , & c. & c. , but have always be prevent by something . she acknowledge that she have be lead a very dissipated life , and I should think she very wicked and very thoughtless ; but , notwithstand that , she think a great deal , and , among other thing , that she should vastly like to see I . ' we have be several day here already , ' write she . ' we have not a single friend with we , and be likely to be very dull . you know I never have a fancy for living with my husband like two turtle in a nest , be he the most delightful creature that ever wear a coat ; so do take pity upon I and come . I suppose you holiday commence in , the same as other people 's ; therefore
therefore you can not plead want of time ; and you must and shall come -- in fact , I shall die if you do not . I want you to visit I as a friend , and stay a long time . there be nobody with I , as I tell you before , but and old : but you need not mind they -- they will trouble we but little with they company . and you shall have a room to yourself , whenever you like to retire to it , and plenty of book to read when my company be not sufficiently amuse . I forget whether you like baby ; if you do , you may have the pleasure of see mine -- the most charming child in the world , no doubt ; and all the more so , that I be not trouble with nurse it - - I be determine I would not be bothere with that . unfortunately , it be a girl , and have never forgive I : but , however , if you will only come , I promise you shall be its governess as soon as it can speak ; and you shall bring it up in the way it should go , and make a better woman of it than its mamma . and you shall see my poodle , too : a splendid little charmer import from : and two fine italian painting of great value -- I forget the artist . Doubtless you will be able to discover prodigious beautie in they , which you must point out to I , as I only admire by hearsay ; and many elegant curiosity besides , which I purchase at and elsewhere ; and , finally , you shall see my new home -- the splendid house and grounds I use to covet so greatly . ! how far the promise of anticipation exceed the pleasure of possession ! there be a fine sentiment ! I assure you I be become quite a grave old matron : pray come , if it be only to witness the wonderful change . write by return of post , and tell I when you vacation commence , and say that you will come the day after , and stay till the day before it close -- in mercy to ' you be affectionately , ' ROSALIE ASHBY . ' I show this strange epistle to my mother , and consult she on what I ought to do . she advise I to go ; and I go -- willing enough to see , and she baby , too , and to do anything I could to benefit she , by consolation or advice ; for I imagine she must be unhappy , or she would not have apply to I thus -- but feel , as may readily be conceived , that , in accept the invitation , I make a great sacrifice for she , and do violence to my feeling in many way , instead of be delighted with the honourable distinction of be entreate by the baronet 's lady to visit she as a friend . however , I determine my visit should be only for a few day at most ; and I will not deny that I derive some consolation from the idea that , as be not very far from , I might possibly see , or , at least , hear something about he . -- the be certainly a very delightful residence . the mansion be stately without , commodious and elegant within ; the park be spacious and beautiful , chiefly on account of its magnificent old tree , it be stately herd of deer , its broad shoot of water , and the ancient woods that stretch beyond it : for there be no broken ground to give variety to the landscape , and but very little of that undulating swell which add so greatly to the charm of park scenery . and so , this be the place have so long to call she own , that she must have a share of it , on whatever term it might be offer -- whatever price be to be pay for the title of mistress , and whoever be to be she partner in the honour and bliss of such a possession ! well I be not dispose to censure she now . she receive I very kindly ; and , though I be a poor clergyman 's daughter , a governess , and a schoolmistress , she welcome I with unaffected pleasure to she home ; and -- what surprise I rather -- take some pain to make my visit agreeable . I could see , it be true , that she expect I to be greatly strike with the magnificence that surround she ; and , I confess , I be rather annoyed at she evident effort to reassure I , and prevent I from be overwhelm by so much grandeur -- too much aw at the idea of encounter she husband and mother - in - law , or too much asham of my own humble appearance . I be not asham of it at all ; for , though plain , I have take good care not to shabby or mean , and should have be pretty considerably at my ease , if my condescending hostess have not take such manifest pain to make I so ; and , as for the magnificence that surround she , nothing that meet my eye strike I or affect I half so much as she own altered appearance . whether from the influence of fashionable dissipation , or some other evil , a space of little more than twelve month have have the effect that might be expect from as many year , in reduce the plumpness of she form
form , the freshness of she complexion , the vivacity of she movement , and the exuberance of she spirit . I wish to know if she be unhappy ; but I feel it be not my province to inquire : I might endeaavor to win she confidence ; but , if she choose to conceal she matrimonial care from I , I would trouble she with no obtrusive question . I , therefore , at first , confin myself to a few general inquirie about she health and welfare , and a few commendation on the beauty of the park , and of the little girl that should have be a boy : a small delicate infant of seven or eight week old , whom its mother seem to regard with no remarkable degree of interest or affection , though full as much as I expect she to show . shortly after my arrival , she commission she maid to conduct I to my room and see that I have everything I want ; it be a small , unpretending , but sufficiently comfortable apartment . when I descend thence -- have divest myself of all travel encumbrance , and arrange my toilet with due consideration for the feeling of my lady hostess , she conduct I herself to the room I be to occupy when I choose to be alone , or when she be engage with visitor , or oblige to be with she mother - in - law , or otherwise prevent , as she say , from enjoy the pleasure of my society . it be a quiet , tidy little sitting - room ; and I be not sorry to be provide with such a harbour of refuge . ' and some time , ' say she , 'I will show you the library : I never examine its shelf , but , I daresay , it be full of wise book ; and you may go and burrow among they whenever you please . and now you shall have some tea -- it will soon be dinner - time , but I think , as you be accustom to dine at one , you would perhaps like better to have a cup of tea about this time , and to dine when we lunch : and then , you know , you can have you tea in this room , and that will save you from have to dine with and : which would be rather awkward -- at least , not awkward , but rather -- a -- you know what i mean . I think you might not like it so well -- especially as we may have other lady and gentleman to dine with we occasionally . ' ' certainly , ' say I , ' I would much rather have it as you say , and , if you have no objection , I should prefer have all my meal in this room . ' ' why so ? ' ' because , I imagine , it would be more agreeable to and . ' ' nothing of the kind . ' ' at any rate it would be more agreeable to I . ' she make some faint objection , but soon conced ; and I could see that the proposal be a considerable relief to she . ' now , come into the drawing - room , ' say she . ' there be the dressing bell ; but I will not go yet : it be no use dressing when there be no one to see you ; and I want to have a little discourse . ' the drawing - room be certainly a imposing apartment , and very elegantly furnish ; but I see it be young mistress glance towards I as we enter , as if to notice how I be impress by the spectacle , and accordingly I determin to preserve a aspect of stony indifference , as if I see nothing at all remarkable . but this be only for a moment : immediately conscience whisper , ' why should I disappoind she to save my pride ? no -- rather let I sacrifice my pride to give she a little innocent gratification . ' and I honestly look round , and tell she it be a noble room , and very tastefully furnish . she say little , but I see she be pleased . she show I she fat french poodle , that lay curl up on a silk cushion , and the two fine italian painting : which , however , she would not give I time to examine , but , say I must look at they some other day , insist upon my admiring the little jewelled watch she have purchase in ; and then she take I round the room to point out sundry article of vertu she have bring from : a elegant little timepiece , and several bust , small graceful figure , and vase , all beautifully carve in white marble . she speak of these with animation , and hear my admiring comment with a smile of pleasure : that soon , however , vanish , and be follow by a melancholy sigh ; as if in consideration of the insufficiency of all such bauble to the happiness of the human heart , and they woeful inability to supply its insatiate demand . then , stretch herself upon a couch , she motion I to a capacious easy - chair that stand opposite -- not before the fire , but before a wide open window ; for it be summer , be it remember ; a sweet , warm evening in the latter half of . I sit for a moment in silence , enjoy the still , pure air , and the delightful prospect of the park that lay before I
I , rich in verdure and foliage , and bask in yellow sunshine , relieve by the long shadow of declining day . but I must take advantage of this pause : I have inquiry to make , and , like the substance of a lady 's postscript , the most important must come last . so I begin with ask after and , and and the young gentleman . I be tell that papa have the gout , which make he very ferocious ; and that he would not give up he choice wine , and he substantial dinner and supper , and have quarrell with he physician , because the latter have da to say that no medicine could cure he while he liv so freely ; that mamma and the rest be well . be still wild and reckless , but she have get a fashionable governess , and be considerably improve in she manners , and soon to be introduce to the world ; and and ( now at home for the holiday ) be , by all account , ' fine , bold , unruly , mischievous boy . ' ' and how be the other people get on ? ' say I -- 'to , for instance ? ' 'Ah ! be heart - break , you know , ' reply she , with a languid smile : ' he have not get over he disappointment yet , and never will , I suppose . he be doom to be a old bachelor ; and he sister be do they best to get married . ' ' and the Meltham ? ' 'Oh , they be jogge on as usual , I suppose : but I know very little about any of they -- except , ' say she , blush slightly , and smile again . 'I see a great deal of he while we be in ; for , as soon as he hear we be there , he come up under pretence of visit he brother , and either follow I , like a shadow , wherever I go , or meet I , like a reflection , at every turn . you need not look so shocked , ; I be very discreet , I assure you , but , you know , one can not help be admire . poor fellow ! he be not my only worshipper ; though he be certainly the most conspicuous , and , I think , the most devoted among they all . and that detestable -- ahem -- and choose to take offence at he -- or my profuse expenditure , or something -- I do not exactly know what -- and hurrie I down to the country at a moment 's notice ; where I be to play the hermit , I suppose , for life . ' and she bit she lip , and frown vindictively upon the fair domain she have once so coveted to call she own . ' and , ' say I , ' what be become of he ? ' again she brighten up , and answer gaily --'Oh ! he make up to a elderly spinster , and marry she , not long since ; weigh she heavy purse against she faded charms , and expect to find that solace in gold which be deny he in love -- ha , ha ! ' ' well , and I think that be all -- except : what be he do ? ' 'I do not know , I be sure . he be go from . ' ' how long since ? and where be he go to ? ' 'I know nothing about he , ' reply she , yawn --'except that he go about a month ago -- I never ask where ' ( I would have ask whether it be to a living or merely another curacy , but think it better not ) ; 'and the people make a great rout about he leave , ' continue she , ' much to 's displeasure ; for do not like he , because he have too much influence with the common people , and because he be not sufficiently tractable and submissive to he -- and for some other unpardonable sins , I do not know what . but now I positively must go and dress : the second bell will ring directly , and if I come to dinner in this guise , I shall never hear the end of it from . it be a strange thing one can not be mistress in one 's own house ! just ring the bell , and I will send for my maid , and tell they to get you some tea . only think of that intolerable woman --' ' who -- you maid ? ' ' no ; --my mother - in - law -- and my unfortunate mistake ! instead of let she take herself off to some other house , as she offer to do when I marry , I be fool enough to ask she to live here still , and direct the affair of the house for I ; because , in the first place , I hope we should spend the greater part of the year , in town , and in the second place , be so young and inexperienc , I be frightene at the idea of have a houseful of servants to manage , and dinner to order , and party to entertain , and all the rest of it , and I think she might assist I with she experience ; never dream she would prove a usurper , a tyrant , a incubus , a spy , and everything else that be detestable . I wish she be dead ! ' she then turn to give she order to the footman
footman , who have be stand bolt upright within the door for the last half minute , and have hear the latter part of she animadversion ; and , of course , make he own reflection upon they , notwithstand the inflexible , wooden countenance he think proper to preserve in the drawing - room . on my remark afterwards that he must have hear she , she reply --'Oh , no matter ! I never care about the footman ; they be mere automaton : it be nothing to they what they superior say or do ; they will not dare to repeat it ; and as to what they think -- if they presume to think at all -- of course , nobody care for that . it would be a pretty thing indeed , it we be to be tongue - tie by we servants ! ' so say , she run off to make she hasty toilet , leave I to pilot my way back to my sitting - room , where , in due time , I be serve with a cup of tea . after that , I sit musing on 's past and present condition ; and on what little information I have obtain respect , and the small chance there be of ever see or hear anything more of he throughout my quiet , drab - colour life : which , henceforth , seem to offer no alternative between positive rainy day , and day of dull grey clouds without downfall . at length , however , I begin to weary of my thought , and to wish I know where to find the library my hostess have speak of ; and to wonder whether I be to remain there do nothing till bed - time . as I be not rich enough to possess a watch , I could not tell how time be pass , except by observe the slowly lengthen shadow from the window ; which present a side view , include a corner of the park , a clump of tree whose topmost branch have be colonize by a innumerable company of noisy rook , and a high wall with a massive wooden gate : no doubt communicate with the stable - yard , as a carriage - road sweep up to it from the park . the shadow of this wall soon take posession of the whole of the ground as far as I could see , force the golden sunlight to retreat inch by inch , and at last take refuge in the very top of the tree . Ere long , even they be leave in shadow -- the shadow of the distant hill , or of the earth itself ; and , in sympathy for the busy citizen of the rookery , I regret to see they habitation , so lately bath in glorious light , reduce to the sombre , work - a - day hue of the lower world , or of my own world within . for a moment , such bird as soar above the rest might still receive the lustre on they wing , which impart to they sable plumage the hue and brilliance of deep red gold ; at last , that too depart . come steal on ; the rook become more quiet ; I become more weary , and wish I be go home to - morrow . at length it grow dark ; and I be think of ringing for a candle , and betak myself to be , when my hostess appear , with many apology for have neglect I so long , and lay all the blame upon that ' nasty old woman , ' as she call she mother - in - law . ' if I do not sit with she in the drawing - room while be take he wine , ' say she , ' she would never forgive I ; and then , if I leave the room the instant he come -- as I have do once or twice -- it be a unpardonable offence against she dear . she never show such disrespect to she husband : and as for affection , wife never think of that now - a - day , she suppose : but thing be different in she time -- as if there be any good to be do by stay in the room , when he do nothing but grumble and scold when he be in a bad humour , talk disgust nonsense when he be in a good one , and go to sleep on the sofa when he be too stupid for either ; which be most frequently the case now , when he have nothing to do but to set over he wine . ' ' but could you not try to occupy he mind with something better ; and engage he to give up such habit ? I be sure you have power of persuasion , and qualification for amusing a gentleman , which many lady would be glad to possess . ' ' and so you think I would lay myself out for he amusement ! no : that be not my idea of a wife . it be the husband 's part to please the wife , not hers to please he ; and if he be not satisfy with she as she be -- and thankful to possess she too -- he be not worthy of she , that be all . and as for persuasion , I assure you I sha not trouble myself with that : I have enough to do to bear with he as he be , without attempt to work a reform . but I be sorry I leave you so long alone , . how have you pass the time ? ' ' Chiefly in watch the rook .
. ' ' , how dull you must have be ! I really must show you the library ; and you must ring for everything you want , just as you would in a inn , and make yourself comfortable . I have selfish reason for wishing to make you happy , because I want you to stay with I , and not fulfil you horrid threat of run away in a day or two . ' ' well , do not let I keep you out of the drawing - room any longer to - night , for at present I be tired and wish to go to bed . ' -- the Park I come down a little before eight , next morning , as I know by the striking of a distant clock . there be no appearance of breakfast . I wait above a hour before it come , still vainly long for access to the library ; and , after that lonely repast be conclude , I wait again about a hour and a half in great suspense and discomfort , uncertain what to do . at length come to bid I good - morning . she inform I she have only just breakfast , and now want I to take a early walk with she in the park . she ask how long I have be up , and on receive my answer , express the deepest regret , and again promise to show I the library . I suggest she have better do so at once , and then there would be no further trouble either with remember or forgett . she comply , on condition that I would not think of reading , or bothere with the book now ; for she want to show I the garden , and take a walk in the park with I , before it become too hot for enjoyment ; which , indeed , be nearly the case already . of course I readily assent ; and we take we walk accordingly . as we be stroll in the park , talk of what my companion have see and hear during she travelling experience , a gentleman on horseback rode up and pass we . as he turn , in passing , and star I full in the face , I have a good opportunity of see what he be like . he be tall , thing , and waste , with a slight stoop in the shoulders , a pale face , but somewhat blotchy , and disagreeably red about the eyelid , plain feature , and a general appearance of languor and flatness , relieve by a sinister expression in the mouth and the dull , soulless eye . 'I detest that man ! ' whisper , with bitter emphasis , as he slowly trot by . ' who be it ? ' I ask , unwill to suppose that she should so speak of she husband . ' Ashby , ' she reply , with dreary composure . ' and do you Detest he , ? ' say I , for I be too much shocked to remember she name at the moment . ' yes , I do , , and despise he too ; and if you know he you would not blame I . ' ' but you know what he be before you marry he . ' ' no ; I only think so : I do not half know he really . I know you warn I against it , and I wish I have listen to you : but it be too late to regret that now . and besides , mamma ought to have know better than either of we , and she never say anything against it -- quite the contrary . and then I think he adore I , and would let I have my own way : he do pretend to do so at first , but now he do not care a bit about I . yet I should not care for that : he might do as he please , if I might only be free to amuse myself and to stay in , or have a few friend down here : but he will do as he please , and I must be a prisoner and a slave . the moment he see I could enjoy myself without he , and that other know my value better than himself , the selfish wretch begin to accuse I of coquetry and extravagance ; and to abuse , whose shoe he be not worthy to clean . and then he must need have I down in the country , to lead the life of a nun , lest I should dishonour he or bring he to ruin ; as if he have not be ten time worse every way , with he betting - book , and he gaming - table , and he opera-girl , and he and . that -- yes , and he bottle of wine , and glassis of brandy - and - water too ! oh , I would give ten thousand worlds to be again ! it be too bad to feel life , health , and beauty waste away , unfelt and unenjoyed , for such a brute as that ! ' exclaim she , fairly burst into tear in the bitterness of she vexation . of course , I pitie she exceedingly ; as well for she false idea of happiness and disregard of duty , as for the wretched partner with whom she fate be link . I say what I could to comfort she , and offer such counsel as I think she most require : advise she , first , by gentle reasoning , by kindness , example , and persuasion , to try to ameliorate she husband ; and then
then , when she have do all she could , if she still find he incorrigible , to endeaavor to abstract herself from he -- to wrap herself up in she own integrity , and trouble herself as little about he as possible . I exhort she to seek consolation in do she duty to and man , to put she trust in , and solace herself with the care and nurture of she little daughter ; assure she she would be amply reward by witnesse its progress in strength and wisdom , and receive its genuine affection . ' but I can not devote myself entirely to a child , ' say she ; ' it may die -- which be not at all improbable . ' ' but , with care , many a delicate infant have become a strong man or woman . ' ' but it may grow so intolerably like it be father that I shall hate it . ' ' that be not likely ; it be a little girl , and strongly resemble its mother . ' ' no matter ; I should like it better if it be a boy -- only that it be father will leave it no inheritance that he can possibly squander away . what pleasure can I have in see a girl grow up to eclipse I , and enjoy those pleasure that I be for ever debar from ? but suppose I could be so generous as to take delight in this , still it be only a child ; and I can not centre all my hope in a child : that be only one degree better than devote oneself to a dog . and as for all the wisdom and goodness you have be try to instil into I -- that be all very right and proper , I daresay , and if I be some twenty year older , I might fructify by it : but people must enjoy themselves when they be young ; and if other will not let they -- why , they must hate they for it ! ' ' the best way to enjoy yourself be to do what be right and hate nobody . the end of be not to teach we how to die , but how to live ; and the earlier you become wise and good , the more of happiness you secure . and now , , I have one more piece of advice to offer you , which be , that you will not make a enemy of you mother - in - law . do not get into the way of hold she at arm ' length , and regard she with jealous distrust . I never see she , but I have hear good as well as evil respect she ; and I imagine that , though cold and haughty in she general demeanour , and even exact in she requirement , she have strong affections for those who can reach they ; and , though so blindly attach to she son , she be not without good principle , or incapable of hear reason . if you would but conciliate she a little , and adopt a friendly , open manner -- and even confide you grievance to she -- real grievance , such as you have a right to complain of -- it be my firm belief that she would , in time , become you faithful friend , and a comfort and support to you , instead of the incubus you describe she . ' but I fear my advice have little effect upon the unfortunate young lady ; and , finde I could render myself so little serviceable , my residence at become doubly painful . but still , I must stay out that day and the follow one , as i have promise to do so : though , resist all entreaty and inducement to prolong my visit further , I insist upon depart the next morning ; affirme that my mother would be lonely without I , and that she impatiently expect my return . nevertheless , it be with a heavy heart that I bade adieu to poor , and leave she in she princely home . it be no slight additional proof of she unhappiness , that she should so cling to the consolation of my presence , and earnestly desire the company of one whose general taste and idea be so little congenial to she own -- whom she have completely forgotten in she hour of prosperity , and whose presence would be rather a nuisance than a pleasure , if she could but have half she heart 's desire . -- the we school be not situate in the heart of the town : on enter a --- from the north - west there be a row of respectable - look house , on each side of the broad , white road , with narrow slips of garden - ground before they , Venetian blind to the window , and a flight of step lead to each trim , brass - handle door . in one of the largest of these habitations dwelt my mother and I , with such young lady as we friend and the public chose to commit to we charge . consequently , we be a considerable distance from the sea , and divide from it by a labyrinth of street and house . but the sea be my delight ; and I would often gladly pierce the town to obtain the pleasure of a walk beside it , whether with the pupil , or alone with my mother during the vacation . it be delightful to I at all time and season , but especially in the wild commotion of a rough sea -breeze , and in the brilliant freshness of a summer morning . I
I awoke early on the third morning after my return from - - the sun be shine through the blind , and I think how pleasant it would be to pass through the quiet town and take a solitary ramble on the sand while half the world be in bed . I be not long in form the resolution , nor slow to act upon it . of course I would not disturb my mother , so I steal noiselessly downstairs , and quietly unfasten the door . I be dress and out , when the church clock strike a quarter to six . there be a feeling of freshness and vigour in the very street ; and when I get free of the town , when my foot be on the sand and my face towards the broad , bright bay , no language can describe the effect of the deep , clear azure of the sky and ocean , the bright morning sunshine on the semicircular barrier of craggy cliff surmount by green swelling hill , and on the smooth , wide sand , and the low rock out at sea -- look , with they clothing of weed and moss , like little grass - grow island -- and above all , on the brilliant , sparkl wave . and then , the unspeakable purity -- and freshness of the air ! there be just enough heat to enhance the value of the breeze , and just enough wind to keep the whole sea in motion , to make the wave come bounde to the shore , foam and sparkl , as if wild with glee . nothing else be stirr -- no living creature be visible besides myself . my footstep be the first to press the firm , unbroken sand ; --nothing before have trample they since last night 's flow tide have obliterate the deepest mark of yesterday , and leave they fair and even , except where the subsiding water have leave behind it the trace of dimpled pool and little run streams . Refresh , delight , invigorate , I walk along , forget all my care , feel as if I have wing to my foot , and could go at least forty mile without fatigue , and experience a sense of exhilaration to which i have be a entire stranger since the day of early youth . about half - past six , however , the grooms begin to come down to air they master 's horse -- first one , and then another , till there be some dozen horse and five or six rider : but that need not trouble I , for they would not come as far as the low rock which I be now approach . when I have reach these , and walk over the moist , slippery sea -weed ( at the risk of flounder into one of the numerous pool of clear , salt water that lay between they ) , to a little mossy promontory with the sea splash round it , I look back again to see who next be stirr . still , there be only the early grooms with they horse , and one gentleman with a little dark speck of a dog run before he , and one water - cart come out of the town to get water for the bath . in another minute or two , the distant bathing machines would begin to move , and then the elderly gentleman of regular habit and sober quaker lady would be come to take they salutary morning walk . but however interesting such a scene might be , I could not wait to witness it , for the sun and the sea so dazzl my eye in that direction , that I could but afford one glance ; and then I turn again to delight myself with the sight and the sound of the sea , dashing against my promontory -- with no prodigious force , for the swell be break by the tangled sea-weed and the unseen rock beneath ; otherwise I should soon have be deluge with spray . but the tide be come in ; the water be rise ; the gulf and lakes be fill ; the strait be wide : it be time to seek some safer footing ; so I walk , skip , and stumble back to the smooth , wide sand , and resolve to proceed to a certain bold projection in the cliff , and then return . presently , I hear a snuffling sound behind I and then a dog come furisking and wriggl to my foot . it be my own snap -- the little dark , wire - haire terrier ! when I speak he name , he leapt up in my face and yell for joy . almost as much delighted as himself , I catch the little creature in my arm , and kiss he repeatedly . but how come he to be there ? he could not have drop from the sky , or come all that way alone : it must be either he master , the rat - catcher , or somebody else that have bring he ; so , repress my extravagant caress , and endeavour to repress he likewise , I look round , and beheld -- ! ' you dog remember you well , , ' say he , warmly grasp the hand I offer he without clearly know what I be about . ' you rise early . ' ' not often so early as this ,' I reply , with amazing composure , consider all the circumstance of the case . ' how far do you purpose to extend you walk ? ' 'I be think of return -- it must be almost time , I think . ' he consult he watch -- a
a gold one now -- and tell I it be only five minute past seven . ' but , doubtless , you have have a long enough walk , ' say he , turn towards the town , to which I now proceed leisurely to retrace my step ; and he walk beside I . ' in what part of the town do you live ? ' ask he . 'I never could discover . ' never could discover ? have he endeavoure to do so then ? I tell he the place of we abode . he ask how we prosper in we affair . I tell he we be do very well -- that we have have a considerable addition to we pupil after the vacation , and expect a still further increase at the close of this . ' you must be a accomplished instructor ,' he observ . ' no , it be my mother ,' I reply ; ' she manage thing so well , and be so active , and clever , and kind . ' 'I should like to know you mother . will you introduce I to she some time , if I call ? ' ' yes , willingly . ' ' and will you allow I the privilege of a old friend , of look in upon you now and then ? ' ' yes , if -- I suppose so . ' this be a very foolish answer , but the truth be , I consider that I have no right to invite anyone to my mother 's house without she knowledge ; and if I have say , ' yes , if my mother do not object , ' it would appear as if by he question I understand more than be expect ; so , Suppose she would not , I add , ' I suppose so :' but of course I should have say something more sensible and more polite , if I have have my wit about I . we continue we walk for a minute in silence ; which , however , be shortly relieve ( no small relief to I ) by comment upon the brightness of the morning and the beauty of the bay , and then upon the advantages a --- possess over many other fashionable place of resort . ' you do not ask what bring I to --- ' say he . ' you can not suppose I be rich enough to come for my own pleasure . ' 'I hear you have leave . ' ' you do not hear , then , that I have get the living of -? ' --- be a village about two mile distant from - . ' no , ' say I ; 'we live so completely out of the world , even here , that news seldom reach I through any quarter ; except through the medium of the -- . but I hope you like you new parish ; and that I may congratulate you on the acquisition ? ' 'I expect to like my parish better a year or two hence , when I have work certain reform I have set my heart upon -- or , at least , progress some step towards such a achievement . but you may congratulate I now ; for I find it very agreeable to Have a parish all to myself , with nobody to interfere with I -- to thwart my plan or cripple my exertion : and beside , I have a respectable house in a rather pleasant neighbourhood , and three hundred pound a year ; and , in fact , I have nothing but solitude to complain of , and nothing but a companion to wish for . ' he look at I as he conclude : and the flash of he dark eye seem to set my face on fire ; greatly to my own discomfiture , for to evince confusion at such a juncture be intolerable . I make a effort , therefore , to remedy the evil , and disclaim all personal application of the remark by a hasty , ill - expressed reply , to the effect that , if he wait till he be well know in the neighbourhood , he might have numerous opportunity for supplying he want among the resident of --- and its vicinity , or the visitor of a ---, if he require so ample a choice : not consider the compliment imply by such a assertion , till he answer make I aware of it . 'I be not so presumptuous as to believe that , ' say he , ' though you tell it I ; but if it be so , I be rather particular in my notion of a companion for life , and perhaps I might not find one to suit I among the ladie you mention . ' ' if you require perfection , you never will . ' 'I do not -- I have no right to require it , as be so far from perfect myself . ' here the conversation be interrupt by a water - cart lumber past we , for we be now come to the busy part of the sand ; and , for the next eight or ten minute , between cart and horse , and ass , and men , there be little room for social intercourse , till we have turn we back upon the sea , and begin to ascend the precipitous road lead into the town . here my companion offer I he arm , which I accept , though not with the intention of use it as a support . ' you do not often come on to the sand , I think , ' say he , ' for I have walk there many time , both morning and evening
evening , since I come , and never see you till now ; and several time , in pass through the town , too , I have look about for you school -- but I do not think of the -- ; and once or twice i make inquiry , but without obtain the requisite information . ' when we have surmount the acclivity , I be about to withdraw my arm from he , but by a slight tightening of the elbow be tacitly inform that such be not he will , and accordingly desiste . Discoursing on different subject , we enter the town , and pass through several street . I see that he be go out of he way to accompany I , notwithstand the long walk that be yet before he ; and , fear that he might be inconvenience himself from motives of politeness , I observe -- fear I be take you out of you way , -- I believe the road to --- lie quite in another direction . ' 'I will leave you at the end of the next street , ' say he . ' and when will you come to see mamma ? ' 'to - morrow -- willing . ' the end of the next street be nearly the conclusion of my journey . he stop there , however , bid I good - morning , and call , who seem a little doubtful whether to follow he old mistress or he new master , but trot away upon be summon by the latter . 'I will not offer to restore he to you , , ' say , smile , ' because I like he . ' ' oh , I do not want he , ' reply I , ' now that he have a good master ; I be quite satisfied . ' ' you take it for grant that I be a good one , then ? ' the man and the dog depart , and I return home , full of gratitude to heaven for so much bliss , and pray that my hope might not again be crush . -- ' well , Agnes , you must not take such long walk again before breakfast , ' say my mother , observe that I drank a extra cup of coffee and eat nothing -- plead the heat of the weather , and the fatigue of my long walk as a excuse . I certainly do feel feverish and tired too . ' you always do thing by extreme : now , if you have take a short walk every morning , and would continue to do so , it would do you good . ' ' well , mamma , I will . ' ' but this be worse than lie in bed or bend over you book : you have quite put yourself into a fever . ' 'I will not do it again , ' say I . I be rack my brain with think how to tell she about , for she must know he be come to - morrow . however , I wait till the breakfast thing be remove , and I be more calm and cool ; and then , have sit down to my drawing , I begin -- 'I meet a old friend on the sand to - day , mamma . ' 'An old friend ! who could it be ? ' ' two old friend , indeed . one be a dog ;' and then I remind she of snap , whose history I have recount before , and relate the incident of he sudden appearance and remarkable recognition ; 'and the other , ' continue I , ' be , the curate of . ' ' ! I never hear of he before . ' ' yes , you have : I have mention he several time , I believe : but you do not remember . ' 'I have hear you speak of . ' ' be the rector , and the curate : I use to mention he sometimes in contradistinction to , as be a more efficient clergyman . however , he be on the sand this morning with the dog -- he have buy it , I suppose , from the rat - catcher ; and he know I as well as it do -- probably through its mean : and I have a little conversation with he , in the course of which , as he ask about we school , I be lead to say something about you , and you good management ; and he say he should like to know you , and ask if I would introduce he to you , if he should take the liberty of call to - morrow ; so I say I would . be I right ? ' ' of course . what kind of a man be he ? ' 'a very respectable man , I think : but you will see he to -morrow . he be the new vicar of ---, and as he have only be there a few week , I suppose he have make no friend yet , and want 's a little society . ' the morrow come . what a fever of anxiety and expectation I be in from breakfast till noon -- at which time he make he appearance ! have introduce he to my mother , I take my work to the window , and sit down to await the result of the interview . they get on extremely well together -- greatly to my satisfaction , for I have feel very anxious about what my mother would think of he . he do not stay long that time : but when he rise to take leave , she say she should be happy to see he
he , whenever he might find it convenient to call again ; and when he be go , I be gratify by hearing she say ,--'well ! I think he be a very sensible man . but why do you sit back there , , ' she add , ' and talk so little ? ' ' because you talk so well , mamma , I think you require no assistance from I : and , besides , he be you visitor , not mine . ' after that , he often call upon we -- several time in the course of a week . he generally address most of he conversation to my mother : and no wonder , for she could converse . I almost envy the unfettered , vigorous fluency of she discourse , and the strong sense evince by everything she say -- and yet , I do not ; for , though I occasionally regret my own deficiencies for he sake , it give I very great pleasure to sit and hear the two being I love and honoure above every one else in the world , discourse together so amicably , so wisely , and so well . I be not always silent , however ; nor be I at all neglect . I be quite as much notice as I would wish to be : there be no lack of kind word and kinder look , no end of delicate attention , too fine and subtle to be grasp by word , and therefore indescribable -- but deeply feel at heart . be quickly drop between we : come as a expect guest , welcome at all time , and never derange the economy of we household affair . he even call I ' :' the name have be timidly speak at first , but , finde it give no offence in any quarter , he seem greatly to prefer that appellation to ' ;' and so do I . how tedious and gloomy be those day in which he do not come ! and yet not miserable ; for I have still the remembrance of the last visit and the hope of the next to cheer I . but when two or three day pass without my see he , I certainly feel very anxious -- absurdly , unreasonably so ; for , of course , he have he own business and the affair of he parish to attend to . and I dread the close of the holiday , when my business also would begin , and I should be sometimes unable to see he , and sometimes -- when my mother be in the schoolroom -- oblige to be with he alone : a position I do not at all desire , in the house ; though to meet he out of door , and walk beside he , have prove by no means disagreeable . one evening , however , in the last week of the vacation , he arrive - -unexpectedly : for a heavy and protract thunder - shower during the afternoon have almost destroy my hope of see he that day ; but now the storm be over , and the sun be shin brightly . 'a beautiful evening , ! ' say he , as he enter . ' Agnes , I want you to take a walk with I to --' ( he name a certain part of the coast -- a bold hill on the land side , and towards the sea a steep precipice , from the summit of which a glorious view be to be have ) . ' the rain have lay the dust , and cool and clear the air , and the prospect will be magnificent . will you come ? ' ' can I go , ? ' ' yes ; to be sure . ' I go to get ready , and be down again in a few minute ; though , of course , I take a little more pain with my attire than if I have merely be go out on some shopping expedition alone . the thunder - shower have certainly have a most beneficial effect upon the weather , and the evening be most delightful . would have I to take he arm ; he say little during we passage through the crowded street , but walk very fast , and appear grave and abstract . I wonder what be the matter , and feel a indefinite dread that something unpleasant be on he mind ; and vague surmise , concern what it might be , trouble I not a little , and make I grave and silent enough . but these fantasy vanish upon reach the quiet outskirt of the town ; for as soon as we come within sight of the venerable old church , and the -- hill , with the deep blue beyond it , I find my companion be cheerful enough . 'I be afraid I have be walk too fast for you , Agnes , ' say he : 'in my impatience to be rid of the town , I forget to consult you convenience ; but now we will walk as slowly as you please . I see , by those light clouds in the west , there will be a brilliant sunset , and we shall be in time to witness it be effect upon the sea , at the most moderate rate of progression . ' when we have get about half - way up the hill , we fall into silence again ; which , as usual , he be the first to break . ' my house be desolate yet , ,' he smilingly observe , ' and I be acquaint now with all the lady in my parish , and several in this town too ; and many other I know
