the Tenant of have Preface to the second Edition while I acknowledge the success of the present work to have be greater than I anticipate , and the praise it have elicit from a few kind critic to have be greater than it deserv , I must also admit that from some other quarter it have be censure with a asperity which I be as little prepare to expect , and which my judgment , as well as my feeling , assure I be more bitter than just . it be scarcely the province of a author to refute the argument of he censor and vindicate he own productions ; but I may be allow to make here a few observation with which I would have preface the first edition , have I foresee the necessity of such precaution against the misapprehension of those who would read it with a prejudiced mind or be content to judge it by a hasty glance . my object in write the follow page be not simply to amuse the reader ; neither be it to gratify my own taste , nor yet to ingratiate myself with the Press and the Public : I wish to tell the truth , for truth always convey its own moral to those who be able to receive it . but as the priceless treasure too frequently hide at the bottom of a well , it need some courage to dive for it , especially as he that do so will be likely to incur more scorn and obloquy for the mud and water into which he have venture to plunge , than thanks for the jewel he procure ; as , in like manner , she who undertake the cleansing of a careless bachelor 's apartment will be liable to more abuse for the dust she raise than commendation for the clearance she effect . let it not be imagine , however , that I consider myself competent to reform the error and abuse of society , but only that I would fain contribute my humble quota towards so good a aim ; and if I can gain the public ear at all , I would rather whisper a few wholesome truth therein than much soft nonsense . as the story of ' ' be accuse of extravagant over - colour in those very part that be carefully copy from the life , with a most scrupulous avoidance of all exaggeration , so , in the present work , I find myself censure for depicting , with 'a morbid love of the coarse , if not of the brutal , ' those scene which , I will venture to say , have not be more painful for the most fastidious of my critic to read than they be for I to describe . I may have go too far ; in which case I shall be careful not to trouble myself or my reader in the same way again ; but when we have to do with vice and vicious character , I maintain it be better to depict they as they really be than as they would wish to appear . to represent a bad thing in it be least offensive light be , doubtless , the most agreeable course for a writer of fiction to pursue ; but be it the most honest , or the safest ? be it better to reveal the snare and pitfall of life to the young and thoughtless traveller , or to cover they with branch and flower ? oh , reader ! if there be less of this delicate concealment of fact - this whisper , ' peace , peace , ' when there be no peace , there would be less of sin and misery to the young of both sex who be left to wr they bitter knowledge from experience . I would not be understand to suppose that the proceeding of the unhappy scapegrace , with he few profligate companion I have here introduce , be a specimen of the common practice of society - the case be a extreme one , as I trust none would fail to perceive ; but I know that such character do exist , and if I have warn one rash youth from follow in they step , or prevent one thoughtless girl from fall into the very natural error of my heroine , the book have not be write in vain . but , at the same time , if any honest reader shall have derive more pain than pleasure from its perusal , and have close the last volume with a disagreeable impression on he mind , I humbly crave he pardon , for such be far from my intention ; and I will endeaavor to do better another time , for I love to give innocent pleasure . yet , be it understand , I shall not limit my ambition to this - or even to produce 'a perfect work of art ': time and talents so spend , I should consider waste and misapply . such humble talents as have give I I will endeaavor to put to they greatest use ; if I be able to amuse , I will try to benefit too ; and when I feel it my duty to speak a unpalatable truth , with the help of , I will speak it , though it be to the prejudice of my name and to the detriment of my reader 's immediate pleasure as well as my own . one word more , and I have do . respecte the author 's identity , I would have it to he distinctly understood that be neither nor , and therefore let not he fault be attribute to they . as to whether the name be real or fictitious , it can not greatly signify to those who know he only by he
he work . as little , I should think , can it matter whether the writer so designate be a man , or a woman , as one or two of my critic profess to have discover . I take the imputation in good part , as a compliment to the just delineation of my female character ; and though I be bound to attribute much of the severity of my censor to this suspicion , I make no effort to refute it , because , in my own mind , I be satisfied that if a book be a good one , it be so whatever the sex of the author may be . all novel be , or should be , write for both man and woman to read , and I be at a loss to conceive how a man should permit himself to write anything that would be really disgraceful to a woman , or why a woman should be censure for writing anything that would be proper and become for a man . July 22nd , 1848 . the not of I you must go back with I to the autumn of 1827 . my father , as you know , be a sort of gentleman farmer in - shire ; and I , by he express desire , succeed he in the same quiet occupation , not very willingly , for ambition urge I to higher aim , and self - conceit assure I that , in disregard it be , I be bury my talent in the earth , and hide my light under a bushel . my mother have do she utmost to persuade I that I be capable of great achievement ; but my father , who think ambition be the surest road to ruin , and change but another word for destruction , would listen to no scheme for bettering either my own condition , or that of my fellow mortal . he assure I it be all rubbish , and exhort I , with he die breath , to continue in the good old way , to follow he step , and those of he father before he , and let my highest ambition be to walk honestly through the world , look neither to the right hand nor to the left , and to transmit the paternal acre to my child in , at least , as flourish a condition as he leave they to I . ' well ! - a honest and industrious farmer be one of the most useful member of society ; and if I devote my talents to the cultivation of my farm , and the improvement of agriculture in general , I shall thereby benefit , not only my own immediate connection and dependant , but , in some degree , mankind at large :- hence I shall not have live in vain . ' with such reflection as these I be endeavour to conseal myself , as I plod home from the field , one cold , damp , cloudy evening towards the close of . but the gleam of a bright red fire through the parlour window have more effect in cheer my spirits , and rebuk my thankless repining , than all the sage reflection and good resolution I have force my mind to frame ; - for I be young then , remember - only four - and - twenty - and have not acquire half the rule over my own spirit that I now possess - trifling as that may be . however , that haven of bliss must not be enter till I have exchange my miry boot for a clean pair of shoe , and my rough surtout for a respectable coat , and make myself generally presentable before decent society ; for my mother , with all she kindness , be vastly particular on certain point . in ascend to my room I be meet upon the stair by a smart , pretty girl of nineteen , with a tidy , dumpy figure , a round face , bright , bloom cheek , glossy , cluster curl , and little merry brown eye . I need not tell you this be my sister rise . she be , I know , a comely matron still , and , doubtless , no less lovely - in you eye - than on the happy day you first beheld she . nothing tell I then that she , a few year hence , would be the wife of one entirely unknown to I as yet , but destin hereafter to become a closer friend than even herself , more intimate than that unmannerly lad of seventeen , by whom I be collar in the passage , on come down , and well - nigh jerk off my equilibrium , and who , in correction for he impudence , receive a resounding whack over the sconce , which , however , sustain no serious injury from the infliction ; as , besides be more than commonly thick , it be protect by a redundant shock of short , reddish curl , that my mother call auburn . on enter the parlour we find that honoure lady seat in she arm - chair at the fireside , work away at she knitting , accord to she usual custom , when she have nothing else to do . she have swept the hearth , and make a bright blazing fire for we reception ; the servant have just bring in the tea - tray ; and be produce the sugar - basin and tea - caddy from the cupboard in the black oak side - board , that shone like polish ebony , in the cheerful parlour twilight . ' well ! here they both be , ' cry my mother , look round upon we without retarde the motion of
of she nimble finger and glitter needle . ' now shut the door , and come to the fire , while get the tea ready ; I be sure you must be starve ; - and tell I what you have be about all day ; - I like to know what my child have be about . ' 'I have be break in the grey colt - no easy business that - direct the ploughing of the last wheat stubble - for the ploughboy have not the sense to direct himself - and carry out a plan for the extensive and efficient draining of the low meadowland . ' ' that be my brave boy ! - and , what have you be do ? ' ' Badger - baiting . ' and here he proceed to give a particular account of he sport , and the respective trait of prowess evince by the badger and the dog ; my mother pretend to listen with deep attention , and watch he animated countenance with a degree of maternal admiration I think highly disproportion to its object . ' it be time you should be do something else , , ' say I , as soon as a momentary pause in he narration allow I to get in a word . ' what can I do ? ' reply he ; 'my mother will not let I go to sea or enter the army ; and I be determined to do nothing else - except make myself such a nuisance to you all , that you will be thankful to get rid of I on any term . ' we parent soothingly strok he stiff , short curl . he grow , and try to look sulky , and then we all take we seat at the table , in obedience to the thrice - repeat summon of . ' now take you tea , ' say she ; ' and I will tell you what I have be do . I have be to call on the Wilson ; and it be a thousand pity you do not go with I , , for be there ! ' ' well ! what of she ? ' 'Oh , nothing ! - I be not go to tell you about she ; - only that she be a nice , amuse little thing , when she be in a merry humour , and I should not mind call she - ' ' Hush , hush , my dear ! you brother have no such idea ! ' whisper my mother earnestly , hold up she finger . ' well , ' resume ; be go to tell you a important piece of news I hear there - I have be burst with it ever since . you know it be report a month ago , that somebody be go to take - and - what do you think ? it have actually be inhabit above a week ! - and we never know ! ' ' impossible ! ' cry my mother . ' preposterous !!! ' shriek . ' it have indeed ! - and by a single lady ! ' ' good gracious , my dear ! the place be in ruins ! ' ' she have have two or three room make habitable ; and there she life , all alone - except a old woman for a servant ! ' 'Oh , dear ! that spoil it - I would hope she be a witch , ' observe , while carve he inch - thick slice of bread and butter . ' Nonsense , ! but be not it strange , mamma? ' ' ! I can hardly believe it . ' ' but you may believe it ; for have see she . she go with she mother , who , of course , when she hear of a stranger be in the neighbourhood , would be on pin and needle till she have see she and get all she could out of she . she be call , and she be in mourning - not widow 's weed , but slightish mourning - and she be quite young , they say , - not above five or six and twenty , - but so reserve ! they try all they could to find out who she be and where she come from , and , all about she , but neither , with she pertinacious and impertinent home - thrust , nor , with she skilful manoeuvring , could manage to elicit a single satisfactory answer , or even a casual remark , or chance expression calculate to allay they curiosity , or throw the faintest ray of light upon she history , circumstance , or connection . moreover , she be barely civil to they , and evidently better pleased to say ' good - by , ' than ' how do you do . ' but say she father intend to call upon she soon , to offer some pastoral advice , which he fear she need , as , though she be know to have enter the neighbourhood early last week , she do not make she appearance at church on ; and she - , that be - will beg to accompany he , and be sure she can succeed in wheedl something out of she - you know , , she can do anything . and we should call some time , mamma ; it be only proper , you know . ' ' of course , my dear . poor thing ! how lonely she must feel ! ' ' and pray , be quick about it ; and mind you bring I word how much sugar she put in she tea , and what sort of cap and apron she wear , and all about it ; for
for I do not know how I can live till I know , ' say , very gravely . but if he intend the speech to be haile as a master - stroke of wit , he signally fail , for nobody laugh . however , he be not much disconcert at that ; for when he have take a mouthful of bread and butter and be about to swallow a gulp of tea , the humour of the thing burst upon he with such irresistible force , that he be oblige to jump up from the table , and rush snorting and chok from the room ; and a minute after , be hear screaming in fearful agony in the garden . as for I , I be hungry , and contente myself with silently demolish the tea , ham , and toast , while my mother and sister go on talking , and continue to discuss the apparent or non - apparent circumstance , and probable or improbable history of the mysterious lady ; but I must confess that , after my brother 's misadventure , I once or twice raise the cup to my lip , and put it down again without daring to taste the contents , lest I should injure my dignity by a similar explosion . the next day my mother and rose hasten to pay they compliment to the fair recluse ; and come back but little wiser than they go ; though my mother declare she do not regret the journey , for if she have not gain much good , she flatter herself she have impart some , and that be better : she have give some useful advice , which , she hope , would not be throw away ; for , though she say little to any purpose , and appear somewhat self - opinionate , seem not incapable of reflection , - though she do not know where she have be all she life , poor thing , for she betraye a lamentable ignorance on certain point , and have not even the sense to be asham of it . 'On what point , mother ? ' ask I . 'On household matter , and all the little nicety of cookery , and such thing , that every lady ought to be familiar with , whether she be require to make a practical use of she knowledge or not . I give she some useful piece of information , however , and several excellent receipt , the value of which she evidently could not appreciate , for she beg I would not trouble myself , as she live in such a plain , quiet way , that she be sure she should never make use of they . " no matter , my dear , " say I ; " it be what every respectable female ought to know ; - and beside , though you be alone now , you will not be always so ; you have be marry , and probably - I might say almost certainly - will be again . " " you be mistaken there , ma 'am , " say she , almost haughtily ; " I be certain I never shall . " - but I tell she I know better . ' ' some romantic young widow , I suppose , ' say I , ' come there to end she day in solitude , and mourn in secret for the dear depart - but it will not last long . ' ' no , I think not , ' observe ; ' for she do not seem very disconsolate after all ; and she be excessively pretty - handsome rather - you must see she , ; you will call she a perfect beauty , though you could hardly pretend to discover a resemblance between she and . ' ' well , I can imagine many face more beautiful than 's , though not more charming . I allow she have small claim to perfection ; but then , I maintain that , if she be more perfect , she would be less interesting . ' ' and so you prefer she fault to other people 's perfection ? ' ' just so - save my mother 's presence . ' ' oh , my dear , what nonsense you talk ! - I know you do not mean it ; it be quite out of the question , ' say my mother , get up , and bust out of the room , under pretence of household business , in order to escape the contradiction that be trembl on my tongue . after that Rose favour I with further particulars respect . she appearance , manners , and dress , and the very furniture of the room she inhabit , be all set before I , with rather more clearness and precision than I care to see they ; but , as I be not a very attentive listener , I could not repeat the description if I would . the next day be ; and , on , everybody wonder whether or not the fair unknown would profit by the vicar 's remonstrance , and come to church . I confess I look with some interest myself towards the old family pew , appertain to , where the faded crimson cushion and lining have be unpressed and unrenewed so many year , and the grim escutcheon , with they lugubrious border of rusty black cloth , frown so sternly from the wall above . and there I beheld a tall , lady - like figure , clad in black . she face be towards I , and there be something in it which , once see , invite I to look again . she hair be raven black , and dispose in long glossy ringlet , a
a style of coiffure rather unusual in those day , but always graceful and become ; she complexion be clear and pale ; she eye I could not see , for , be bend upon she prayer - book , they be conceal by they drooping lid and long black lash , but the brows above be expressive and well define ; the forehead be lofy and intellectual , the nose , a perfect aquiline and the feature , in general , unexceptionable - only there be a slight hollowness about the cheek and eye , and the lip , though finely form , be a little too thin , a little too firmly compress , and have something about they that betoken , I think , no very soft or amiable temper ; and I say in my heart - ' I would rather admire you from this distance , fair lady , than be the partner of you home . ' just then she happen to raise she eye , and they meet mine ; I do not choose to withdraw my gaze , and she turn again to she book , but with a momentary , indefinable expression of quiet scorn , that be inexpressibly provoke to I . ' she think I a impudent puppy , ' think I . ' Humph ! - she shall change she mind before long , if I think it worth while . ' but then it flash upon I that these be very improper thought for a place of worship , and that my behaviour , on the present occasion , be anything but what it ought to be . previous , however , to direct my mind to the service , I glance round the church to see if any one have be observe I ; - but no , - all , who be not attend to they prayer - book , be attend to the strange lady , - my good mother and sister among the rest , and and she daughter ; and even be slily glance from the corner of she eye towards the object of general attraction . then she glance at I , simper a little , and blush , modestly look at she prayer - book , and endeavoure to compose she feature . here I be transgresse again ; and this time I be make sensible of it by a sudden dig in the rib , from the elbow of my pert brother . for the present , I could only resent the insult by press my foot upon he toe , deferr further vengeance till we get out of church . now , , before I close this letter , I will tell you who be : she be the vicar 's younger daughter , and a very engage little creature , for whom I feel no small degree of partiality ; - and she know it , though I have never come to any direct explanation , and have no definite intention of so do , for my mother , who maintain there be no one good enough for I within twenty mile round , could not bear the thought of my marrying that insignificant little thing , who , in addition to she numerous other disqualification , have not twenty pound to call she own . 's figure be at once slight and plump , she face small , and nearly as round as my sister 's , - complexion , something similar to hers , but more delicate and less decidedly bloom , - nose , retrousse , - feature , generally irregular ; and , altogether , she be rather charme than pretty . but she eye - I must not forget those remarkable feature , for therein she chief attraction lay - in outward aspect at least ; - they be long and narrow in shape , the irid black , or very dark brown , the expression various , and ever change , but always either preternaturally - I have almost say diabolically - wick , or irresistibly bewitch - often both . she voice be gentle and childish , she tread light and soft as that of a cat :- but she manners more frequently resemble those of a pretty playful kitten , that be now pert and roguish , now timid and demure , accord to its own sweet will . she sister , , be several year older , several inche taller , and of a larger , coarser build - a plain , quiet , sensible girl , who have patiently nurse they mother , through she last long , tedious illness , and be the housekeeper , and family drudge , from thence to the present time . she be trust and value by she father , love and court by all dog , cat , child , and poor people , and slighte and neglect by everybody else . the himself be a tall , ponderous elderly gentleman , who place a shovel hat above he large , square , massive - feature face , carry a stout walking - stick in he hand , and incase he still powerful limb in knee - breech and gaiter , - or black silk stocking on state occasion . he be a man of fix principle , strong prejudice , and regular habit , intolerant of dissent in any shape , act under a firm conviction that he opinion be always right , and whoever differ from they must be either most deplorably ignorant , or wilfully blind . in childhood , I have always be accustom to regard he with a feeling of reverential awe - but lately , even now , surmount , for , though he have a fatherly kindness for the well - behaved , he be a strict disciplinarian , and have often sternly reprove
reprove we juvenile failings and peccadilloe ; and moreover , in those day , whenever he call upon we parent , we have to stand up before he , and say we catechism , or repeat , ' how doth the little busy bee , ' or some other hymn , or - worse than all - be question about he last text , and the head of the discourse , which we never could remember . sometimes , the worthy gentleman would reprove my mother for be over-indulgent to she son , with a reference to old , or and , which be particularly gall to she feeling ; and , very highly as she respecte he , and all he saying , I once hear she exclaim , 'i wish to goodness he have a son himself ! he would not be so ready with he advice to other people then ; - he would see what it be to have a couple of boy to keep in order . ' he have a laudable care for he own bodily health - keep very early hour , regularly take a walk before breakfast , be vastly particular about warm and dry clothing , have never be know to preach a sermon without previously swallow a raw egg - albeit he be gift with good lung and a powerful voice , - and be , generally , extremely particular about what he eat and drank , though by no means abstemious , and have a mode of dietary peculiar to himself , - be a great despiser of tea and such slop , and a patron of malt liquor , bacon and egg , ham , hang beef , and other strong meat , which agree well enough with he digestive organ , and therefore be maintain by he to be good and wholesome for everybody , and confidently recommend to the most delicate convalescent or dyspeptic , who , if they fail to derive the promise benefit from he prescription , be tell it be because they have not persever , and if they complain of inconvenient result therefrom , be assure it be all fancy . I will just touch upon two other person whom I have mention , and then bring this long letter to a close . these be and she daughter . the former be the widow of a substantial farmer , a narrow - minded , tattl old gossip , whose character be not worth describe . she have two son , , a rough countrified farmer , and , a retiring , studious young man , who be study the classic with the vicar 's assistance , prepare for college , with a view to enter the church . they sister be a young lady of some talents , and more ambition . she have , at she own desire , receive a regular boarding - school education , superior to what any member of the family have obtain before . she have take the polish well , acquire considerable elegance of manners , quite lose she provincial accent , and could boast of more accomplishment than the vicar 's daughter . she be consider a beauty besides ; but never for a moment could she number I amongst she admirer . she be about six and twenty , rather tall and very slender , she hair be neither chestnut nor auburn , but a most decided bright , light red ; she complexion be remarkably fair and brilliant , she head small , neck long , ching well turn , but very short , lip thing and red , eye clear hazel , quick , and penetrat , but entirely destitute of poetry or feeling . she have , or might have have , many suitor in she own rank of life , but scornfully repulse or reject they all ; for none but a gentleman could please she refin taste , and none but a rich one could satisfy she soaring ambition . one gentleman there be , from whom she have lately receive some rather pointed attention , and upon whose heart , name , and fortune , it be whispered , she have serious designs . this be , the young squire , whose family have formerly occupy , but have desert it , some fifteen year ago , for a more modern and commodious mansion in the neighbour parish . now , , I bid you adieu for the present . this be the first instalment of my debt . if the coin suit you , tell I so , and I will send you the rest at my leisure : if you would rather remain my creditor than stuff you purse with such ungainly , heavy piece , - tell I still , and I will pardon you bad taste , and willingly keep the treasure to myself . yours immutably , . chapter ii I perceive , with joy , my must value friend , that the cloud of you displeasure have pass away ; the light of you countenance bless I once more , and you desire the continuation of my story : therefore , without more ado , you shall have it . I think the day I last mention be a certain , the latest in the of 1827 . on the follow I be out with my dog and gun , in pursuit of such game as I could find within the territory of - ; but find none at all , I turn my arm against the hawk and carrion crow , whose depredation , as I suspect , have deprive I of better prey . to this end I leave the more frequented region , the wooded valley , the corn-field , and the meadow - lands , and proceed to mount the steep acclivity of , the wildest and
and the loftiest eminence in we neighbourhood , where , as you ascend , the hedge , as well as the tree , become scanty and stunt , the former , at length , give place to rough stone fence , partly green over with ivy and moss , the latter to larch and fir - tree , or isolate blackthorn . the field , be rough and stony , and wholly unfit for the plough , be mostly devote to the posturing of sheep and cattle ; the soil be thin and poor : bit of grey rock here and there pee out from the grassy hillock ; bilberry - plant and heather - relic of more savage wildness - grow under the wall ; and in many of the enclosure , ragweed and rush usur supremacy over the scanty herbage ; but these be not my property . near the top of this hill , about two mile from - , stand , a superannuate mansion of the era , build of dark grey stone , venerable and picturesque to look at , but doubtless , cold and gloomy enough to inhabit , with its thick stone mullion and little latticed pane , its time - eat air - hole , and its too lonely , too unsheltered situation , - only shield from the war of wind and weather by a group of fir , themselves half blight with storm , and look as stern and gloomy as the Hall itself . behind it lay a few desolate fields , and then the brown heath - clad summit of the hill ; before it ( enclose by stone wall , and enter by a iron gate , with large ball of grey granite - similar to those which decorate the roof and gable - surmount the gate - post ) be a garden , - once stock with such hard plant and flower as could best brook the soil and climate , and such tree and shrub as could best endure the gardener 's torture shear , and most readily assume the shape he choose to give they , - now , have be leave so many year untilled and untrimmed , abandon to the weed and the grass , to the frost and the wind , the rain and the drink , it present a very singular appearance indeed . the close green walls of privet , that have border the principal walk , be two - third wither away , and the rest grow beyond all reasonable bounds ; the old boxwood swan , that sit beside the scraper , have lose it be neck and half its body : the castellate towers of laurel in the middle of the garden , the gigantic warrior that stand on one side of the gateway , and the lion that guard the other , be sproute into such fantastic shape as resemble nothing either in heaven or earth , or in the water under the earth ; but , to my young imagination , they present all of they a goblinish appearance , that harmonise well with the ghostly legion and dark tradition we old nurse have tell we respecte the haunted hall and its depart occupant . I have succeed in kill a hawk and two crow when I come within sight of the mansion ; and then , relinquish further depredation , I saunter on , to have a look at the old place , and see what change have be wrotch in it by its new inhabitant . I do not like to go quite to the front and stare in at the gate ; but I pause beside the garden wall , and look , and see no change - except in one wing , where the broken window and dilapidate roof have evidently be repair , and where a thin wreath of smoke be curl up from the stack of chimney . while I thus stand , lean on my gun , and look up at the dark gable , sunk in a idle reverie , weave a tissue of wayward fancie , in which old associations and the fair young hermit , now within those wall , bear a nearly equal part , I hear a slight rustling and scramble just within the garden ; and , glance in the direction whence the sound proceed , I beheld a tiny hand elevate above the wall : it cling to the topmost stone , and then another little hand be raise to take a firmer hold , and then appear a small white forehead , surmount with wreat of light brown hair , with a pair of deep blue eye beneath , and the upper portion of a diminutive ivory nose . the eyes do not notice I , but sparkle with glee on beholding , my beautiful black and white setter , that be course about the field with its muzzle to the ground . the little creature raise it be face and call aloud to the dog . the good - natured animal pause , look up , and wag he tail , but make no further advance . the child ( a little boy , apparently about five year old ) scramble up to the top of the wall , and call again and again ; but find this of no avail , apparently make up he mind , like , to go to the mountain , since the mountain would not come to he , and attempt to get over ; but a crab old cherry - tree , that grow hard by , catch he by the frock in one of its crooked scraggy arm that stretch over the wall . in attempt to disengage himself he foot slip , and down he tumble - but not to the earth ; - the tree still keep he suspend
suspend . there be a silent struggle , and then a piercing shriek ; - but , in a instant , I have drop my gun on the grass , and catch the little fellow in my arm . I wip he eye with he frock , tell he he be all right and call to pacify he . he be just put little hand on the dog 's neck and begin to smile through he tear , when I hear behind I a click of the iron gate , and a rustle of female garment , and lo ! dart upon I - she neck uncovered , she black lock streame in the wind . ' give I the child ! ' she say , in a voice scarce louder than a whisper , but with a tone of startling vehemence , and , seize the boy , she snatch he from I , as if some dire contamination be in my touch , and then stand with one hand firmly clasp he , the other on he shoulder , fix upon I she large , luminous dark eye - pale , breathless , quiver with agitation . 'I be not harm the child , madam , ' say I , scarce know whether to be most astonished or displease ; ' he be tumbl off the wall there ; and I be so fortunate as to catch he , while he hang suspend headlong from that tree , and prevent I know not what catastrophe . ' 'I beg you pardon , sir , ' stammer she ; - suddenly calm down , - the light of reason seem to break upon she becloude spirit , and a faint blush mantl on she cheek - 'I do not know you ; - and I think - ' she stoop to kiss the child , and fondly clasp she arm round he neck . ' you think I be go to kidnap you son , I suppose ? ' she strok he head with a half - embarrass laugh , and reply , - do not know he have attempt to climb the wall . - I have the pleasure of addressing , I believe ? ' she add , somewhat abruptly . I bow , but venture to ask how she know I . ' you sister call here , a few day ago , with . ' ' be the resemblance so strong then ? ' I ask , in some surprise , and not so greatly flatter at the idea as I ink to have be . ' there be a likeness about the eyes and complexion I think , ' reply she , somewhat dubiously survey my face ; - ' and I think I see you at church on . ' I smile . - there be something either in that smile or the recollection it awaken that be particularly displease to she , for she suddenly assume again that proud , chilly look that have so unspeakably rouse my aversion at church - a look of repellent scorn , so easily assume , and so entirely without the least distortion of a single feature , that , while there , it see like the natural expression of the face , and be the more provoke to I , because I could not think it affect . ' good - morning , , ' say she ; and without another word or glance , she withdraw , with she child , into the garden ; and I return home , angry and dissatisfied - I could scarcely tell you why , and therefore will not attempt it . I only stay to put away my gun and powder - horn , and give some requisite direction to one of the farming - man , and then repair to the vicarage , to solace my spirit and soothey my ruffle temper with the company and conversation of . I find she , as usual , busy with some piece of soft embroidery ( the mania for wool have not yet commence ) , while she sister be seat at the chimney - corner , with the cat on she knee , mende a heap of stocking . ' - ! put they away ! ' be hastily say , just as I enter the room . ' not I , indeed ! ' be the phlegmatic reply ; and my appearance prevent further discussion . ' you be so unfortunate , ! ' observ the younger sister , with one of she arch , sidelong glance . ' 's just go out into the parish , and not likely to be back for a hour ! ' ' never mind ; I can manage to spend a few minute with he daughter , if they will allow I , ' say I , bring a chair to the fire , and seate myself therein , without wait to be ask . ' well , if you will be very good and amuse , we shall not object . ' ' let you permission be unconditional , pray ; for I come not to give pleasure , but to seek it ,' I answer . however , I think it but reasonable to make some slight exertion to render my company agreeable ; and what little effort I make , be apparently pretty successful , for be never in a better humour . we seem , indeed , to be mutually pleased with each other , and manage to maintain between we a cheerful and animate though not very profound conversation . it be little better than a Tete - E-tete , for never open she lip , except occasionally to correct some random assertion or exaggerate expression of she sister 's , and once to ask she to pick up the ball of cotton that have
have roll under the table . I do this myself , however , as in duty bound . ' thank you , , ' say she , as I present it to she . 'I would have pick it up myself ; only I do not want to disturb the cat . ' ' , dear , that will not excuse you in 's eye , ' say ; 'he hate cat , I daresay , as cordially as he do old maid - like all other gentleman . do not you , ? ' 'I believe it be natural for we unamiable sex to dislike the creature , ' reply I ; ' for you lady lavish so many caress upon they . ' ' bless they - little darling ! ' cry she , in a sudden burst of enthusiasm , turn round and overwhelm she sister 's pet with a shower of kiss . ' do not , ! ' say , somewhat grufinitely , as she impatiently push she away . but it be time for I to be go : make what haste I would , I should still be too late for tea ; and my mother be the soul of order and punctuality . my fair friend be evidently unwilling to bid I adieu . I tenderly squeeze she little hand at parting ; and she repay I with one of she softest smile and most bewitch glance . I go home very happy , with a heart brimful of complacency for myself , and overflow with love for . chapter Iii two day after , call at - , contrary to the expectation of , who entertaine a idea that the mysterious occupant of would wholly disregard the common observance of civilized life , - in which opinion she be support by the , who testify that neither they call nor the ' have be return as yet . now , however , the cause of that omission be explain , though not entirely to the satisfaction of rose . have bring she child with she , and on my mother 's expressing surprise that he could walk so far , she reply , - ' it be a long walk for he ; but I must have either take he with I , or relinquish the visit altogether ; for I never leave he alone ; and I think , . , I must beg you to make my excuse to the and , when you see they , as I fear I can not do myself the pleasure of call upon they till my little Arthur be able to accompany I . ' ' but you have a servant , ' say ; ' could you not leave he with she ? ' ' she have she own occupations to attend to ; and besides , she be too old to run after a child , and he be too mercurial to be tie to a elderly woman . ' ' but you leave he to come to church . ' ' yes , once ; but I would not have leave he for any other purpose ; and I think , in future , I must contrive to bring he with I , or stay at home . ' ' be he so mischievous ? ' ask my mother , considerably shocked . ' no , ' reply the lady , sadly smile , as she strok the wavy lock of she son , who be seat on a low stool at she foot ; ' but he be my only treasure , and I be he only friend : so we do not like to be separat . ' ' but , my dear , I call that do , ' say my plain - speak parent . ' you should try to suppress such foolish fondness , as well to save you son from ruin as yourself from ridicule . ' ' ! ! ' ' yes ; it be spoile the child . even at he age , he ought not to be always tie to he mother 's apron - string ; he should learn to be asham of it . ' ' . , I beg you will not say such thing , in he presence , at least . I trust my son will never be asham to love he mother ! ' say , with a serious energy that start the company . my mother attempt to appease she by a explanation ; but she seem to think enough have be say on the subject , and abruptly turn the conversation . ' just as I think , ' say I to myself : ' the lady 's temper be none of the mildest , notwithstand she sweet , pale face and lofty brow , where think and suffer seem equally to have stampe they impress . ' all this time I be seat at a table on the other side of the room , apparently immerse in the perusal of a volume of the 's , which I happen to have be read at the moment of we visitor 's arrival ; and , not choose to be over civil , I have merely bowed as she enter , and continue my occupation as before . in a little while , however , I be sensible that some one be approach I , with a light , but slow and hesitat tread . it be little , irresistibly attract by my dog , that be lie at my foot . on look up I beheld he stand about two yard off , with he clear blue eye wistfully gaze on the dog , transfix to the spot , not by fear of the animal , but by a timid disinclination to approach its master . a little encouragement , however , induce
induce he to come forward . the child , though shy , be not sull . in a minute he be knee on the carpet , with he arm round 's neck , and , in a minute or two more , the little fellow be seat on my knee , survey with eager interest the various specimen of horse , cattle , pig , and model farm portray in the volume before I . I glance at he mother now and then to see how she relish the new - sprung intimacy ; and I see , by the unquiet aspect of she eye , that for some reason or other she be uneasy at the child 's position . ' , ' say she , at length , ' come here . you be troublesome to : he wish to read . ' ' by no means , ; pray let he stay . I be as much amuse as he be , ' plead I . but still , with hand and eye , she silently call he to she side . 'no , mamma , ' say the child ; ' let I look at these picture first ; and then I will come , and tell you all about they . ' ' we be go to have a small party on , the fifth of , ' say my mother ; ' and I hope you will not refuse to make one , . you can bring you little boy with you , you know - I daresay we shall be able to amuse he ; - and then you can make you own apology to the Millwards and Wilsons - they will all be here , I expect . ' ' thank you , I never go to party . ' 'Oh ! but this will be quite a family concern - early hour , and nobody here but ourselves , and just the and , most of whom you already know , and , you landlord , with whom you ought to make acquaintance . ' 'I do know something of he - but you must excuse I this time ; for the evening , now , be dark and damp , and , I fear , be too delicate to risk exposure to they influence with impunity . we must defer the enjoyment of you hospitality till the return of longer day and warmer night . ' Rose , now , at a hint from my mother , produce a decanter of wine , with accompaniment of glass and cake , from the cupboard and the oak sideboard , and the refreshment be duly present to the guest . they both partook of the cake , but obstinately refuse the wine , in spite of they hostess 's hospitable attempt to force it upon they . , especially shrank from the ruby nectar as if in terror and disgust , and be ready to cry when urged to take it . ' never mind , , ' say he mamma ; ' . think it will do you good , as you be tired with you walk ; but she will not oblige you to take it ! - I daresay you will do very well without . he detest the very sight of wine , ' she add , ' and the smell of it almost make he sick . I have be accustom to make he swallow a little wine or weak spirit - and - water , by way of medicine , when he be sick , and , in fact , I have do what I could to make he hate they . ' everybody laugh , except the young widow and she son . ' well , , ' say my mother , wip the tear of merriment from she bright blue eye - ' well , you surprise I ! I really give you credit for have more sense . - the poor child will be the veriest milksop that ever be sop ! only think what a man you will make of he , if you persist in - ' ' I think it a very excellent plan , ' interrupt , with imperturbable gravity . ' by that mean I hope to save he from one degrading vice at least . I wish I could render the incentive to every other equally innoxious in he case . ' ' but by such means , ' say I , ' you will never render he virtuous . - what be it that constitute virtue , ? be it the circumstance of be able and willing to resist temptation ; or that of have no temptation to resist ? - be he a strong man that overcome great obstacle and perform surprising achievement , though by dint of great muscular exertion , and at the risk of some subsequent fatigue , or he that sit in he chair all day , with nothing to do more laborious than stirr the fire , and carry he food to he mouth ? if you would have you son to walk honourably through the world , you must not attempt to clear the stone from he path , but teach he to walk firmly over they - not insist upon lead he by the hand , but let he learn to go alone . ' 'I will lead he by the hand , , till he have strength to go alone ; and I will clear as many stone from he path as I can , and teach he to avoid the rest - or walk firmly over they , as you say ; - for when I have do my utmost , in the way of clearance , there will still be plenty leave to exercise all the agility , steadiness , and circumspection he will ever have
have . - it be all very well to talk about noble resistance , and trial of virtue ; but for fifty - or five hundred man that have yield to temptation , show I one that have have virtue to resist . and why should I take it for grant that my son will be one in a thousand ? - and not rather prepare for the worst , and suppose he will be like he - like the rest of mankind , unless I take care to prevent it ? ' ' you be very complimentary to we all ,' I observ . 'I know nothing about you - I speak of those I do know - and when I see the whole race of mankind ( with a few rare exception ) stumbl and blundere along the path of life , sinke into every pitfall , and break they shins over every impediment that lie in they way , shall I not use all the means in my power to insure for he a smoother and a safer passage ? ' ' yes , but the surest means will be to endeaavor to fortify he against temptation , not to remove it out of he way . ' 'I will do both , . know he will have temptation enough to assail he , both from withing and without , when I have do all I can to render vice as uninviting to he , as it be abominable in its own nature - I myself have have , indeed , but few incentife to what the world call vice , but yet I have experience temptation and trial of another kind , that have require , on many occasion , more watchfulness and firmness to resist than I have hithertoo be able to muster against they . and this , I believe , be what most other would acknowledge who be accustom to reflection , and wishful to strive against they natural corruption . ' ' yes , ' say my mother , but half apprehend she drift ; ' but you would not judge of a boy by yourself - and , my dear , let I warn you in good time against the error - the fatal error , I may call it - of take that boy 's education upon yourself . because you be clever in some thing and well inform , you may fancy yourself equal to the task ; but indeed you be not ; and if you persist in the attempt , believe I you will bitterly repent it when the mischief be done . ' 'I be to send he to school , I suppose , to learn to despise he mother 's authority and affection ! ' say the lady , with rather a bitter smile . 'Oh , no ! - but if you would have a boy to despise he mother , let she keep he at home , and spend she life in pett he up , and slave to indulge he folly and caprice . ' 'I perfectly agree with you , ; but nothing can be further from my principle and practice than such criminal weakness as that . ' ' well , but you will treat he like a girl - you will spoil he spirit , and make a mere of he - you will , indeed , , whatever you may think . but I will get to talk to you about it :- he will tell you the consequence ; - he will set it before you as plain as the day ; - and tell you what you ought to do , and all about it ; - and , I do not doubt , he will be able to convince you in a minute . ' ' no occasion to trouble the vicar , ' say , glance at I - I suppose I be smile at my mother 's unbounded confidence in that worthy gentleman - ' . here think he power of conviction at least equal to 's . if I hear not he , neither should I be convinced though one rise from the dead , he would tell you . well , , you that maintain that a boy should not be shield from evil , but send out to battle against it , alone and unassisted - not teach to avoid the snare of life , but boldly to rush into they , or over they , as he may - to seek danger , rather than shin it , and feed he virtue by temptation , - would you -? ' 'I beg you pardon , - but you get on too fast . I have not yet say that a boy should be teach to rush into the snare of life , - or even wilfully to seek temptation for the sake of exercise he virtue by overcome it ; - I only say that it be better to arm and strengthen you hero , than to disarm and enfeeble the foe ; - and if you be to rear a oak sap in a hothouse , ten it carefully night and day , and shield it from every breath of wind , you could not expect it to become a hardy tree , like that which have grow up on the mountain - side , expose to all the action of the element , and not even shelter from the shock of the tempest . ' ' grant ; - but would you use the same argument with regard to a girl ? ' ' certainly not . ' ' no ; you would have she to be tenderly and delicately nurture , like a hot - house plant - teach to cling to other for direction and support , and guard , as much as possible , from
from the very knowledge of evil . but will you be so good as to inform I why you make this distinction ? be it that you think she have no virtue ? ' ' Assuredly not . ' ' well , but you affirm that virtue be only elicit by temptation ; - and you think that a woman can not be too little expose to temptation , or too little acquaint with vice , or anything connect therewith . it must be either that you think she be essentially so vicious , or so feeble - minded , that she can not withstand temptation , - and though she may be pure and innocent as long as she be keep in ignorance and restraint , yet , be destitute of real virtue , to teach she how to sin be at once to make she a sinner , and the greater she knowledge , the wider she liberty , the deeper will be she depravity , - whereas , in the nobler sex , there be a natural tendency to goodness , guard by a superior fortitude , which , the more it be exercise by trials and dangers , be only the further develop - ' ' forbid that I should think so ! ' I interrupt she at last . ' well , then , it must be that you think they be both weak and pro to err , and the slightest error , the merest shadow of pollution , will ruin the one , while the character of the other will be strengthen and embellish - he education properly finish by a little practical acquaintance with forbidden thing . such experience , to he ( to use a trite simile ) , will be like the storm to the oak , which , though it may scatter the leave , and snap the smaller branch , serve but to rivet the root , and to hare and condense the fibre of the tree . you would have we encourage we son to prove all thing by they own experience , while we daughter must not even profit by the experience of other . now I would have both so to benefit by the experience of other , and the precept of a higher authority , that they should know beforehand to refuse the evil and choose the good , and require no experimental proof to teach they the evil of transgression . I would not send a poor girl into the world , unarm against she foe , and ignorant of the snare that beset she path ; nor would I watch and guard she , till , deprive of self - respect and self - reliance , she lose the power or the will to watch and guard herself ; - and as for my son - if I think he would grow up to be what you call a man of the world - one that have " seen life , " and glory in he experience , even though he should so far profit by it as to sober down , at length , into a useful and respect member of society - I would rather that he die to - morrow ! - rather a thousand time ! ' she earnestly repeat , press she darling to she side and kiss he forehead with intense affection . he have already leave he new companion , and be stand for some time beside he mother 's knee , look up into she face , and listen in silent to she incomprehensible discourse . ' well ! you lady must always have the last word , I suppose , ' say I , observe she rise , and begin to take leave of my mother . ' you may have as many word as you please , - only I can not stay to hear they . ' ' no ; that be the way : you hear just as much of a argument as you please ; and the rest may be speak to the wind . ' ' if you be anxious to say anything more on the subject , ' reply she , as she shook hand with , ' you must bring you sister to see I some fine day , and I will listen , as patiently as you could wish , to whatever you please to say . I would rather be lecture by you than the vicar , because I should have less remorse in tell you , at the end of the discourse , that I preserve my own opinion precisely the same as at the beginning - as would be the case , I be persuade , with regard to either logician . ' ' yes , of course , ' reply I , determi to be as provoke as herself ; ' for when a lady do consent to listen to a argument against she own opinion , she be always predetermined to withstand it - to listen only with she bodily ears , keep the mental organ resolutely close against the strongest reasoning . ' ' good - morning , , ' say my fair antagonist , with a pity smile ; and deign no further rejoinder , she slightly bow , and be about to withdraw ; but she son , with childish impertinence , arrest she by exclaiming , - ' , you have not shake hand with ! ' she laughingly turn round and hold out she hand . I give it a spiteful squeeze , for I be annoyed at the continual injustice she have do I from the very dawn of we acquaintance . without know anything about my real disposition and principle , she be evidently prejudice against I , and seem bent upon show I that she opinion respect I , on every particular ,
, fall far below those I entertaine of myself . I be naturally touchy , or it would not have vex I so much . perhaps , too , I be a little bit spoilead by my mother and sister , and some other lady of my acquaintance ; - and yet I be by no means a fop - of that I be fully convinced , whether you be or not . chapter iv we party , on the 5th of , pass off very well , in spite of 's refusal to grase it with she presence . indeed , it be probable that , have she be there , there would have be less cordiality , freedom , and frolic amongst we than there be without she . my mother , as usual , be cheerful and chatty , full of activity and good - nature , and only faulty in be too anxious to make she guest happy , thereby force several of they to do what they soul abhor in the way of eat or drink , sit opposite the blazing fire , or talk when they would be silent . nevertheless , they bear it very well , be all in they holiday humours . be mighty in important dogma and sententious joke , pompous anecdote and oracular discourse , deal out for the edification of the whole assembly in general , and of the admiring , the polite , the sedate , the quiet , and the matter - of - fact Robert in particular , - as be the most attentive listener . be more brilliant than ever , with she budget of fresh news and old scandal , string together with trivial question and remark , and oft-repeated observation , uttere apparently for the sole purpose of deny a moment 's rest to she inexhaustible organ of speech . she have bring she knitt with she , and it seem as if she tongue have lay a wager with she finger , to outdo they in swift and ceaseless motion . she daughter be , of course , as graceful and elegant , as witty and seductive , as she could possibly manage to be ; for here be all the lady to outshine , and all the gentleman to charm , - and , especially , to capture and subdue . she little art to effect he subjugation be too subtle and impalpable to attract my observation ; but I think there be a certain refin affectation of superiority , and a ungenial self - consciousness about she , that negative all she advantage ; and after she be go , rose interpret to I she various look , word , and action with a mingled acuteness and asperity that make I wonder , equally , at the lady 's artifice and my sister 's penetration , and ask myself if she too have a eye to the squire - but never mind , ; she have not . , 's younger brother , sit in a corner , apparently good - tempered , but silent and shy , desirous to escape observation , but willing enough to listen and observe : and , although somewhat out of he element , he would have be happy enough in he own quiet way , if my mother could only have let he alone ; but in she mistaken kindness , she would keep persecut he with she attention - press upon he all manner of viand , under the notion that he be too bashful to help himself , and oblige he to shout across the room he monosyllabic reply to the numerous question and observation by which she vainly attempt to draw he into conversation . Rose inform I that he never would have favour we with he company but for the importunity of he sister , who be most anxious to show Lawrence that she have at least one brother more gentlemanly and refin than . that worthy individual she have be equally solicitous to keep away ; but he affir that he see no reason why he should not enjoy a crack with and the old lady ( my mother be not old , really ) , and bonny and the parson , as well as the best ; - and he be in the right of it too . so he talk common - place with my mother and rose , and discuss parish affair with the vicar , far matter with I , and politics with we both . be another mute , - not so much torment with cruel kindness as , because she have a certain short , decided way of answering and refuse , and be suppose to be rather sullen than diffident . however that might be , she certainly do not give much pleasure to the company ; - nor do she appear to derive much from it . tell I she have only come because she father insist upon it , have take it into he head that she devote herself too exclusively to she household duty , to the neglect of such relaxation and innocent enjoyment as be proper to she age and sex . she seem to I to be good - humoure enough on the whole . once or twice she be provoke to laughter by the wit or the merriment of some favour individual amongst we ; and then I observe she seek the eye of , who sit over against she . as he study with she father , she have some acquaintance with he , in spite of the retire habits of both , and I suppose there be a kind of fellow - feeling establish between they . my be charme beyond description , coquettish without affectation , and evidently more desirous to engage my attention than that of all the room besides .
. she delight in have I near she , seat or stand by she side , whisper in she ear , or press she hand in the dance , be plainly legible in she glow face and heaive bosom , however bely by saucy word and gesture . but I have better hold my tongue : if I boast of these thing now , I shall have to blush hereafter . to proceed , then , with the various individual of we party ; rose be simple and natural as usual , and full of mirth and vivacity . be impertinent and absurd ; but he impertinence and folly serve to make other laugh , if they do not raise himself in they estimation . and finally ( for I omit myself ) , be gentlemanly and inoffensive to all , and polite to the vicar and the lady , especially he hostess and she daughter , and - misguide man ; he have not the taste to prefer . and I be on tolerably intimate term . essentially of reserve habits , and but seldom quit the secluded place of he birth , where he have live in solitary state since the death of he father , he have neither the opportunity nor the inclination for form many acquaintance ; and , of all he have ever know , I ( judge by the result ) be the companion most agreeable to he taste . I like the man well enough , but he be too cold , and shy , and self - contain , to obtain my cordial sympathy . a spirit of candour and frankness , when wholly unaccompanied with coarseness , he admire in other , but he could not acquire it himself . he excessive reserve upon all he own concern be , indeed , provoke and chilly enough ; but I forgave it , from a conviction that it originate less in pride and want of confidence in he friend , than in a certain morbid feeling of delicacy , and a peculiar diffidence , that he be sensible of , but want energy to overcome . he heart be like a sensitive plant , that open for a moment in the sunshine , but curl up and shrink into itself at the slightest touch of the finger , or the lightest breath of wind . and , upon the whole , we intimacy be rather a mutual predilection than a deep and solid friendship , such as have since arisen between myself and you , , whom , in spite of you occasional crustiness , I can like to nothing so well as a old coat , unimpeachable in texture , but easy and loose - that have conform itself to the shape of the wearer , and which he may use as he please , without be bother with the fear of spoil it ; - whereas be like a new garment , all very neat and trim to look at , but so tight in the elbow , that you would fear to split the seam by the unrestricted motion of you arm , and so smooth and fine in surface that you scruple to expose it to a single drop of rain . after the arrival of the guest , my mother mention , regret she be not there to meet they , and explain to the and the reason she have give for neglecting to return they call , hope they would excuse she , as she be sure she do not mean to be uncivil , and would be glad to see they at any time . - ' but she be a very singular lady , , ' add she ; 'we do not know what to make of she - but I daresay you can tell we something about she , for she be you tenant , you know , - and she say she know you a little . ' all eyes be turn to . I think he look unnecessarily confused at be so appeal to . 'I , ! ' say he ; ' you be mistaken - I do not - that be - I have see she , certainly ; but I be the last person you should apply to for information respect . ' he then immediately turn to , and ask she to favour the company with a song , or a tune on the piano . ' no , ' say she , ' you must ask : she outshine we all in singing , and music too . ' demur . ' she will se readily enough , ' say , ' if you will undertake to stand by she , , and turn over the leaf for she . ' 'I shall be most happy to do so , ; will you allow I ? ' she bridle she long neck and smile , and suffer he to lead she to the instrument , where she play and sang , in she very best style , one piece after another ; while he stand patiently by , lean one hand on the back of she chair , and turn over the leaf of she book with the other . perhaps he be as much charme with she performance as she be . it be all very fine in its way ; but I can not say that it move I very deeply . there be plenty of skill and execution , but precious little feeling . but we have not do with yet . 'I do not take wine , , ' say , upon the introduction of that beverage ; 'I will take a little of you home - brew ale . I always prefer you home - brew to anything else . ' Flatter at this compliment , my mother ring the bell ,
, and a china jug of we best ale be presently bring and set before the worthy gentleman who so well know how to appreciate its excellence . ' now this be the thing ! ' cry he , pour out a glass of the same in a long stream , skilfully direct from the jug to the tumbler , so as to produce much foam without spill a drop ; and , have survey it for a moment opposite the candle , he take a deep dratch , and then smack he lip , draw a long breath , and refill he glass , my mother look on with the greatest satisfaction . ' there be nothing like this , ! ' say he . 'I always maintain that there be nothing to compare with you home - brew ale . ' 'I be sure I be glad you like it , sir . I always look after the brewing myself , as well as the cheese and the butter - I like to have thing well do , while we be about it . ' ' quite right , ! ' ' but then , , you do not think it wrong to take a little wine now and then - or a little spirit either ! ' say my mother , as she hand a smoking tumbler of gin - and - water to , who affir that wine sit heavy on she stomach , and whose son be at that moment help himself to a pretty stiff glass of the same . ' by no means ! ' reply the oracle , with a - like nod ; ' these thing be all blessing and mercy , if we only know how to make use of they . ' ' but do not think so . you shall just hear now what she tell we the other day - I tell she I would tell you . ' and my mother favour the company with a particular account of that lady 's mistaken idea and conduct regard the matter in hand , conclude with , ' now , do not you think it be wrong ? ' ' ! ' repeat the vicar , with more than common solemnity - ' criminal , I should say - criminal ! not only be it make a fool of the boy , but it be despise the gift of Providence , and teach he to trample they under he foot . ' he then enter more fully into the question , and explain at large the folly and impiety of such a proceeding . my mother hear he with profoundest reverence ; and even vouchsaf to rest she tongue for a moment , and listen in silence , while she complacently sip she gin - and - water . sit with he elbow on the table , carelessly play with he half - empty wine - glass , and covertly smile to himself . ' but do not you think , , ' suggest he , when at length that pause in he discourse , ' that when a child may be naturally prone to intemperance - by the fault of its parent or ancestor , for instance - some precaution be advisable ? ' ( now it be generally believe that 's father have shorten he day by intemperance . ) ' some precaution , it may be ; but temperance , sir , be one thing , and abstinence another . ' ' but I have hear that , with some person , temperance - that be , moderation - be almost impossible ; and if abstinence be a evil ( which some have doubt ) , no one will deny that excess be a greater . some parent have entirely prohibit they child from tasting intoxicat liquor ; but a parent 's authority can not last for ever ; child be naturally prone to hanker after forbidden thing ; and a child , in such a case , would be likely to have a strong curiosity to taste , and try the effect of what have be so laud and enjoy by other , so strictly forbidden to himself - which curiosity would generally be gratify on the first convenient opportunity ; and the restraint once broken , serious consequence might ensue . I do not pretend to be a judge of such matter , but it seem to I , that this plan of 's , as you describe it , , extraordinary as it may be , be not without its advantage ; for here you see the child be deliver at once from temptation ; he have no secret curiosity , no hankering desire ; he be as well acquaint with the tempting liquor as he ever wish to be ; and be thoroughly disgust with they , without have suffer from they effect . ' ' and be that right , sir ? have I not prove to you how wrong it be - how contrary to Scripture and to reason , to teach a child to look with contempt and disgust upon the blessing of Providence , instead of to use they aright ? ' ' you may consider laudanum a blessing of Providence , sir , ' reply , smile ; ' and yet , you will allow that most of we have better abstain from it , even in moderation ; but , ' add he , ' I would not desire you to follow out my simile too closely - in witness whereor I finish my glass . ' ' and take another , I hope , , ' say my mother , push the bottle towards he . he politely decline , and push he chair a little away from the table , lean back towards I - I be seat a trifle behind , on the
the sofa beside - and carelessly ask I if I know . 'I have meet she once or twice ,' I reply . ' what do you think of she ? ' 'I can not say that I like she much . she be handsome - or rather I should say distinguished and interesting - in she appearance , but by no means amiable - a woman liable to take strong prejudice , I should fancy , and stick to they through thick and thing , twiste everything into conformity with she own preconceive opinion - too hard , too sharp , too bitter for my taste . ' he make no reply , but look down and bit he lip , and shortly after rise and saunter up to , as much repell by I , I fancy , as attract by she . I scarcely notice it at the time , but afterwards I be lead to recall this and other trifling fact , of a similar nature , to my remembrance , when - but I must not anticipate . we wound up the evening with dancing - we worthy pastor think it no scandal to be present on the occasion , though one of the village musician be engage to direct we evolutions with he violin . but obstinately refuse to join we ; and so do , though my mother earnestly entreate he to do so , and even offer to be he partner . we manage very well without they , however . with a single set of quadrille , and several country dance , we carry it on to a pretty late hour ; and at length , have call upon we musician to strike up a waltz , I be just about to whirl round in that delightful dance , accompany by and , and and , when interpose with :- ' no , no ; I do not allow that ! come , it be time to be go now . ' 'Oh , no , papa ! ' plead . ' high time , my girl - high time ! Moderation in all thing , remember ! that be the plan - " let you moderation be know unto all man ! " ' but in revenge I follow into the dimly - lighted passage , where , under pretence of help she on with she shawl , I fear I must plead guilty to snatch a kiss behind she father 's back , while he be envelope he throat and ching in the fold of a mighty comforter . but alas ! in turn round , there be my mother close beside I . the consequence be , that no sooner be the guest depart , than I be doom to a very serious remonstrance , which unpleasantly check the galloping course of my spirit , and make a disagreeable close to the evening . ' my dear , ' say she , 'I wish you would not do so ! you know how deeply I have you advantage at heart , how I love you and prize you above everything else in the world , and how much I long to see you well settle in life - and how bitterly it would grieve I to see you marry to that girl - or any other in the neighbourhood . what you see in she I do not know . it be not only the want of money that I think about - nothing of the kind - but there be neither beauty , nor cleverness , nor goodness , nor anything else that be desirable . if you know you own value , as I do , you would not dream of it . do wait awhile and see ! if you bind yourself to she , you will repent it all you lifetime when you look round and see how many better there be . take my word for it , you will . ' ' well , mother , do be quiet ! - I hate to be lecture ! - I be not go to marry yet , I tell you ; but - dear I ! may not I enjoy myself at all ? ' ' yes , my dear boy , but not in that way . indeed , you should not do such thing . you would be wrong the girl , if she be what she ought to be ; but I assure you she be as artful a little hussy as anybody need wish to see ; and you will get entangle in she snare before you know where you be . and if you marry she , , you will break my heart - so there be a end of it . ' ' well , do not cry about it , mother , ' say I , for the tear be gush from she eye ; ' there , let that kiss efface the one I give ; do not abuse she any more , and set you mind at rest ; for I will promise never - that be , I will promise to think twice before I take any important step you seriously disapprove of . ' so say , I light my candle , and go to bed , considerably quench in spirit . it be about the close of the month , that , yield at length to the urgent importunity of , I accompany she in a visit to . to we surprise , we be usher into a room where the first object that meet the eye be a painter 's easel , with a table beside it cover with roll of canva , bottle of oil and varnish , palette , brush , paint , &c . lean against the wall be several sketch in various stage of progression , and
and a few finish painting - mostly of landscape and figure . ' I must make you welcome to my studio , ' say ; ' there be no fire in the sitting - room to - day , and it be rather too cold to show you into a place with a empty grate . ' and disengage a couple of chair from the artistical lumber that usur they , she bid we be seat , and resume she place beside the easel - not face it exactly , but now and then glance at the picture upon it while she converse , and give it a occasional touch with she brush , as if she find it impossible to wean she attention entirely from she occupation to fix it upon she guest . it be a view of , as see at early morning from the field below , rise in dark relief against a sky of clear silvery blue , with a few red streak on the horizon , faithfully draw and colour , and very elegantly and artistically handle . 'I see you heart be in you work , , ' observe I : ' I must beg you to go on with it ; for if you suffer we presence to interrupt you , we shall be constrain to regard ourselves as unwelcome intruder . ' 'Oh , no ! ' reply she , throw she brush on to the table , as if start into politeness . 'I be not so beset with visitor but that I can readily spare a few minute to the few that do favour I with they company . ' ' you have almost complete you painting , ' say I , approach to observe it more closely , and survey it with a greater degree of admiration and delight than I care to express . 'a few more touch in the foreground will finish it , I should think . but why have you call it , , instead of , - shire ? ' I ask , allud to the name she have trace in small character at the bottom of the canva . but immediately I be sensible of have commit a act of impertinence in so do ; for she colour and hesitat ; but after a moment 's pause , with a kind of desperate frankness , she reply :- ' because I have friend - acquaintance at least - in the world , from whom I desire my present abode to be conceal ; and as they might see the picture , and might possibly recognise the style in spite of the false initial I have put in the corner , I take the precaution to give a false name to the place also , in order to put they on a wrong scent , if they should attempt to trace I out by it . ' ' then you do not intend to keep the picture ? ' say I , anxious to say anything to change the subject . ' no ; I can not afford to paint for my own amusement . ' ' send all she picture to , ' say ; ' and somebody sell they for she there , and send we the money . ' in look round upon the other piece , I remark a pretty sketch of - hope from the top of the hill ; another view of the old hall bask in the sunny haze of a quiet summer afternoon ; and a simple but strike little picture of a child brooding , with look of silent but deep and sorrowful regret , over a handful of withered flowers , with glimpse of dark low hill and autumnal field behind it , and a dull becloude sky above . ' you see there be a sad dearth of subject , ' observe the fair artist . 'I take the old hall once on a moonlight night , and I suppose I must take it again on a snowy winter 's day , and then again on a dark cloudy evening ; for I really have nothing else to paint . I have be tell that you have a fine view of the sea somewhere in the neighbourhood . be it true ? - and be it within walking distance ? ' ' yes , if you do not object to walk four mile - or nearly so - little short of eight mile , there and back - and over a somewhat rough , fatigue road . ' ' in what direction do it lie ? ' I describe the situation as well as I could , and be enter upon a explanation of the various road , lane , and field to be traverse in order to reach it , the goings straight on , and turnings to the right and the left , when she check I with , - 'Oh , stop ! do not tell I now : I shall forget every word of you direction before I require they . I shall not think about go till next spring ; and then , perhaps , I may trouble you . at present we have the winter before we , and - ' she suddenly pause , with a suppress exclamation , start up from she seat , and say , ' excuse I one moment , ' hurrie from the room , and shut the door behind she . curious to see what have start she so , I look towards the window - for she eye have be carelessly fix upon it the moment before - and just beheld the skirt of a man 's coat vanish behind a large holly - bush that stand between the window and the porch . ' it be 's friend , ' say . and I look at each other
other . 'I do not know what to make of she at all , ' whisper . the child look at she in grave surprise . she straightway begin to talk to he on indifferent matter , while I amuse myself with look at the picture . there be one in a obscure corner that I have not before observe . it be a little child , seat on the grass with its lap full of flower . the tiny feature and large blue eye , smile through a shock of light brown curl , shake over the forehead as it bend above its treasure , bear sufficient resemblance to those of the young gentleman before I to proclaim it a portrait of in he early infancy . in take this up to bring it to the light , I discover another behind it , with it be face to the wall . I venture to take that up too . it be the portrait of a gentleman in the full prime of youthful manhood - handsome enough , and not badly execute ; but if do by the same hand as the other , it be evidently some year before ; for there be far more careful minuteness of detail , and less of that freshness of colouring and freedom of handling that delighte and surprise I in they . nevertheless , I survey it with considerable interest . there be a certain individuality in the feature and expression that stamp it , at once , a successful likeness . the bright blue eye regard the spectator with a kind of lurking drollery - you almost expect to see they wink ; the lip - a little too voluptuously full - seem ready to break into a smile ; the warmly - tinted cheek be embellish with a luxuriant growth of reddish whisker ; while the bright chestnut hair , cluster in abundant , wavy curl , trespass too much upon the forehead , and seem to intimate that the owner thereof be prouder of he beauty than he intellect - as , perhaps , he have reason to be ; and yet he look no fool . I have not have the portrait in my hand two minute before the fair artist return . ' only some one come about the picture , ' say she , in apology for she abrupt departure : 'I tell he to wait . ' 'I fear it will be consider a act of impertinence , ' say 'to presume to look at a picture that the artist have turn to the wall ; but may I ask -' ' it be a act of very great impertinence , sir ; and therefore I beg you will ask nothing about it , for you curiosity will not be gratify , ' reply she , attempt to cover the tartness of she rebuke with a smile ; but I could see , by she flushed cheek and kindling eye , that she be seriously annoyed . 'I be only go to ask if you have paint it yourself , ' say I , sulkily resign the picture into she hand ; for without a grain of ceremony she take it from I ; and quickly restore it to the dark corner , with it be face to the wall , place the other against it as before , and then turn to I and laugh . but I be in no humour for jesting . I carelessly turn to the window , and stand look out upon the desolate garden , leave she to talk to rise for a minute or two ; and then , tell my sister it be time to go , shook hand with the little gentleman , coolly bow to the lady , and move towards the door . but , have bid adieu to , present she hand to I , say , with a soft voice , and by no means a disagreeable smile , - ' let not the sun go down upon you wrath , . I be sorry I offend you by my abruptness . ' when a lady condescends to apologise , there be no keeping one be anger , of course ; so we part good friend for once ; and this time I squeeze she hand with a cordial , not a spiteful pressure . during the next four month I do not enter 's house , nor she mine ; but still the lady continue to talk about she , and still we acquaintance continue , though slowly , to advance . as for they talk , I pay but little attention to that ( when it related to the fair hermit , I mean ) , and the only information I derive from it be , that one fine frosty day she have venture to take she little boy as far as the vicarage , and that , unfortunately , nobody be at home but ; nevertheless , she have sit a long time , and , by all account , they have find a good deal to say to each other , and part with a mutual desire to meet again . but like child , and fond mamma like those who can duly appreciate they treasure . but sometimes I see she myself , not only when she come to church , but when she be out on the hill with she son , whether take a long , purpose - like walk , or - on special fine day - leisurely rambl over the moor or the bleak pasture - lands , surround the old hall , herself with a book in she hand , she son gamboll about she ; and , on any of these occasion , when I catch sight of she in my solitary walk or ride , or while follow my
my agricultural pursuit , I generally contrive to meet or overtake she , for I rather like to see , and to talk to she , and I decidedly like to talk to she little companion , whom , when once the ice of he shyness be fairly broken , I find to be a very amiable , intelligent , and entertaine little fellow ; and we soon become excellent friend - how much to the gratification of he mamma I can not undertake to say . I suspect at first that she be desirous of throw cold water on this grow intimacy - to quench , as it be , the kind flame of we friendship - but discovering , at length , in spite of she prejudice against I , that I be perfectly harmless , and even well - intentione , and that , between myself and my dog , she son derive a great deal of pleasure from the acquaintance that he would not otherwise have know , she cease to object , and even welcome my come with a smile . as for , he would shout he welcome from afar , and run to meet I fifty yard from he mother 's side . if I happen to be on horseback he be sure to get a canter or a gallop ; or , if there be one of the dratch horse within a available distance , he be treat to a steady ride upon that , which serve he turn almost as well ; but he mother would always follow and trudge beside he - not so much , I believe , to ensure he safe conduct , as to see that I instil no objectionable notion into he infant mind , for she be ever on the watch , and never would allow he to be take out of she sight . what please she best of all be to see he rom and rac with , while I walk by she side - not , I fear , for love of my company ( though I sometimes delude myself with that idea ) , so much as for the delight she take in see she son thus happily engage in the enjoyment of those active sport so invigorat to he tender frame , yet so seldom exercise for want of playmate suite to he year : and , perhaps , she pleasure be sweeten not a little by the fact of my be with she instead of with he , and therefore incapable of do he any injury directly or indirectly , designedly or otherwise , small thanks to she for that same . but sometimes , I believe , she really have some little gratification in conversing with I ; and one bright morning , during twenty minute ' stroll along the moor , she lay aside she usual asperity and reserve , and fairly enter into conversation with I , discourse with so much eloquence and depth of think and feel on a subject happily coincid with my own idea , and look so beautiful withal , that I go home enchant ; and on the way ( morally ) start to find myself think that , after all , it would , perhaps , be better to spend one 's day with such a woman than with ; and then I ( figuratively ) blush for my inconstancy . on enter the parlour I find there with , and no one else . the surprise be not altogether so agreeable as it ought to have be . we chat together a long time , but I find she rather frivolous , and even a little insipid , compare with the more mature and earnest . Alas , for human constancy ! ' however , ' think I , ' I ought not to marry , since my mother so strongly object to it , and I ought not to delude the girl with the idea that I intend to do so . now , if this mood continue , I shall have less difficulty in emancipat my affections from she soft yet unrelenting sway ; and , though might be equally objectionable , I may be permit , like the doctor , to cure a greater evil by a less , for I shall not fall seriously in love with the young widow , I think , nor she with I - that be certain - but if i find a little pleasure in she society I may surely be allow to seek it ; and if the star of she divinity be bright enough to dim the lustre of 's , so much the better , but I scarcely can think it . ' and thereafter I seldom suffer a fine day to pass without pay a visit to about the time my new acquaintance usually leave she hermitage ; but so frequently be I baulk in my expectation of another interview , so changeable be she in she time of come forth and in she place of resort , so transient be the occasional glimpse I be able to obtain , that I feel half inclined to think she take as much pain to avoid my company as I to seek hers ; but this be too disagreeable a supposition to be entertain a moment after it could conveniently be dismiss . one calm , clear afternoon , however , in , as I be superintend the rolling of the meadow - land , and the repairing of a hedge in the valley , I see down by the brook , with a sketch - book in she hand , absorb in the exercise of she favourite art , while be put on the time with constructing dam and breakwater in the shallow , stony stream . I be rather in want of amusement , and so
so rare a opportunity be not to be neglect ; so , leave both meadow and hedge , I quickly repair to the spot , but not before , who , immediately upon perceive he young friend , scour at full gallop the intervene space , and pounce upon he with a impetuous mirth that precipitate the child almost into the middle of the beck ; but , happily , the stone preserve he from any serious wetting , while they smoothness prevent he be too much hurt to laugh at the untoward event . be study the distinctive character of the different variety of tree in they winter nakedness , and copy , with a spirited , though delicate touch , they various ramification . she do not talk much , but I stand and watch the progress of she pencil : it be a pleasure to behold it so dexterously guide by those fair and graceful finger . but ere long they dexterity become impaired , they begin to hesitate , to tremble slightly , and make false stroke , and then suddenly come to a pause , while they owner laughingly raise she face to mine , and tell I that she sketch do not profit by my superintendence . ' then , ' say I , 'I will talk to till you have do . ' 'I should like to have a ride , , if mamma will let I , ' say the child . ' what on , my boy ? ' 'I think there be a horse in that field , ' reply he , point to where the strong black mare be pull the roller . ' no , no , ; it be too far , ' object he mother . but I promise to bring he safe back after a turn or two up and down the meadow ; and when she look at he eager face she smile and let he go . it be the first time she have even allow I to take he so much as half a field 's length from she side . Enthron upon he monstrous steed , and solemnly proceed up and down the wide , steep field , he look the very incarnation of quiet , gleeful satisfaction and delight . the rolling , however , be soon complete ; but when I dismount the gallant horseman , and restore he to he mother , she see rather displease at my keep he so long . she have shut up she sketch - book , and be , probably , for some minute impatiently wait he return . it be now high time to go home , she say , and would have bid I good - evening , but I be not go to leave she yet : I accompany she half - way up the hill . she become more sociable , and I be begin to be very happy ; but , on come within sight of the grim old hall , she stand still , and turn towards I while she speak , as if expect I should go no further , that the conversation would end here , and I should now take leave and depart - as , indeed , it be time to do , for ' the clear , cold eve ' be fast ' declining , ' the sun have set , and the gibbous moon be visibly brighten in the pale grey sky ; but a feeling almost of compassion rivet I to the spot . it seem hard to leave she to such a lonely , comfortless home . I look up at it . and grim it frown ; before we . a faint , red light be gleam from the lower window of one wing , but all the other window be in darkness , and many exhibit they black , cavernous gulf , entirely destitute of glazing or framework . ' do you not find it a desolate place to live in ? ' say I , after a moment of silent contemplation . 'I do , sometimes , ' reply she . 'On winter evening , when be in bed , and I be sit there alone , hear the bleak wind moan round I and how through the ruinous old chamber , no book or occupations can represss the dismal thought and apprehension that come crowd in - but it be folly to give way to such weakness , I know . if be satisfied with such a life , why should not I ? - indeed , I can not be too thankful for such a asylum , while it be leave I . ' the closing sentence be uttere in a under - tone , as if speak rather to herself than to I . she then bid I good - evening and withdrew . I have not proceed many step on my way homewards when I perceive , on he pretty grey pony , come up the rugged lane that cross over the hill - top . I go a little out of my way to speak to he ; for we have not meet for some time . ' be that . you be speak to just now ? ' say he , after the first few word of greeting have pass between we . ' yes . ' ' Humph ! I think so . ' he look contemplatively at he horse 's mane , as if he have some serious cause of dissatisfaction with it , or something else . ' well ! what then ? ' 'Oh , nothing ! ' reply he . ' only I think you dislike she ,' he quietly add , curl he classic lip with a slightly sarcastic smile . ' suppose I do ; may not a man change he mind on
on further acquaintance ? ' ' yes , of course , ' return he , nicly reduce a entanglement in the pony 's redundant hoary mane . then suddenly turn to I , and fix he shy , hazel eye upon I with a steady penetrating gaze , he add , ' then you have change you mind ? ' 'I can not say that I have exactly . no ; I think I hold the same opinion respect she as before - but slightly ameliorate . ' 'Oh ! ' he look round for something else to talk about ; and glance up at the moon , make some remark upon the beauty of the evening , which I do not answer , as be irrelevant to the subject . ' Lawrence , ' say I , calmly look he in the face , ' be you in love with ? ' instead of he be deeply offen at this , as I more than half expect he would , the first start of surprise , at the audacious question , be follow by a tittering laugh , as if he be highly amused at the idea . 'I in love with she ! ' repeat he . ' what make you dream of such a thing ? ' ' from the interest you take in the progress of my acquaintance with the lady , and the change of my opinion concern she , I think you might be jealous . ' he laugh again . ' ! no . but I think you be go to marry . ' ' you think wrong , then ; I be not go to marry either one or the other - that I know of - ' ' then I think you would better let they alone . ' ' be you go to marry ? ' he colou , and play with the mane again , but answer - ' no , I think not . ' ' then you have better let she alone . ' ' she will not let I alone ,' he might have say ; but he only look silly and say nothing for the space of half a minute , and then make another attempt to turn the conversation ; and this time I let it pass ; for he have borne enough : another word on the subject would have be like the last atom that break the camel 's . back . I be too late for tea ; but my mother have kindly keep the teapot and muffin warm upon the hob , and , though she scold I a little , readily admit my excuse ; and when I complain of the flavour of the overdrawn tea , she pour the remainder into the slop - basin , and bay rose put some fresh into the pot , and reboil the kettle , which office be perform with great commotion , and certain remarkable comment . ' well ! - if it have be I now , I should have have no tea at all - if it have be Fergus , even , he would have to put up with such as there be , and be tell to be thankful , for it be far too good for he ; but you - we can not do too much for you . it be always so - if there be anything particularly nice at table , mamma wink and nod at I to abstain from it , and if I do not attend to that , she whisper , " do not eat so much of that , ; will like it for he supper . " - I be nothing at all . in the parlour , it be " come , rose , put away you thing , and let 's have the room nice and tidy against they come in ; and keep up a good fire ; like a cheerful fire . " in the kitchen - " make that pie a large one , rose ; I daresay the boy will be hungry ; and do not put so much pepper in , they will not like it , I be sure " - or , " rise , do not put so many spice in the pudding , like it plain , " - or , " mind you put plenty of currant in the cake , like plenty . " if I say , " well , mamma , I do not , " I be tell I ought not to think off myself . " you know , , in all household matter , we have only two thing to consider , first , what be proper to be do ; and , secondly , what be most agreeable to the gentleman of the house - anything will do for the ladie . " ' ' and very good doctrine too , ' say my mother . ' think so , I be sure . ' ' very convenient doctrine , for we , at all event , ' say I ; ' but if you would really study my pleasure , mother , you must consider you own comfort and convenience a little more than you do - as for , I have no doubt she will take care of herself ; and whenever she do make a sacrifice or perform a remarkable act of devotedness , she will take good care to let I know the extent of it . but for you I might sink into the grossest condition of self - indulgence and carelessness about the wants of other , from the mere habit of be constantly care for myself , and have all my want anticipate or immediately supply , while leave in total ignorance of what be do for I , - if rose do
do not enlighten I now and then ; and I should receive all you kindness as a matter of course , and never know how much I owe you . ' 'Ah ! and you never will know , , till you be marry . then , when you have get some trifling , self - conceit girl like , careless of everything but she own immediate pleasure and advantage , or some misguided , obstinate woman , like , ignorant of she principal duty , and clever only in what concern she least to know - then you will find the difference . ' ' it will do I good , mother ; I be not send into the world merely to exercise the good capacitie and good feeling of other - be I ? - but to exert my own towards they ; and when I marry , I shall expect to find more pleasure in make my wife happy and comfortable , than in be make so by she : I would rather give than receive . ' 'Oh ! that be all nonsense , my dear . it be mere boy 's talk that ! you will soon tire of petting and humour you wife , be she ever so charming , and then come the trial . ' ' well , then , we must bear one another 's burden . ' ' then you must fall each into you proper place . you will do you business , and she , if she be worthy of you , will do hers ; but it be you business to please yourself , and hers to please you . I be sure you poor , dear father be as good a husband as ever liv , and after the first six month or so were over , I should as soon have expect he to fly , as to put himself out of he way to pleasure I . he always say I be a good wife , and do my duty ; and he always do he - bless he ! - he be steady and punctual , seldom find fault without a reason , always do justice to my good dinner , and hardly ever spoil my cookery by delay - and that be as much as any woman can expect of any man . ' be it so , ? be that the extent of you domestic virtue ; and do you happy wife exact no more ? not many day after this , on a mild sunny morning - rather soave under foot ; for the last fall of snow be only just waste away , leave yet a thin ridge , here and there , linger on the fresh green grass beneath the hedge ; but beside they already , the young primrose be pee from among they moist , dark foliage , and the lark above be singe of summer , and hope , and love , and every heavenly thing - I be out on the hill - side , enjoy these delight , and look after the well - being of my young lamb and they mother , when , on glancing round I , I beheld three person ascending from the vale below . they be , , and Rose ; so I cross the field to meet they ; and , be tell they be go to , I declare myself willing to go with they , and offer my arm to , who readily accept it in lieu of my brother 's , tell the latter he might go back , for I would accompany the lady . 'I beg you pardon ! ' exclaim he . ' it be the lady that be accompany I , not I they . you have all have a peep at this wonderful stranger but I , and I could endure my wretched ignorance no longer - come what would , I must be satisfied ; so I beg rise to go with I to the hall , and introduce I to she at once . she swore she would not , unless would go too ; so I run to the vicarage and fetch she ; and we have come hook all the way , as fond as a pair of lover - and now you have take she from I ; and you want to deprive I of my walk and my visit besides . go back to you field and you cattle , you lubberly fellow ; you be not fit to associate with lady and gentleman like we , that have nothing to do but to run snook about to we neighbour 's house , pee into they private corner , and scent out they secret , and pick hole in they coat , when we do not find they ready make to we hand - you do not understand such refin source of enjoyment . ' ' can not you both go ? ' suggest , disregard the latter half of the speech . ' yes , both , to be sure ! ' cry ; ' the more the merrier - and I be sure we shall want all the cheerfulness we can carry with we to that great , dark , gloomy room , with its narrow latticed window , and its dismal old furniture - unless she show we into she studio again . ' so we go all in a body ; and the meagre old maid - servant , that open the door , usher we into a apartment such as rose have describe to I as the scene of she first introduction to , a tolerably spacious and lofy room , but obscurely light by the old - fashioned window , the ceiling , panel , and chimney - piece of grim black oak - the latter elaborately
elaborately but not very tastefully carve , - with table and chair to match , a old bookcase on one side of the fire - place , stock with a motley assemblage of book , and a elderly cabinet piano on the other . the lady be seat in a stiff , high - back arm -chair , with a small round table , contain a desk and a work - basket on one side of she , and she little boy on the other , who stand lean he elbow on she knee , and read to she , with wonderful fluency , from a small volume that lay in she lap ; while she rest she hand on he shoulder , and abstractedly play with the long , wavy curl that fall on he ivory neck . they struck I as form a pleasing contrast to all the surround object ; but of course they position be immediately change on we entrance . I could only observe the picture during the few brief seconds that hold the door for we admittance . I do not think be particularly delighted to see we : there be something indescribably chilly in she quiet , calm civility ; but I do not talk much to she . seat myself near the window , a little back from the circle , I call to I , and he and I and amuse ourselves very pleasantly together , while the two young lady bait he mother with small talk , and sit opposite with he leg cross and he hand in he breech - pocket , lean back in he chair , and star now up at the ceiling , now straight forward at he hostess ( in a manner that make I strongly inclin to kick he out of the room ) , now whistl sotto voce to himself a snatch of a favourite air , now interrupt the conversation , or fill up a pause ( as the case might be ) with some most impertinent question or remark . at one time it be , - ' it , amaze I , . , how you could choose such a dilapidated , rickety old place as this to live in . if you could not afford to occupy the whole house , and have it mende up , why could not you take a neat little cottage ? ' ' perhaps I be too proud , , ' reply she , smile ; ' perhaps I take a particular fancy for this romantic , old - fashioned place - but , indeed , it have many advantage over a cottage - in the first place , you see , the room be larger and more airy ; in the second place , the unoccupied apartment , which I do not pay for , may serve as lumber - room , if I have anything to put in they ; and they be very useful for my little boy to run about in on rainy day when he can not go out ; and then there be the garden for he to play in , and for I to work in . you see I have effect some little improvement already , ' continue she , turn to the window . ' there be a bed of young vegetables in that corner , and here be some snowdrop and primrose already in bloom - and there , too , be a yellow crocus just open in the sunshine . ' ' but then how can you bear such a situation - you nearest neighbour two mile distant , and nobody look in or pass by ? Rose would go stark mad in such a place . she can not put on life unless she see half a dozen fresh gowns and bonnet a day - not to speak of the face within ; but you might sit watch at these window all day long , and never see so much as a old woman carry she egg to market . ' 'I be not sure the loneliness of the place be not one of its chief recommendation . I take no pleasure in watch people pass the window ; and I like to be quiet . ' 'Oh ! as good as to say you wish we would all of we mind we own business , and let you alone . ' ' no , I dislike a extensive acquaintance ; but if I have a few friend , of course I be glad to see they occasionally . no one can be happy in eternal solitude . therefore , , if you choose to enter my house as a friend , I will make you welcome ; if not , I must confess , I would rather you keep away . ' she then turn and address some observation to or . ' and , , ' say he again , five minute after , 'we be dispute , as we come along , a question that you can readily decide for we , as it mainly regard yourself - and , indeed , we often hold discussion about you ; for some of we have nothing better to do than to talk about we neighbour ' concern , and we , the indigenous plant of the soil , have know each other so long , and talk each other over so often , that we be quite sick of that game ; so that a stranger come amongst we make a invaluable addition to we exhausted source of amusement . well , the question , or question , you be request to solve - ' ' hold you tongue , Fergus ! ' cry Rose , in a fever of apprehension and wrath . 'I will not , I tell you . the question you be request to solve be
be these :- first , concern you birth , extraction , and previous residence . some will have it that you be a foreigner , and some a Englishwoman ; some a native of the north country , and some of the south ; some say - ' ' well , , I will tell you . I be a - and I do not see why any one should doubt it - and I be bear in the country , neither in the extreme north nor south of we happy isle ; and in the country I have chiefly pass my life , and now I hope you be satisfied ; for I be not dispose to answer any more question at present . ' ' except this - ' ' no , not one more ! ' laugh she , and , instantly quit she seat , she seek refuge at the window by which I be seat , and , in very desperation , to escape my brother 's persecution , endeavoure to draw I into conversation . ' , ' say she , she rapid utterance and heighten colour too plainly evince she disquietude , ' have you forget the fine sea-view we be speak of some time ago ? I think I must trouble you , now , to tell I the nearest way to it ; for if this beautiful weather continue , I shall , perhaps , be able to walk there , and take my sketch ; I have exhaust every other subject for painting ; and I long to see it . ' I be about to comply with she request , but rose would not suffer I to proceed . 'Oh , do not tell she , ! ' cry she ; ' she shall go with we . it be - you be think about , I suppose , ? it be a very long walk , too far for you , and out of the question for . but we be think about make a picnic to see it some fine day ; and , if you will wait till the settled fine weather come , I be sure we shall all be delighted to have you amongst we . ' poor look dismayed , and attempt to make excuse , but , either compassionat she lonely life , or anxious to cultivate she acquaintance , be determined to have she ; and every objection be overruled . she be tell it would only be a small party , and all friend , and that the best view of all be from - , full five mile distant . ' just a nice walk for the gentleman , ' continue ; ' but the lady will drive and walk by turn ; for we shall have we pony - carriage , which will be plenty large enough to contain little Arthur and three lady , together with you sketching apparatus , and we provision . ' so the proposal be finally acced to ; and , after some further discussion respect the time and manner of the project excursion , we rise , and take we leave . but this be only : a cold , wet , and two week of pass over before we could venture forth on we expedition with the reasonable hope of obtaining that pleasure we seek in pleasant prospect , cheerful society , fresh air , good cheer and exercise , without the alloy of bad roads , cold wind , or threaten cloud . then , on a glorious morning , we gather we force and set forth . the company consist of and , and , and , and , , and . have be invite to join we , but , for some reason best know to himself , have refuse to give we he company . I have solicit the favour myself . when I do so , he hesitate , and ask who be go . upon my naming among the rest , he seem half inclin to go , but when I mention , think it might be a further inducement , it appear to have a contrary effect , and he decline it altogether , and , to confess the truth , the decision be not displease to I , though I could scarcely tell you why . it be about midday when we reach the place of we destination . walk all the way to the cliff ; and little walk the greater part of it too ; for he be now much more hardy and active than when he first enter the neighbourhood , and he do not like be in the carriage with strangers , while all he four friend , mamma , and , and , and , be on foot , journey far behind , or pass through distant field and lane . I have a very pleasant recollection of that walk , along the hard , white , sunny road , shade here and there with bright green tree , and adorn with flowery bank and blossom hedge of delicious fragrance ; or through pleasant field and lane , all glorious in the sweet flower and brilliant verdure of delightful . it be true , be not beside I ; but she be with she friend in the pony -carriage , as happy , I trust , as I be ; and even when we pedestrian , have forsake the highway for a short cut across the field , beheld the little carriage far away , disappear amid the green , embower tree , I do not hate those tree for snatch the dear little bonnet and shawl from my sight , nor do I feel that all those intervene object lay between my happiness and I ; for , to confess the truth , I be too happy in
in the company of to regret the absence of , . the former , it be true , be most provokingly unsociable at first - seemingly bend upon talk to no one but and . she and journey along together , generally with the child between they ; - but where the road permit , I always walk on the other side of she , take the other side of , and rove here and there accord to he fancy ; and , after a while , she become more friendly , and at length I succeed in secure she attention almost entirely to myself - and then I be happy indeed ; for whenever she do condescmend to converse , I like to listen . where she opinion and sentiment tally with mine , it be she extreme good sense , she exquisite taste and feel , that delight I ; where they differ , it be still she uncompromising boldness in the avowal or defence of that difference , she earnestness and keenness , that pique my fancy : and even when she anger I by she unkind word or look , and she uncharitable conclusion respect I , it only make I the more dissatisfied with myself for have so unfavourably impress she , and the more desirous to vindicate my character and disposition in she eye , and , if possible , to win she esteem . at length we walk be end . the increase height and boldness of the hill have for some time intercept the prospect ; but , on gain the summit of a steep acclivity , and look downward , a opening lay before we - and the blue sea burst upon we sight ! - deep violet blue - not deadly calm , but cove with glint breaker - diminutive white speck twinkl on its bosom , and scarcely to be distinguished , by the keenest vision , from the little seamew that sport above , they white wing glitter in the sunshine : only one or two vessel be visible , and those be far away . I look at my companion to see what she think of this glorious scene . she say nothing : but she stand still , and fix she eye upon it with a gaze that assure I she be not disappoint . she have very fine eye , by - the - by - I do not know whether I have tell you before , but they be full of soul , large , clear , and nearly black - not brown , but very dark grey . a cool , revive breeze blow from the sea - soft , pure , salubrious : it wave she droop ringlet , and impart a livelier colour to she usually too pallid lip and cheek . she feel its exhilarating influence , and so do I - I feel it tingl through my frame , but da not give way to it while she remain so quiet . there be a aspect of subdue exhilaration in she face , that kindle into almost a smile of exalted , glad intelligence as she eye meet mine . never have she look so lovely : never have my heart so warmly cleaved to she as now . have we be leave two minute longer stand there alone , I can not answer for the consequence . happily for my discretion , perhaps for my enjoyment during the remainder of the day , we be speedily summon to the repast - a very respectable collation , which rise , assist by and , who , have share she seat in the carriage , have arrive with she a little before the rest , have set out upon a elevated platform overlook the sea , and shelter from the hot sun by a shelving rock and overhange tree . seat herself at a distance from I . be my nearest neighbour . she exert herself to be agreeable , in she gentle , unobtrusive way , and be , no doubt , as fascinate and charme as ever , if I could only have feel it . but soon my heart begin to warm towards she once again ; and we be all very merry and happy together - as far as I could see - throughout the protract social meal . when that be over , summon to help she to gather up the fragment , and the knife , dish , & c. , and restore they to the basket ; and take she camp - stool and draw material ; and have beg to take charge of she precious son , and strictly enjoin he not to wander from he new guardian 's side , she leave we and proceed along the steep , stony hill , to a loftier , more precipitous eminence at some distance , whence a still finer prospect be to be have , where she prefer take she sketch , though some of the ladie tell she it be a frightful place , and advise she not to attempt it . when she be go , I feel as if there be to be no more fun - though it be difficult to say what she have contribute to the hilarity of the party . no jest , and little laughter , have escape she lip ; but she smile have animate my mirth ; a keen observation or a cheerful word from she have insensibly sharpen my wit , and throw a interest over all that be do and say by the rest . even my conversation with have be enliven by she presence , though I know it not ; and now that she be go , 's playful nonsense cease to amuse I - nay , grow wearisome to my soul , and I grow weary of amusing she
she : I feel myself draw by a irresistible attraction to that distant point where the fair artist sat and ply she solitary task - and not long do I attempt to resist it : while my little neighbour be exchange a few word with , I rise and cannily slipp away . a few rapid stride , and a little active clambering , soon bring I to the place where she be seat - a narrow ledge of rock at the very verge of the cliff , which descende with a steep , precipitous slant , quite down to the rocky shore . she do not hear I come : the falling of my shadow across she paper give she a electric start ; and she look hastily round - any other lady of my acquaintance would have scream under such a sudden alarm . 'Oh ! I do not know it be you . - why do you startle I so ? ' say she , somewhat testily . 'I hate anybody to come upon I so unexpectedly . ' ' why , what do you take I for ? ' say I : 'if I have know you be so nervous , I would have be more cautious ; but - ' 'Well , never mind . what do you come for ? be they all come ? ' 'no ; this little ledge could scarcely contain they all . ' 'I be glad , for I be tired of talk . ' ' well , then , I will not talk . I will only sit and watch you drawing . ' 'Oh , but you know I do not like that . ' ' then I will contend myself with admir this magnificent prospect . ' she make no objection to this ; and , for some time , sketch away in silence . but I could not help steal a glance , now and then , from the splendid view at we foot to the elegant white hand that hold the pencil , and the graceful neck and glossy raven curl that droop over the paper . ' now ,' think I , ' if I have but a pencil and a morsel of paper , I could make a lovelier sketch than hers , admit I have the power to delineate faithfully what be before I . ' but , though this satisfaction be deny I , I be very well content to sit beside she there , and say nothing . ' be you there still , ? ' say she at length , look round upon I - for I be seat a little behind on a mossy projection of the cliff . - ' why do not you go and amuse yourself with you friend ? ' ' because I be tired of they , like you ; and I shall have enough of they to - morrow - or at any time hence ; but you I may not have the pleasure of see again for I know not how long . ' ' what be yoArthu do when you come away ? ' ' he be with , where you leave he - all right , but hope mamma would not be long away . you do not intrust he to I , by - the - by ,' I grumble , ' though I have the honour of a much longer acquaintance ; but have the art of conciliating and amusing child ,' I carelessly add , ' if she be good for nothing else . ' ' have many estimable quality , which such as you can not be expect to perceive or appreciate . will you tell Arthur that I shall come in a few minute ? ' ' if that be the case , I will wait , with you permission , till those few minute be past ; and then I can assist you to descmend this difficult path . ' ' thank you - I always manage best , on such occasion , without assistance . ' ' but , at least , I can carry you stool and sketch - book . ' she do not deny I this favour ; but I be rather offended at she evident desire to be rid of I , and be begin to repent of my pertinacity , when she somewhat appease I by consult my taste and judgment about some doubtful matter in she draw . my opinion , happily , meet she approbation , and the improvement I suggest be adopt without hesitation . 'I have often wish in vain , ' say she , ' for another 's judgment to appeal to when I could scarcely trust the direction of my own eye and head , they have be so long occupy with the contemplation of a single object as to become almost incapable of form a proper idea respect it . ' ' that , ' reply I , 'is only one of many evils to which a solitary life expose we . ' ' true , ' say she ; and again we relapse into silence . about two minute after , however , she declare she sketch complete , and close the book . on return to the scene of we repast we find all the company have desert it , with the exception of three - , , and . the younger gentleman lay fast asleep with he head pillow on the lady 's lap ; the other be seat beside she with a pocket edition of some classic author in he hand . he never go anywhere without such a companion wherewith to improve he leisure moment : all time seem lose that be not devote to study , or exact , by he physical nature , for the bare support of life . even now he
he could not abandon himself to the enjoyment of that pure air and balmy sunshine - that splendo prospect , and those soothing sound , the music of the wave and of the soft wind in the sheltering tree above he - not even with a lady by he side ( though not a very charming one , I will allow ) - he must pull out he book , and make the most of he time while digest he temperate meal , and repose he weary limb , unused to so much exercise . perhaps , however , he spare a moment to exchange a word or a glance with he companion now and then - at any rate , she do not appear at all resentful of he conduct ; for she homely feature wear a expression of unusual cheerfulness and serenity , and she be study he pale , thoughtful face with great complacency when we arrive . the journey homeward be by no means so agreeable to I as the former part of the day : for now be in the carriage , and be the companion of my walk . she have observ my preference for the young widow , and evidently feel herself neglect . she do not manifest she chagrin by keen reproach , bitter sarcasm , or pout sullen silence - any or all of these I could easily have endure , or lightly laugh away ; but she show it by a kind of gentle melancholy , a mild , reproachful sadness that cut I to the heart . I try to cheer she up , and apparently succeed in some degree , before the walk be over ; but in the very act my conscience reprove I , know , as I do , that , sooner or later , the tie must be broken , and this be only nourishing false hope and put off the evil day . when the pony -carriage have approach as near as the road would permit - unless , indeed , it proceed up the long rough lane , which would not allow - the young widow and she son alight , relinquish the driver 's seat to ; and I persuade to take the latter 's place . have put she comfortably in , bid she take care of the evening air , and wish she a kind good - night , I feel considerably relieved , and hasten to offer my service to to carry she apparatus up the field , but she have already hang she camp - stool on she arm and take she sketch - book in she hand , and insist upon bid I adieu then and there , with the rest of the company . but this time she decline my proffer aid in so kind and friendly a manner that I almost forgave she . six week have pass away . it be a splendid morning about the close of . most of the hay be cut , but the last week have be very unfavourable ; and now that fine weather be come at last , be determined to make the most of it , I have gather all hand together into the hay - field , and be work away myself , in the midst of they , in my shirt - sleeve , with a light , shady straw hat on my head , catch up armful of moist , reek grass , and shake it out to the four wind of heaven , at the head of a goodly file of servants and hireling - intend so to labour , from morning till night , with as much zeal and assiduity as I could look for from any of they , as well to prosper the work by my own exertion as to animate the worker by my example - when lo ! my resolution be overthry in a moment , by the simple fact of my brother 's run up to I and put into my hand a small parcel , just arrive from , which I have be for some time expect . I tore off the cover , and disclose a elegant and portable edition of ' . ' 'I guess I know who that be for , ' say , who stand look on while I complacently examine the volume . ' that be for , now . ' he pronounce this with a tone and look so prodigiously know , that I be glad to contradict he . ' you be wrong , my lad , ' say I ; and , take up my coat , I deposit the book in one of its pocket , and then put it on ( i.e. the coat ) . ' now come here , you idle dog , and make yourself useful for once ,' I continue . ' pull off you coat , and take my place in the field till I come back . ' ' till you come back ? - and where be you go , pray ? ' no matter where - the when be all that concern you ; - and I shall be back by dinner , at least . ' 'Oh - oh ! and I be to labour away till then , be I ? - and to keep all these fellow hard at it besides ? well , well ! I will submit - for once in a way . - come , my lad , you must look sharp : I be come to help you now :- and woe be to that man , or woman either , that pause for a moment amongst you - whether to stare about he , to scratch he head , or blow he nose - no pretext will serve - nothing but work , work , work in the
the sweat of you face , ' & c. , &c . leave he thus harangue the people , more to they amusement than edification , I return to the house , and , have make some alteration in my toilet , hasten away to , with the book in my pocket ; for it be destin for the shelf of . ' what ! then have she and you get on so well together as to come to the give and receive of present ? ' - not precisely , old buck ; this be my first experiment in that line ; and I be very anxious to see the result of it . we have meet several time since the - excursion , and I have find she be not averse to my company , provide I confin my conversation to the discussion of abstract matter , or topic of common interest ; - the moment I touch upon the sentimental or the complimentary , or make the slightest approach to tenderness in word or look , I be not only punish by a immediate change in she manner at the time , but doom to find she more cold and distant , if not entirely inaccessible , when next I seek she company . this circumstance do not greatly disconcert I , however , because I attribute it , not so much to any dislike of my person , as to some absolute resolution against a second marriage for prior to the time of we acquaintance , whether from excess of affection for she late husband , or because she have have enough of he and the matrimonial state together . at first , indeed , she have seem to take a pleasure in mortify my vanity and crush my presumption - relentlessly nippe off bud by bud as they venture to appear ; and then , I confess , I be deeply wounded , though , at the same time , stimulate to seek revenge ; - but latterly find , beyond a doubt , that I be not that empty - head coxcomb she have first suppose I , she have repulse my modest advance in quite a different spirit . it be a kind of serious , almost sorrowful displeasure , which I soon lear not carefully to avoid awakening . ' let I first establish my position as a friend , ' think I - ' the patron and playfellow of she son , the sober , solid , plain - deal friend of herself , and then , when I have make myself fairly necessary to she comfort and enjoyment in life ( as I believe I can ) , we will see what next may be effect . ' so we talk about painting , poetry , and music , theology , geology , and philosophy : once or twice I lent she a book , and once she lent I one in return : I meet she in she walk as often as I could ; I come to she house as often as I da . my first pretext for invade the sanctum be to bring yoArthu a little waddling puppy of which be the father , and which delighte the child beyond expression , and , consequently , could not fail to please he mamma . my second be to bring he a book , which , know he mother 's particularity , I have carefully select , and which I submit for she approbation before present it to he . then , I bring she some plant for she garden , in my sister 's name - have previously persuade rose to send they . each of these time I inquire after the picture she be pain from the sketch take on the cliff , and be admit into the studio , and ask my opinion or advice respect its progress . my last visit have be to return the book she have lent I ; and then it be that , in casually discuss the poetry of , she have express a wish to see ' , ' and I have conceive the presumptuous idea of make she a present of it , and , on my return home , instantly send for the smart little volume I have this morning receive . but a apology for invade the hermitage be still necessary ; so I have furnish myself with a blue morocco collar for 's little dog ; and that be give and receive , with much more joy and gratitude , on the part of the receiver , than the worth of the gift or the selfish motive of the giver deserve , I venture to ask for one more look at the picture , if it be still there . 'Oh , yes ! come in , ' say she ( for I have meet they in the garden ) . ' it be finish and fram , all ready for send away ; but give I you last opinion , and if you can suggest any further improvement , it shall be - duly consider , at least . ' the picture be strikingly beautiful ; it be the very scene itself , transfer as if by magic to the canva ; but I express my approbation in guard term , and few word , for fear of displease she . she , however , attentively watch my look , and she artist 's pride be gratify , no doubt , to read my heartfelt admiration in my eye . but , while I gaze , I think upon the book , and wonder how it be to be present . my heart fail I ; but I determine not to be such a fool as to come away without have make the attempt . it be useless wait for a opportunity ,
, and useless try to concoct a speech for the occasion . the more plainly and naturally the thing be done , the better , I think ; so I just look out of the window to screw up my courage , and then pull out the book , turn round , and put it into she hand , with this short explanation : ' you be wish to see ' ,' ; and here it be , if you will be so kind as to take it . ' a momentary blush suffuse she face - perhaps , a blush of sympathetic shame for such a awkward style of presentation : she gravely examine the volume on both side ; then silently turn over the leave , knitt she brow the while , in serious cogitation ; then close the book , and turn from it to I , quietly ask the price of it - I feel the hot blood rush to my face . 'I be sorry to offend you , , ' say she , ' but unless I pay for the book , I can not take it . ' and she lay it on the table . ' why can not you ? ' ' because , ' - she pause , and look at the carpet . ' why can not you ? ' I repeat , with a degree of irascibility that rouse she to lift she eye and look I steadily in the face . ' because I do not like to put myself under obligation that I can never repay - I be oblige to you already for you kindness to my son ; but he grateful affection and you own good feeling must reward you for that . ' ' Nonsense ! ' ejaculate I . she turn she eye on I again , with a look of quiet , grave surprise , that have the effect of a rebuke , whether intend for such or not . ' then you will not take the book ? ' I ask , more mildly than I have yet spoken . 'I will gladly take it , if you will let I pay for it . ' I tell she the exact price , and the cost of the carriage beside , in as calm a tone as I could command - for , in fact , I be ready to weep with disappointment and vexation . she produce she purse , and coolly count out the money , but hesitate to put it into my hand . Attentively regard I , in a tone of soothing softness , she observe , - ' you think yourself insult , - I wish I could make you understand that - that I - ' 'I do understand you , perfectly ,' I say . ' you think that if you be to accept that trifle from I now , I should presume upon it hereafter ; but you be mistaken :- if you will only oblige I by take it , believe I , I shall build no hope upon it , and consider this no precedent for future favour :- and it be nonsense to talk about put yourself under obligation to I when you must know that in such a case the obligation be entirely on my side , - the favour on yours . ' ' well , then , I will take you at you word , ' she answer , with a most angelic smile , return the odious money to she purse - ' but remember ! ' 'I will remember - what I have say ; - but do not you punish my presumption by withdraw you friendship entirely from I , - or expect I to ato for it by be more distant than before , ' say I , extend my hand to take leave , for I be too much excited to remain . ' well , then ! let we be as we be , ' reply she , frankly place she hand in mine ; and while I hold it there , I have much difficulty to refrain from press it to my lip ; - but that would be suicidal madness : I have be bold enough already , and this premature offering have well - nigh give the death - blow to my hope . it be with a agitate , burn heart and brain that I hurrie homeward , regardless of that scorch noonday sun - forgetful of everything but she I have just leave - regret nothing but she impenetrability , and my own precipitancy and want of tact - fear nothing but she hateful resolution , and my inability to overcome it - hope nothing - but halt , - I will not bear you with my conflicting hope and fear - my serious cogitation and resolve . through my affections might now be say to be fairly wean from , I do not yet entirely relinquish my visit to the vicarage , because I want , as it be , to let she down easy ; without raise much sorrow , or incurr much resentment , - or make myself the talk of the parish ; and besides , if I have wholly keep away , the vicar , who look upon my visit as pay chiefly , if not entirely , to himself , would have feel himself decidedly affront by the neglect . but when I call there the day after my interview with , he happen to be from home - a circumstance by no means so agreeable to I now as it have be on former occasion . be there , it be true , but she , of course , would be little better than a nonentity . however , I resolve to make my visit a short one ,
, and to talk to in a brotherly , friendly sort of way , such as we long acquaintance might warrant I in assuming , and which , I think , could neither give offence nor serve to encourage false hope . it be never my custom to talk about either to she or any one else ; but I have not be seat three minute before she bring that lady on to the carpet herself in a rather remarkable manner . 'Oh , ! ' say she , with a shocked expression and voice subdu almost to a whisper , ' what do you think of these shock report about ? - can you encourage we to disbelieve they ? ' ' what report ? ' 'Ah , now ! you know ! ' she slily smile and shake she head . 'I know nothing about they . what in the world do you mean , ? ' 'Oh , do not ask I ! I can not explain it . ' she take up the cambric handkerchief which she have be beautify with a deep lace border , and begin to be very busy . ' what be it , ? what do she mean ? ' say I , appeal to she sister , who seem to be absorb in the hemming of a large , coarse sheet . 'I do not know , ' reply she . ' some idle slander somebody have be invent , I suppose . I never hear it till tell I the other day , - but if all the parish dinn it in my ear , I should not believe a word of it - I know too well ! ' ' quite right , ! - and so do I - whatever it may be . ' ' well , ' observ , with a gentle sigh , ' it be well to have such a comfortable assurance regard the worth of those we love . I only wish you may not find you confidence misplace . ' and she raise she face , and give I such a look of sorrowful tenderness as might have melte my heart , but within those eye there lurk a something that I do not like ; and I wonder how I ever could have admire they - she sister 's honest face and small grey optic appear far more agreeable . but I be out of temper with at that moment for she insinuation against , which be false , I be certain , whether she know it or not . I say nothing more on the subject , however , at the time , and but little on any other ; for , finde I could not well recover my equanimity , I presently rise and take leave , excuse myself under the plea of business at the farm ; and to the farm I go , not trouble my mind one whit about the possible truth of these mysterious report , but only wonder what they be , by whom originate , and on what foundation raise , and how they could the most effectually be silence or disprove . a few day after this we have another of we quiet little party , to which the usual company of friend and neighbour have be invite , and among the number . she could not now absent herself under the plea of dark evening or inclement weather , and , greatly to my relief , she come . without she I should have find the whole affair a intolerable bore ; but the moment of she arrival bring new life to the house , and though I might not neglect the other guest for she , or expect to engross much of she attention and conversation to myself alone , I anticipate a evening of no common enjoyment . come too . he do not arrive till some time after the rest be assemble . I be curious to see how he would comport himself to . a slight bow be all that pass between they on he entrance ; and have politely greet the other member of the company , he seat himself quite aloof from the young widow , between my mother and rose . ' do you ever see such art ? ' whisper , who be my nearest neighbour . ' would you not say they be perfect stranger ? ' ' almost ; but what then ? ' ' what then ; why , you can not pretend to be ignorant ? ' ' ignorant of what ? ' demand I , so sharply that she start and reply , - 'Oh , hush ! do not speak so loud . ' ' well , tell I then ,' I answer in a lower tone , ' what be it you mean ? I hate enigmas . ' ' well , you know , I do not vouch for the truth of it - indeed , far from it - but have not you hear -? ' 'I have hear nothing , except from you . ' ' you must be wilfully deaf then , for anyone will tell you that ; but I shall only anger you by repeat it , I see , so I have better hold my tongue . ' she close she lip and fold she hand before she , with a air of injured meekness . ' if you have wish not to anger I , you should have hold you tongue from the beginning , or else speak out plainly and honestly all you have to say . ' she turn aside she face , pull out she handkerchief , rose , and go to the window , where she stand for some time , evidently dissolve in tear . I be astounde , provoke , asham -
- not so much of my harshness as for she childish weakness . however , no one seem to notice she , and shortly after we be summon to the tea - table : in those part it be customary to sit to the table at tea - time on all occasion , and make a meal of it , for we dine early . on take my seat , I have on one side of I and a empty chair on the other . ' may I sit by you ? ' say a soft voice at my elbow . ' if you like , ' be the reply ; and slipp into the vacant chair ; then , look up in my face with a half - sad , half - playful smile , she whisper , - ' you be so stern , . ' I hand down she tea with a slightly contemptuous smile , and say nothing , for I have nothing to say . ' what have I do to offend you ? ' say she , more plaintively . 'I wish I know . ' ' come , take you tea , , and do not be foolish , ' respond I , hand she the sugar and cream . just then there arise a slight commotion on the other side of I , occasion by 's come to negotiate a exchange of seat with rose . ' will you be so good as to exchange place with I , ? ' say she ; ' for I do not like to sit by . if you mamma think proper to invite such person to she house , she can not object to she daughter 's keeping company with they . ' this latter clause be add in a sort of soliloquy when be go ; but I be not polite enough to let it pass . ' will you be so good as to tell I what you mean , ? ' say I . the question start she a little , but not much . ' why , , ' reply she , coolly , have quickly recover she self - possession , ' it surprise I rather that should invite such a person as . to she house ; but , perhaps , she be not aware that the lady 's character be consider scarcely respectable . ' ' she be not , nor be I ; and therefore you would oblige I by explain you mean a little further . ' ' this be scarcely the time or the place for such explanation ; but I think you can hardly be so ignorant as you pretend - you must know she as well as I do . ' 'I think I do , perhaps a little better ; and therefore , if you will inform I what you have hear or imagin against she , I shall , perhaps , be able to set you right . ' ' can you tell I , then , who be she husband , or if she ever have any ? ' Indignation keep I silent . at such a time and place I could not trust myself to answer . ' have you never observ , ' say , ' what a strike likeness there be between that child of hers and - ' ' and whom ? ' demand , with a air of cold , but keen severity . be start ; the timidly spoken suggestion have be intend for my ear alone . ' oh , I beg you pardon ! ' plead she ; 'I may be mistaken - perhaps I be mistaken . ' but she accompany the word with a sly glance of derision direct to I from the corner of she disingenuous eye . ' there be no need to ask my pardon , ' reply she friend , ' but I see no one here that at all resemble that child , except he mother , and when you hear ill - natured report , , I will thank you , that be , I think you will do well , to refrain from repeat they . I presume the person you allude to be Lawrence ; but I think I can assure you that you suspicion , in that respect , be utterly misplace ; and if he have any particular connection with the lady at all ( which no one have a right to assert ) , at least he have ( what can not be say of some other ) sufficient sense of propriety to withhold he from acknowledge anything more than a bowing acquaintance in the presence of respectable person ; he be evidently both surprised and annoyed to find she here . ' 'Go it ! ' cry , who sit on the other side of , and be the only individual who share that side of the table with we . ' go it like brick ! mind you do not leave she one stone upon another . ' draw herself up with a look of freezing scorn , but say nothing . would have reply , but I interrupt she by say as calmly as I could , though in a tone which betraye , no doubt , some little of what I feel within , - ' we have have enough of this subject ; if we can only speak to slander we betters , let we hold we tongue . ' 'I think you would better , ' observe , ' and so do we good parson ; he have be address the company in he richest vein all the while , and eye you , from time to time , with look of stern distaste , while you sit there , irreverently whisper and mutter together ; and once he pause in the middle
middle of a story or a sermon , I do not know which , and fix he eye upon you , , as much as to say , " when have do flirt with those two lady I will proceed . " ' what more be say at the tea - table I can not tell , nor how I find patience to sit till the meal be over . I remember , however , that I swallow with difficulty the remainder of the tea that be in my cup , and eat nothing ; and that the first thing I do be to stare at , who sit beside he mother on the opposite side of the table , and the second to stare at , who sit below ; and , first , it strike I that there be a likeness ; but , on further contemplation , I conclude it be only in imagination . both , it be true , have more delicate feature and smaller bone than commonly fall to the lot of individual of the rougher sex , and 's complexion be pale and clear , and be delicately fair ; but be tiny , somewhat snubby nose could never become so long and straight as 's ; and the outline of he face , though not full enough to be round , and too finely converge to the small , dimple ching to be square , could never be draw out to the long oval of the other 's , while the child 's hair be evidently of a lighter , warmer tint than the elder gentleman 's have ever be , and he large , clear blue eye , though prematurely serious at time , be utterly dissimilar to the shy hazel eye of , whence the sensitive soul look so distrustfully forth , as ever ready to retire within , from the offence of a too rude , too uncongenial world . Wretch that I be to harbour that detestable idea for a moment ! do I not know ? have I not see she , converse with she time after time ? be I not certain that she , in intellect , in purity and elevation of soul , be immeasurably superior to any of she detractor ; that she be , in fact , the noblest , the most adorable , of she sex I have ever beheld , or even imagine to exist ? yes , and I would say with ( sensible girl as she be ) , that if all the parish , ay , or all the world , should din these horrible lie in my ear , I would not believe they , for I know she better than they . , my brain be on fire with indignation , and my heart seem ready to burst from its prison with conflict passion . I regard my two fair neighbour with a feeling of abhorrence and loath I scarcely endeavoure to conceal . I be rally from several quarter for my abstraction and ungallant neglect of the ladie ; but I car little for that : all I car about , besides that one grand subject of my thought , be to see the cup travel up to the tea - tray , and not come down again . I think never would cease tell we that he be no tea - drinker , and that it be highly injuriious to keep loa the stomach with slop to the exclusion of more wholesome sustenance , and so give himself time to finish he fourth cup . at length it be over ; and I rise and leave the table and the guest without a word of apology - I could endure they company no longer . I rush out to cool my brain in the balmy evening air , and to compose my mind or indulge my passionate thought in the solitude of the garden . to avoid be see from the window I go down a quiet little avenue that skirt one side of the inclosure , at the bottom of which be a seat embower in rose and honeysuckle . here I sit down to think over the virtue and wrong of the lady of ; but I have not be so occupy two minute , before voice and laughter , and glimpse of move object through the tree , inform I that the whole company have turn out to take a airing in the garden too . however , I nestle up in a corner of the bower , and hope to retain possession of it , secure alike from observation and intrusion . but no - confound it - there be some one come down the avenue ! why could not they enjoy the flower and sunshine of the open garden , and leave that sunless nook to I , and the gnat and midge ? but , pee through my fragrant screen of the interwoven branch to discover who the intruder be ( for a murmur of voice tell I it be more than one ) , my vexation instantly subside , and far other feeling agitate my still unquiet soul ; for there be , slowly move down the walk with by she side , and no one else . why be they alone ? have the poison of detracting tongue already spread through all ; and have they all turn they back upon she ? I now recollect have see , in the early part of the evening , ed she chair close up to my mother , and bend forward , evidently in the delivery of some important confidential intelligence ; and from the incessant wagging of she head , the frequent distortion of she wrinkle physiognomy , and the winking and malicious twinkle of she little ugly eye , I judge it be some spicy piece
piece of scandal that engage she power ; and from the cautious privacy of the communication I suppose some person then present be the luckless object of she calumny : and from all these token , together with my mother 's look and gesture of mingled horror and incredulity , I now conclude that object to have be . I do not emerge from my place of concealment till she have nearly reach the bottom of the walk , lest my appearance should drive she away ; and when I do step forward she stand still and seem inclin to turn back as it be . ' oh , do not let we disturb you , ! ' say she . ' we come here to seek retirement ourselves , not to intrude on you seclusion . ' 'I be no hermit , - though I own it look rather like it to absent myself in this uncourteous fashion from my guest . ' 'I fear you be unwell , ' say she , with a look of real concern . 'I be rather , but it be over now . do sit here a little and rest , and tell I how you like this arbour , ' say I , and , lift by the shoulders , I plan he in the middle of the seat by way of secure he mamma , who , acknowledge it to be a tempting place of refuge , throw herself back in one corner , while I take possession of the other . but that word refuge disturb I . have they unkindness then really drive she to seek for peace in solitude ? ' why have they leave you alone ? ' I ask . ' it be I who have leave they , ' be the smiling rejoinder . 'I be weary to death with small talk - nothing wear I out like that . I can not imagine how they can go on as they do . ' I could not help smile at the serious depth of she wonderment . ' be it that they think it a duty to be continually talk , ' pursue she : ' and so never pause to think , but fill up with aimless trifle and vain repetition when subject of real interest fail to present themselves , or do they really take a pleasure in such discourse ? ' ' very likely they do , ' say I ; ' they shallow mind can hold no great idea , and they light head be carry away by triviality that would not move a better - furnish skull ; and they only alternative to such discourse be to plunge over head and ear into the slough of scandal - which be they chief delight . ' ' not all of they , surely ? ' cry the lady , astonished at the bitterness of my remark . ' no , certainly ; I exonerate my sister from such degrad taste , and my mother too , if you include she in you animadversion . ' 'I mean no animadversion against any one , and certainly intend no disrespectful allusion to you mother . I have know some sensible person great adept in that style of conversation when circumstance impell they to it ; but it be a gift I can not boast the possession of . I keep up my attention on this occasion as long as I could , but when my power be exhaust I steal away to seek a few minute ' repose in this quiet walk . I hate talk where there be no exchange of idea or sentiment , and no good give or receive . ' ' well , ' say I , ' if ever I trouble you with my loquacity , tell I so at once , and I promise not to be offend ; for I possess the faculty of enjoy the company of those I - of my friend as well in silence as in conversation . ' 'I do not quite believe you ; but if it be so you would exactly suit I for a companion . ' 'I be all you wish , then , in other respects ? ' ' no , I do not mean that . how beautiful those little cluster of foliage look , where the sun come through behind they ! ' say she , on purpose to change the subject . and they do look beautiful , where at interval the level ray of the sun penetrate the thickness of tree and shrub on the opposite side of the path before we , relieve they dusky verdure by display patch of semi-transparent leave of resplendent golden green . 'I almost wish i be not a painter , ' observ my companion . ' why so ? one would think at such a time you would most exult in you privilege of be able to imitate the various brilliant and delightful touch of nature . ' ' no ; for instead of deliver myself up to the full enjoyment of they as other do , I be always trouble my head about how I could produce the same effect upon canva ; and as that can never be do , it be more vanity and vexation of spirit . ' ' perhaps you can not do it to satisfy yourself , but you may and do succeed in delighting other with the result of you endeavour . ' ' well , after all , I should not complain : perhaps few people gain they livelihood with so much pleasure in they toil as I do . here be some one come . ' she seem vex at the interruption . ' it be only and , ' say I , ' come to enjoy a quiet stroll . they will not disturb we
we . ' I could not quite decipher the expression of she face ; but I be satisfied there be no jealousy therein . what business have I to look for it ? ' what sort of a person be ? ' she ask . ' she be elegant and accomplish above the generality of she birth and station ; and some say she be ladylike and agreeable . ' 'I think she somewhat frigid and rather supercilious in she manner to - day . ' ' very likely she might be so to you . she have possibly take a prejudice against you , for I think she regard you in the light of a rival . ' 'I ! impossible , ! ' say she , evidently astonished and annoyed . ' well , I know nothing about it , ' return I , rather doggedly ; for I think she annoyance be chiefly against myself . the pair have now approach within a few pace of we . we arbour be set snugly back in a corner , before which the avenue at its termination turn off into the more airy walk along the bottom of the garden . as they approach this , I see , by the aspect of , that she be direct she companion 's attention to we ; and , as well by she cold , sarcastic smile as by the few isolate word of she discourse that reach I , I know full well that she be impress he with the idea , that we be strongly attach to each other . I notice that he colour up to the temple , give we one furtive glance in passing , and walk on , look grave , but seemingly offer no reply to she remark . it be true , then , that he have some design upon ; and , be they honourable , he would not be so anxious to conceal they . she be blameless , of course , but he be detestable beyond all count . while these thought flash through my mind , my companion abruptly rise , and call she son , say they would now go in quest of the company , and depart up the avenue . Doubtless she have hear or guess something of 's remark , and therefore it be natural enough she should choose to continue the Tete - e - Tete no longer , especially as at that moment my cheek be burn with indignation against my former friend , the token of which she might mistake for a blush of stupid embarrassment . for this I owed yet another grudge ; and still the more I think upon she conduct the more I hate she . it be late in the evening before I join the company . I find already equip for departure , and take leave of the rest , who be now return to the house . I offer , nay , beg to accompany she home . be stand by at the time converse with some one else . he do not look at we , but , on hear my earnest request , he pause in the middle of a sentence to listen for she reply , and go on , with a look of quiet satisfaction , the moment he find it be to be a denial . a denial it be , decide , though not unkind . she could not be persuade to think there be danger for herself or she child in traverse those lonely lane and field without attendance . it be daylight still , and she should meet no one ; or if she do , the people be quiet and harmless she be well assure . in fact , she would not hear of any one 's put himself out of the way to accompany she , though Fergus vouchsaf to offer he service in case they should be more acceptable than mine , and my mother beg she might send one of the farming -men to escort she . when she be go the rest be all a blank or worse . attempt to draw I into conversation , but I snub he and go to another part of the room . shortly after the party break up and he himself take leave . when he come to I I be blind to he extended hand , and deaf to he good - night till he repeat it a second time ; and then , to get rid of he , I mutter a inarticulate reply , accompany by a sulky nod . ' what be the matter , ? ' whisper he . I reply by a wrathful and contemptuous stare . ' be you angry because would not let you go home with she ? ' he ask , with a faint smile that nearly exasperate I beyond control . but , swallow down all fiercer answer , I merely demand , - ' what business be it of yours ? ' ' why , none , ' reply he with provoke quietness ; ' only , ' - and he raise he eye to my face , and speak with unusual solemnity , - ' only let I tell you , , that if you have any design in that quarter , they will certainly fail ; and it grieve I to see you cherish false hope , and waste you strength in useless effort , for - ' ' ! ' I exclaim ; and he hold he breath , and look very blank , turn white about the gill , and go away without another word . I have wound he to the quick ; and I be glad of it . when all be gone , I learn that the vile slander have indeed be circulate throughout the company ,
, in the very presence of the victim . Rose , however , vow she do not and would not believe it , and my mother make the same declaration , though not , I fear , with the same amount of real , unwavering incredulity . it seem to dwell continually on she mind , and she keep irritat I from time to time by such expression as - ' dear , dear , who would have think it ! - well ! I always think there be something odd about she . - you see what it be for woman to affect to be different to other people . ' and once it be , - ' I misdoubt that appearance of mystery from the very first - I think there would no good come of it ; but this be a sad , sad business , to be sure ! ' ' why , mother , you say you do not believe these tale , ' say . ' no more I do , my dear ; but then , you know , there must be some foundation . ' ' the foundation be in the wickedness and falsehood of the world , ' say I , ' and in the fact that have be see to go that way once or twice of a evening - and the village gossip say he go to pay he address to the strange lady , and the scandal - monger have greedily seize the rumour , to make it the basis of they own infernal structure . ' ' well , but , , there must be something in she manner to countenance such report . ' ' do you see anything in she manner ? ' ' no , certainly ; but then , you know , I always say there be something strange about she . ' I believe it be on that very evening that I venture on another invasion of . from the time of we party , which be upward of a week ago , I have be make daily effort to meet its mistress in she walk ; and always disappoint ( she must have manage it so on purpose ) , have nightly keep revolve in my mind some pretext for another call . at length I conclude that the separation could be endure no longer ( by this time , you will see , I be pretty far go ) ; and , take from the book - case a old volume that I think she might be interested in , though , from its unsightly and somewhat dilapidate condition , I have not yet venture to offer it for perusal , I hasten away , - but not without sundry misgiving as to how she would receive I , or how I could summon courage to present myself with so slight a excuse . but , perhaps , I might see she in the field or the garden , and then there would be no great difficulty : it be the formal knock at the door , with the prospect of be gravely usher in by , to the presence of a surprised , uncordial mistress , that so greatly disturb I . my wish , however , be not gratify . herself be not to be see ; but there be play with he frolicsome little dog in the garden . I look over the gate and call he to I . he want I to come in ; but I tell he I could not without he mother 's leave . 'I will go and ask she , ' say the child . ' no , no , , you must not do that ; but if she be not engage , just ask she to come here a minute . tell she I want to speak to she . ' he run to perform my bidding , and quickly return with he mother . how lovly she look with she dark ringlet streame in the light summer breeze , she fair cheek slightly flush , and she countenance radiant with smile . dear Arthur ! what do I not owe to you for this and every other happy meeting ? through he I be at once deliver from all formality , and terror , and constraint . in love affair , there be no mediator like a merry , simple - hear child - ever ready to cement divide heart , to span the unfriendly gulf of custom , to melt the ice of cold reserve , and overthrow the separating wall of dread formality and pride . ' well , , what be it ? ' say the young mother , accost I with a pleasant smile . 'I want you to look at this book , and , if you please , to take it , and peruse it at you leisure . I make no apology for call you out on such a lovely evening , though it be for a matter of no greater importance . ' ' tell he to come in , mamma , ' say . ' would you like to come in ? ' ask the lady . ' yes ; I should like to see you improvement in the garden . ' ' and how you sister 's root have prosper in my charge , ' add she , as she open the gate . and we saunter through the garden , and talk of the flower , the tree , and the book , and then of other thing . the evening be kind and genial , and so be my companion . by degrees I wax more warm and tender than , perhaps , I have ever be before ; but still I say nothing tangible , and she attempt no repulse , until , in pass
pass a moss rose -tree that I have bring she some week since , in my sister 's name , she pluck a beautiful half - open bud and bay I give it to rose . ' may I not keep it myself ? ' I ask . ' no ; but here be another for you . ' instead of take it quietly , I likewise take the hand that offer it , and look into she face . she let I hold it for a moment , and I see a flash of ecstatic brilliance in she eye , a glow of glad excitement on she face - I think my hour of victory be come - but instantly a painful recollection seem to flash upon she ; a cloud of anguish darken she brow , a marble paleness blanch she cheek and lip ; there see a moment of inward conflict , and , with a sudden effort , she withdraw she hand , and retreate a step or two back . ' now , , ' say she , with a kind of desperate calmness , ' I must tell you plainly that I can not do with this . I like you company , because I be alone here , and you conversation please I more than that of any other person ; but if you can not be content to regard I as a friend - a plain , cold , motherly , or sisterly friend - I must beg you to leave I now , and let I alone hereafter : in fact , we must be stranger for the future . ' 'I will , then - be you friend , or brother , or anything you wish , if you will only let I continue to see you ; but tell I why I can not be anything more ? ' there be a perplexed and thoughtful pause . ' be it in consequence of some rash vow ? ' ' it be something of the kind , ' she answer . ' some day I may tell you , but at present you have better leave I ; and never , , put I to the painful necessity of repeat what I have just now say to you , ' she earnestly add , give I she hand in serious kindness . how sweet , how musical my own name sound in she mouth ! 'I will not ,' I reply . ' but you pardon this offence ? ' 'On condition that you never repeat it . ' ' and may I come to see you now and then ? ' ' perhaps - occasionally ; provide you never abuse the privilege . ' 'I make no empty promise , but you shall see . ' ' the moment you do we intimacy be at a end , that be all . ' ' and will you always call I ? it sound more sisterly , and it will serve to remind I of we contract . ' she smile , and once more bid I go ; and at length I judge it prudent to obey , and she re-enter the house and I go down the hill . but as I go the tramp of horse 's hoof fell on my ear , and break the stillness of the dewy evening ; and , look towards the lane , I see a solitary equestrian come up . Inclin to dusk as it be , I know he at a glance : it be on he grey pony . I flow across the field , leape the stone fence , and then walk down the lane to meet he . on see I , he suddenly draw in he little steed , and seem inclin to turn back , but on second thought apparently judge it better to continue he course as before . he accost I with a slight bow , and , ed close to the wall , endeavoure to pass on ; but I be not so minded . Seize he horse by the bridle , I exclaim , - ' now , , I will have this mystery explain ! tell I where you be go , and what you mean to do - at once , and distinctly ! ' ' will you take you hand off the bridle ? ' say he , quietly - ' you be hurt my pony 's mouth . ' ' you and you pony be - ' ' what make you so coarse and brutal , ? I be quite asham of you . ' ' you answer my question - before you leave this spot I will know what you mean by this perfidious duplicity ! ' 'I shall answer no question till you let go the bridle , - if you stand till morning . ' ' now then , ' say I , unclose my hand , but still stand before he . ' ask I some other time , when you can speak like a gentleman , ' return he , and he make a effort to pass I again ; but I quickly re-capture the pony , scarce less astonished than its master at such uncivil usage . ' really , , this be too much ! ' say the latter . ' can I not go to see my tenant on matter of business , without be assault in this manner by -? ' ' this be no time for business , sir ! - I will tell you , now , what I think of you conduct . ' ' you would better defer you opinion to a more convenient season , ' interrupt he in a low tone - ' here be the vicar . ' and , in truth , the vicar be just behind I , plodd
plodd homeward from some remote corner of he parish . I immediately release the squire ; and he go on he way , salut as he pass . ' what ! quarrelling , ? ' cry the latter , address himself to I , - ' and about that young widow , I doubt ? ' he add , reproachfully shak he head . ' but let I tell you , young mang ( here he put he face into mine with a important , confidential air ) , ' she be not worth it ! ' and he confirm the assertion by a solemn nod . ' . ,' I exclaim , in a tone of wrathful menace that make the reverend gentleman look round - aghast - astounde at such unwonted insolence , and stare I in the face , with a look that plainly say , ' what , this to I ! ' but I be too indignant to apologise , or to speak another word to he : I turn away , and hasten homeward , descende with rapid strides the steep , rough lane , and leave he to follow as he please . you must suppose about three week pass over . and I be now establish friend - or brother and sister , as we rather choose to consider ourselves . she call I , by my express desire , and I call she Helen , for I have see that name write in she book . I seldom attempt to see she above twice a week ; and still I make we meeting appear the result of accident as often as I could - for I find it necessary to be extremely careful - and , altogether , I behave with such exceeding propriety that she never have occasion to reprove I once . yet I could not but perceive that she be at time unhappy and dissatisfie with herself or she position , and truly I myself be not quite contente with the latter : this assumption of brotherly nonchalance be very hard to sustain , and I often feel myself a most confounded hypocrite with it all ; I see too , or rather I feel , that , in spite of herself , be not indifferent to she , ' as the novel hero modestly express it , and while I thankfully enjoy my present good fortune , I could not fail to wish and hope for something better in future ; but , of course , I keep such dream entirely to myself . ' where be you go , ? ' say , one evening , shortly after tea , when I have be busy with the farm all day . 'To take a walk , ' be the reply . ' do you always brush you hat so carefully , and do you hair so nicly , and put on such smart new glove when you take a walk ? ' ' not always . ' ' you be go to , be not you ? ' ' what make you think so ? ' ' because you look as if you be - but I wish you would not go so often . ' ' Nonsense , child ! I do not go once in six week - what do you mean ? ' ' well , but if i be you , I would not have so much to do with . ' ' why , , be you , too , give in to the prevailing opinion ? ' ' no , ' return she , hesitatingly - ' but I have hear so much about she lately , both at the ' and the vicarage ; - and beside , mamma say , if she be a proper person she would not be live there by herself - and do not you remember last winter , Gilbert , all that about the false name to the picture ; and how she explain it - say she have friend or acquaintance from whom she wish she present residence to be conceal , and that she be afraid of they trace she out ; - and then , how suddenly she start up and leave the room when that person come - whom she take good care not to let we catch a glimpse of , and who , with such a air of mystery , tell we be he mamma 's friend ? ' ' yes , rose , I remember it all ; and I can forgive you uncharitable conclusion ; for , perhaps , if I do not know she myself , I should put all these thing together , and believe the same as you do ; but thank , I do know she ; and I should be unworthy the name of a man , if I could believe anything that be say against she , unless I hear it from she own lip . - I should as soon believe such thing of you , . ' 'Oh , ! ' ' well , do you think I could believe anything of the kind , - whatever the and da to whisper ? ' 'I should hope not indeed ! ' ' and why not ? - because I know you - well , and I know she just as well . ' 'Oh , no ! you know nothing of she former life ; and last year , at this time , you do not know that such a person exist . ' ' no matter . there be such a thing as look through a person 's eye into the heart , and learn more of the height , and breadth , and depth of another 's soul in one hour than it might take you a lifetime to discover , if he or she be
be not dispose to reveal it , or if you have not the sense to understand it . ' ' then you be go to see she this evening ? ' 'To be sure I be ! ' ' but what would mamma say , ! ' ' Mamma need not know . ' ' but she must know some time , if you go on . ' 'Go on ! - there be no go on in the matter . and I be two friend - and will be ; and no man breathing shall hinder it , - or have a right to interfere between we . ' ' but if you know how they talk you would be more careful , for she sake as well as for you own . think you visit to the old hall but another proof of she depravity - ' ' Confound ! ' ' and be quite grieved about you . ' 'I hope she be . ' ' but I would not , if I be you . ' ' would not want ? - how do they know that I go there ? ' ' there be nothing hide from they : they spy out everything . ' 'Oh , I never think of this ! - and so they dare to turn my friendship into food for further scandal against she ! - that prove the falsehood of they other lie , at all event , if any proof be want . - mind you contradict they , rose , whenever you can . ' ' but they do not speak openly to I about such thing : it be only by hint and innuendoe , and by what I hear other say , that I know what they think . ' ' well , then , I will not go to - day , as it be get latish . but oh , deuce take they curse , envenom tongue ! ' I mutter , in the bitterness of my soul . and just at that moment the vicar enter the room : we have be too much absorb in we conversation to observe he knock . after he customary cheerful and fatherly greeting of , who be rather a favourite with the old gentleman , he turn somewhat sternly to I :- ' well , sy ! ' say he , ' you be quite a stranger . it be - let - I - see ,' he continue , slowly , as he deposit he ponderous bulk in the arm -chair that officiously bring towards he ; ' it be just - six -week - by my reckoning , since you darken - my - door ! ' he speak it with emphasis , and strike he stick on the floor . ' be it , sir ? ' say I . 'Ay ! it be so ! ' he add a affirmatory nod , and continue to gaze upon I with a kind of irate solemnity , hold he substantial stick between he knee , with he hand clasp upon its head . 'I have be busy ,' I say , for a apology be evidently demande . ' ! ' repeat he , derisively . ' yes , you know I have be get in my hay ; and now the harvest be begin . ' 'Humph ! ' just then my mother come in , and create a diversion in my favour by she loquacious and animated welcome of the reverend guest . she regrett deeply that he have not come a little earlier , in time for tea , but offer to have some immediately prepared , if he would do she the favour to partake of it . ' not any for I , I thank you , ' reply he ; 'I shall be at home in a few minute . ' 'Oh , but do stay and take a little ! it will be ready in five minute . ' but he reject the offer with a majestic wave of the hand . 'I will tell you what I will take , , ' say he : 'I will take a glass of you excellent ale . ' ' with pleasure ! ' cry my mother , proceed with alacrity to pull the bell and order the favoured beverage . 'I think , ' continue he , 'I would just look in upon you as I pass , and taste you home - brew ale . I have be to call on . ' ' have you , indeed ? ' he nod gravely , and add with awful emphasis - 'I think it incumbend upon I to do so . ' ' really ! ' ejaculate my mother . ' why so , ? ' ask I . he look at I with some severity , and turn again to my mother , repeat , - 'I think it incumbend upon I ! ' and strike he stick on the floor again . my mother sit opposite , a awe - struck but admir auditor . ' " , " say I ,' he continue , shak he head as he speak , ' " these be terrible report ! " " what , sir ? " say she , affect to be ignorant of my meaning . " it be my - duty - as - you pastor , " say I , " to tell you both everything that I myself see reprehensible in you conduct , and all I have reason to suspect , and what other tell I concern you . " - so I tell she ! ' ' you do , sy ? ' cry I , start from my seat and strike my fist on the table . he merely glance towards I , and continue - address he hostess
hostess :- ' it be a painful duty , - but I tell she ! ' ' and how do she take it ? ' ask my mother . ' Harden , I fear - harden ! ' he reply , with a despondent shake of the head ; ' and , at the same time , there be a strong display of unchastened , misdirect passion . she turn white in the face , and draw she breath through she tooth in a savage sort of way ; - but she offer no extenuation or defence ; and with a kind of shameless calmness - shock indeed to witness in one so young - as good as tell I that my remonstrance be unavailing , and my pastoral advice quite throw away upon she - nay , that my very presence be displease while I speak such thing . and I withdraw at length , too plainly see that nothing could be do - and sadly grieve to find she case so hopeless . but I be fully determined , , that my daughter - shall - not - consort with she . do you adopt the same resolution with regard to yours ! - as for you son - as for you , young man ,' he continue , sternly turn to I - ' as for I , sir ,' I begin , but check by some impediment in my utterance , and find that my whole frame tremble with fury , I say no more , but take the wiser part of snatching up my hat and bolt from the room , slam the door behind I , with a bang that shook the house to its foundation , and make my mother scream , and give a momentary relief to my excited feeling . the next minute see I hurrie with rapid stride in the direction of - to what intent or purpose I could scarcely tell , but I must be move somewhere , and no other goal would do - I must see she too , and speak to she - that be certain ; but what to say , or how to act , I have no definite idea . such stormy thought - so many different resolution crowd in upon I , that my mind be little better than a chaos of conflict passion . in little more than twenty minute the journey be accomplish . I pause at the gate to wipe my streaming forehead , and recover my breath and some degree of composure . already the rapid walking have somewhat mitigate my excitement ; and with a firm and steady tread I pace the garden - walk . in pass the inhabit wing of the building , I catch a sight of , through the open window , slowly pace up and down she lonely room . she seem agitated and even dismay at my arrival , as if she think I too be come to accuse she . I have enter she presence intend to condeal with she upon the wickedness of the world , and help she to abuse the vicar and he vile informant , but now I feel positively asham to mention the subject , and determine not to refer to it , unless she lead the way . 'I be come at a unseasonable hour , ' say I , assume a cheerfulness I do not feel , in order to reassure she ; ' but I will not stay many minute . ' she smile upon I , faintly it be true , but most kindly - I have almost say thankfully , as she apprehension be remove . ' how dismal you be , Helen ! why have you no fire ? ' I say , look round on the gloomy apartment . ' it be summer yet , ' she reply . ' but we always have a fire in the evening , if we can bear it ; and you especially require one in this cold house and dreary room . ' ' you should have come a little sooner , and I would have have one lighted for you : but it be not worth while now - you will not stay many minute , you say , and be go to bed . ' ' but I have a fancy for a fire , nevertheless . will you order one , if I ring ? ' ' why , , you do not look cold ! ' say she , smilingly regard my face , which no doubt seem warm enough . ' no , ' reply I , ' but I want to see you comfortable before I go . ' ' I comfortable ! ' repeat she , with a bitter laugh , as if there be something amusingly absurd in the idea . ' it suit I better as it be , ' she add , in a tone of mournful resignation . but determined to have my own way , I pull the bell . ' there now , ! ' I say , as the approach step of be hear in answer to the summon . there be nothing for it but to turn round and desire the maid to light the fire . I owe a grudge to this day for the look she cast upon I ere she depart on she mission , the sour , suspicious , inquisitorial look that plainly demand , ' what be you here for , I wonder ? ' she mistress do not fail to notice it , and a shade of uneasiness darken she brow . ' you must not stay long , , ' say she , when the door be close upon we . 'I be not go to , ' say I , somewhat testily , though without a grain of
of anger in my heart against any one but the meddl old woman . ' but , Helen , I have something to say to you before I go . ' ' what be it ? ' 'no , not now - I do not know yet precisely what it be , or how to say it , ' reply I , with more truth than wisdom ; and then , fear lest she should turn I out of the house , I begin talk about indifferent matter in order to gain time . meanwhile come in to kindle the fire , which be soon effect by thrust a red - hot poker between the bar of the grate , where the fuel be already dispose for ignition . she honoure I with another of she hard , inhospitable look in departing , but , little move thereby , I go on talk ; and set a chair for . on one side of the hearth , and one for myself on the other , I venture to sit down , though half suspect she would rather see I go . in a little while we both relapse into silence , and continue for several minute gaze abstractedly into the fire - she intend upon she own sad thought , and I reflect how delightful it would be to be seat thus beside she with no other presence to restrain we intercourse - not even that of , we mutual friend , without whom we have never meet before - if only I could venture to speak my mind , and disbure my full heart of the feeling that have so long oppress it , and which it now struggle to retain , with a effort that it seem impossible to continue much longer , - and revolve the pro and con for open my heart to she there and then , and implor a return of affection , the permission to regard she thenceforth as my own , and the right and the power to defend she from the calumny of malicious tongue . on the one hand , I feel a new - bear confidence in my power of persuasion - a strong conviction that my own fervour of spirit would grant I eloquence - that my very determination - the absolute necessity for succeeding , that I feel must win I what I seek ; while , on the other , I fear to lose the ground I have already gain with so much toil and skill , and destroy all future hope by one rash effort , when time and patience might have won success . it be like set my life upon the cast of a die ; and yet I be ready to resolve upon the attempt . at any rate , I would entreat the explanation she have half promise to give I before ; I would demand the reason of this hateful barrier , this mysterious impediment to my happiness , and , as I trust , to she own . but while I consider in what manner I could best frame my request , my companion , wake from she reverie with a scarcely audible sigh , and look towards the window , where the blood - red harvest moon , just rise over one of the grim , fantastic evergreens , be shine in upon we , say , - ' , it be get late . ' 'I see , ' say I . ' you want I to go , I suppose ? ' 'I think you ink . if my kind neighbour get to know of this visit - as no doubt they will - they will not turn it much to my advantage . ' it be with what the vicar would doubtless have call a savage sort of smile that she say this . ' let they turn it as they will , ' say I . ' what be they thought to you or I , so long as we be satisfied with ourselves - and each other . let they go to the deuce with they vile construction and they lie invention ! ' this outburst bring a flush of colour to she face . ' you have hear , then , what they say of I ? ' 'I hear some detestable falsehood ; but none but fool would credit they for a moment , , so do not let they trouble you . ' 'I do not think a fool , and he believe it all ; but however little you may value the opinion of those about you - however little you may esteem they as individual , it be not pleasant to be look upon as a liar and a hypocrite , to be think to practise what you abhor , and to encourage the vice you would discountenance , to find you good intention frustrate , and you hand crippl by you suppose unworthiness , and to bring disgrace on the principle you profess . ' ' true ; and if I , by my thoughtlessness and selfish disregard to appearance , have at all assist to expose you to these evils , let I entreat you not only to pardon I , but to enable I to make reparation ; authorise I to clear you name from every imputation : give I the right to identify you honour with my own , and to defend you reputation as more precious than my life ! ' ' be you hero enough to unite yourself to one whom you know to be suspect and despise by all around you , and identify you interest and you honour with hers ? think ! it be a serious thing . ' 'I should be proud to do it , Helen ! - most happy - delighte beyond expression ! - and if
if that be all the obstacle to we union , it be demolish , and you must - you shall be mine ! ' and start from my seat in a frenzy of ardour , I seize she hand and would have press it to my lip , but she as suddenly catch it away , exclaim in the bitterness of intense affliction , - ' no , no , it be not all ! ' ' what be it , then ? you promise I should know some time , and - ' ' you shall know some time - but not now - my head ach terribly , ' she say , press she hand to she forehead , ' and I must have some repose - and surely I have have misery enough to - day ! ' she add , almost wildly . ' but it could not harm you to tell it ,' I persist : ' it would ease you mind ; and I should then know how to comfort you . ' she shook she head despondingly . ' if you know all , you , too , would blame I - perhaps even more than I deserve - though I have cruelly wronge you , ' she add in a low murmur , as if she muse aloud . ' you , ? impossible ? ' ' yes , not willingly ; for I do not know the strength and depth of you attachment . I think - at least I endeavoure to think you regard for I be as cold and fraternal as you profess it to be . ' 'or as yours ? ' 'or as mine - ought to have be - of such a light and selfish , superficial nature , that - ' ' there , indeed , you wronge I . ' I know I do ; and , sometimes , I suspect it then ; but I think , upon the whole , there could be no great harm in leave you fancie and you hope to dream themselves to nothing - or flutter away to some more fitting object , while you friendly sympathy remain with I ; but if I have know the depth of you regard , the generous , disinterest affection you seem to feel - ' ' , ? ' ' that you do feel , then , I would have ac differently . ' ' how ? you could not have give I less encouragement , or treat I with greater severity than you do ! and if you think you have wrong I by give I you friendship , and occasionally admit I to the enjoyment of you company and conversation , when all hope of closer intimacy be vain - as indeed you always give I to understand - if you think you have wrong I by this , you be mistaken ; for such favour , in themselves alone , be not only delightful to my heart , but purify , exalt , ennobl to my soul ; and I would rather have you friendship than the love of any other woman in the world ! ' little comfort by this , she clasp she hand upon she knee , and glance upward , seem , in silent anguish , to implore divine assistance ; then , turn to I , she calmly say , - ' to - morrow , if you meet I on the moor about mid-day , I will tell you all you seek to know ; and perhaps you will then see the necessity of discontinue we intimacy - if , indeed , you do not willingly resign I as one no longer worthy of regard . ' 'I can safely answer no to that : you can not have such grave confession to make - you must be try my faith , . ' ' no , no , no ,' she earnestly repeat - 'I wish it be so ! thank heaven ! ' she add , 'I have no great crime to confess ; but I have more than you will like to hear , or , perhaps , can readily excuse , - and more than I can tell you now ; so let I entreat you to leave I ! ' 'I will ; but answer I this one question first ; - do you love I ? ' 'I will not answer it ! ' ' then I will conclude you do ; and so good - night . ' she turn from I to hide the emotion she could not quite control ; but I take she hand and fervently kiss it . ' , do leave I ! ' she cry , in a tone of such thrilling anguish that I feel it would be cruel to disobey . but I give one look back before I close the door , and see she lean forward on the table , with she hand presse against she eye , sobb convulsively ; yet I withdraw in silence . I feel that to obtrude my consolation on she then would only serve to aggravate she suffering . to tell you all the questionings and conjecture - the fear , and hope , and wild emotion that jostle and chase each other through my mind as I descende the hill , would almost fill a volume in itself . but before I be half - way down , a sentiment of strong sympathy for she I have leave behind I have displace all other feeling , and see imperatively to draw I back : I begin to think , ' why be I hurrie so fast in this direction ? can I find comfort or consolation - peace , certainty , contentment , all - or anything that I want at home ? and can I leave
leave all perturbation , sorrow , and anxiety behind I there ? ' and I turn round to look at the old . there be little besides the chimney visible above my contract horizon . I walk back to get a better view of it . when it rise in sight , I stand still a moment to look , and then continue move towards the gloomy object of attraction . something call I nearer - nearer still - and why not , pray ? might I not find more benefit in the contemplation of that venerable pile with the full moon in the cloudless heaven shining so calmly above it - with that warm yellow lustre peculiar to a night - and the mistress of my soul within , than in return to my home , where all comparatively be light , and life , and cheerfulness , and therefore inimical to I in my present frame of mind , - and the more so that its inmate all be more or less imbue with that detestable belief , the very thought of which make my blood boil in my vein - and how could I endure to hear it openly declare , or cautiously insinuate - which be worse ? - I have have trouble enough already , with some babbling fiend that would keep whispering in my ear , ' it may be true , ' till I have shoute aloud , ' it be false ! I defy you to make I suppose it ! ' I could see the red firelight dimly gleam from she parlour window . I go up to the garden wall , and stood lean over it , with my eye fix upon the lattice , wonder what she be do , think , or suffer now , and wish I could speak to she but one word , or even catch one glimpse of she , before I go . I have not thus look , and wish , and wonder long , before I vault over the barrier , unable to resist the temptation of take one glance through the window , just to if she be more composed than when we part ; - and if I find she still in deep distress , perhaps I might venture attempt a word of comfort - to utter one of the many thing I should have say before , instead of aggravate she suffering by my stupid impetuosity . I look . she chair be vacant : so be the room . but at that moment some one open the outer door , and a voice - she voice - say , - ' come out - I want to see the moon , and breathe the evening air : they will do I good - if anything will . ' here , then , be she and come to take a walk in the garden . I wish myself safe back over the wall . I stand , however , in the shadow of the tall holly - bush , which , stand between the window and the porch , at present screen I from observation , but do not prevent I from see two figure come forth into the moonlight : follow by another - not , but a young man , slender and rather tall . of heaven , how my temple throb ! intense anxiety darken my sight ; but I think - yes , and the voice confirm it - it be ! ' you should not let it worry you so much , , ' say he ; 'I will be more cautious in future ; and in time - ' I do not hear the rest of the sentence ; for he walk close beside she and spoke so gently that I could not catch the word . my heart be split with hatred ; but I listen intently for she reply . I hear it plainly enough . ' but I must leave this place , , ' she say - 'I never can be happy here , - nor anywhere else , indeed , ' she add , with a mirthless laugh , - ' but I can not rest here . ' ' but where could you find a better place ? ' reply he , 'so secluded - so near I , if you think anything of that . ' ' yes , ' interrupt she , ' it be all I could wish , if they could only have leave I alone . ' ' but wherever you go , , there will be the same source of annoyance . I can not consent to lose you : I must go with you , or come to you ; and there be meddling fools elsewhere , as well as here . ' while thus converse they have saunter slowly past I , down the walk , and I hear no more of they discourse ; but I see he put he arm round she waist , while she lovingly rest she hand on he shoulder ; - and then , a tremulous darkness obscure my sight , my heart sicken and my head burn like fire : I half rush , half stagger from the spot , where horror have keep I root , and leape or tumble over the wall - I hardly know which - but I know that , afterwards , like a passionate child , I dash myself on the ground and lay there in a paroxysm of anger and despair - how long , I can not undertake to say ; but it must have be a considerable time ; for when , have partially relieve myself by a torment of tear , and look up at the moon , shining so calmly and carelessly on , as little influence by my misery as
as I be by its peaceful radiance , and earnestly pray for death or forgetfulness , I have risen and journey homeward - little regard the way , but carry instinctively by my foot to the door , I find it bolt against I , and every one in bed except my mother , who hasten to answer my impatient knocking , and receive I with a shower of question and rebuke . 'Oh , ! how could you do so ? where have you be ? do come in and take you supper . I have get it all ready , though you do not deserve it , for keep I in such a fright , after the strange manner you leave the house this evening . be quite - bless the boy ! how ill he look . oh , gracious ! what be the matter ? ' ' nothing , nothing - give I a candle . ' ' but will not you take some supper ? ' ' no ; I want to go to bed , ' say I , take a candle and light it at the one she hold in she hand . 'Oh , , how you tremble ! ' exclaim my anxious parent . ' how white you look ! do tell I what it be ? have anything happen ? ' ' it be nothing , ' cry I , ready to stamp with vexation because the candle would not light . then , suppresse my irritation , I add , ' I have be walk too fast , that be all . good -night , ' and march off to bed , regardless of the ' walk too fast ! where have you be ? ' that be call after I from below . my mother follow I to the very door of my room with she questionings and advice concern my health and my conduct ; but I implor she to let I alone till morning ; and she withdraw , and at length I have the satisfaction to hear she close she own door . there be no sleep for I , however , that night as I think ; and instead of attempting to solicit it , I employ myself in rapidly pace the chamber , have first remove my boot , lest my mother should hear I . but the board creak , and she be watchful . I have not walk above a quarter of a hour before she be at the door again . ' , why be you not in bed - you say you want to go ? ' ' Confound it ! I be go , ' say I . ' but why be you so long about it ? you must have something on you mind - ' ' for heaven 's sake , let I alone , and get to be yourself . ' ' can it be that . that distress you so ? ' ' no , no , I tell you - it be nothing . ' 'I wish to goodness it may not , ' murmure she , with a sigh , as she return to she own apartment , while I throw myself on the bed , feel most undutifully disaffect towards she for have deprive I of what see the only shadow of a consolation that remain , and chain I to that wretch couch of thorn . never do I endure so long , so miserable a night as that . and yet it be not wholly sleepless . towards mor my distracting thought begin to lose all pretension to coherency , and shape themselves into confused and feverish dream , and , at length , there follow a interval of unconscious slumber . but then the dawn of bitter recollection that succeed - the waking to find life a blank , and worse than a blank , teem with torment and misery - not a mere barren wilderness , but full of thorn and brier - to find myself deceive , du , hopeless , my affections trample upon , my angel not a angel , and my friend a fiend incarnate - it be worse than if I have not sleep at all . it be a dull , gloomy morning ; the weather have change like my prospect , and the rain be patter against the window . I rise , nevertheless , and go out ; not to look after the farm , though that would serve as my excuse , but to cool my brain , and aregain , if possible , a sufficient degree of composure to meet the family at the morning meal without excit inconvenient remark . if I get a wetting , that , in conjunction with a pretended over-exertion before breakfast , might excuse my sudden loss of appetite ; and if a cold ensue , the severer the better - it would help to account for the sullen mood and mo melancholy likely to cloud my brow for long enough . ' my dear Gilbert , I wish you would try to be a little more amiable , ' say my mother one morning after some display of unjustifiable ill - humour on my part . ' you say there be nothing the matter with you , and nothing have happene to grieve you , and yet I never see anyone so alte as you within these last few day . you have not a good word for anybody - friend and strangers , equals and inferior - it be all the same . I do wish you would try to check it . ' ' check what ? ' ' why , you strange temper . you do not know how it spoil you . I be sure a finer disposition than yours by nature could not be , if
if you would let it have fair play : so you 've no excuse that way . ' while she thus remonstrate , I take up a book , and lay it open on the table before I , pretend to be deeply absorb in its perusal , for I be equally unable to justify myself and unwill to acknowledge my error ; and I wish to have nothing to say on the matter . but my excellent parent go on lecturing , and then come to coax , and begin to streak my hair ; and I be get to feel quite a good boy , but my mischievous brother , who be id about the room , revive my corruption by suddenly call out , - ' do not touch he , mother ! he will bite ! he be a very tiger in human form . I have give he up for my part - fairly disown he - cast he off , root and branch . it be as much as my life be worth to come within six yard of he . the other day he nearly fracture my skull for singe a pretty , inoffensive love - song , on purpose to amuse he . ' 'Oh , ! how could you ? ' exclaim my mother . 'I tell you to hold you noise first , you know , , ' say I . ' yes , but when I assure you it be no trouble and go on with the next verse , think you might like it better , you clutch I by the shoulder and dash I away , right against the wall there , with such force that I think I have bite my tongue in two , and expect to see the place plastere with my brain ; and when I put my hand to my head , and find my skull not break , I think it be a miracle , and no mistake . but , poor fellow ! ' add he , with a sentimental sigh - ' he heart 's broken - that be the truth of it - and he head 's - ' ' will you be silent now ? ' cry I , start up , and eye the fellow so fiercely that my mother , think I mean to inflict some grievous bodily injury , laid she hand on my arm , and besotch I to let he alone , and he walk leisurely out , with he hand in he pocket , singe provokingly - ' shall I , because a woman 's fair , ' & c . 'I be not go to defile my finger with he , ' say I , in answer to the maternal intercession . 'I would not touch he with the tong . ' I now recollect that I have business with , concern the purchase of a certain field adjoin my farm - a business I have be put off from day to day ; for I have no interest in anything now ; and beside , I be misanthropically inclined , and , moreover , have a particular objection to meet or she mother ; for though I have too good reason , now , to credit they report concern , I do not like they a bit the better for it - or either - and the thought of meet they be the more repugnant to I that I could not , now , defy they seem calumny and triumph in my own conviction as before . but to - day I determine to make a effort to return to my duty . though I find no pleasure in it , it would be less irksome than idleness - at all event it would be more profitable . if life promise no enjoyment within my vocation , at least it offer no allurement out of it ; and henceforth I would put my shoulder to the wheel and toil away , like any poor drudge of a cart - horse that be fairly broken in to its labour , and plod through life , not wholly useless if not agreeable , and uncomplaining if not contente with my lot . thus resolve , with a kind of sullen resignation , if such a term may be allow , I wend my way to Ryecote , scarcely expect to find its owner within at this time of day , but hope to learn in what part of the premise he be most likely to be find . absent he be , but expect home in a few minute ; and I be desire to step into the parlour and wait . be busy in the kitchen , but the room be not empty ; and I scarcely check a involuntary recoil as I enter it ; for there sit chatter with . however , I determine to be cool and civil . seem to have make the same resolution on she part . we have not meet since the evening of the tea - party ; but there be no visible emotion either of pleasure or pain , no attempt at patho , no display of injure pride : she be cool in temper , civil in demeanour . there be even a ease and cheerfulness about she air and manner that I make no pretension to ; but there be a depth of malice in she too expressive eye that plainly tell I I be not forgive ; for , though she no longer hope to win I to herself , she still hate she rival , and evidently delighted to wreak she spite on I . on the other hand , be as affable and courteous as heart could wish , and though I be in no very conversable humour myself , the two lady between they manage to
to keep up a pretty continuous fire of small talk . but take advantage of the first convenient pause to ask if I have lately see , in a tone of merely casual inquiry , but with a sidelong glance - intend to be playfully mischievous - really , brimful and run over with malice . ' not lately ,' I reply , in a careless tone , but sternly repell she odious glance with my eye ; for I be vex to feel the colour mount to my forehead , despite my strenuous effort to appear unmoved . ' what ! be you begin to tire already ? I think so noble a creature would have power to attach you for a year at least ! ' 'I would rather not speak of she now . ' 'Ah ! then you be convince , at last , of you mistake - you have at length discovered that you divinity be not quite the immaculate - ' 'I desire you not to speak of she , . ' ' oh , I beg you pardon ! I perceive 's arrow have be too sharp for you : the wound , be more than skin - deep , be not yet heale , and bleed afresh at every mention of the loved one 's name . ' ' say , rather , ' interpose , ' that feel that name be unworthy to be mention in the presence of right - minded female . I wonder , , you should think of refer to that unfortunate person - you might know the mention of she would be anything but agreeable to any one here present . ' how could this be borne ? I rise and be about to clap my hat upon my head and burst away , in wrathful indignation from the house ; but recollect - just in time to save my dignity - the folly of such a proceeding , and how it would only give my fair tormentor a merry laugh at my expense , for the sake of one I acknowledge in my own heart to be unworthy of the slightest sacrifice - though the ghost of my former reverence and love so hang about I still , that I could not bear to hear she name asperse by other - I merely walk to the window , and have spend a few seconds in vengibly bite my lip and sternly repress the passionate heaving of my chest , I observe to , that I could see nothing of she brother , and add that , as my time be precious , it would perhaps be better to call again to - morrow , at some time when I should be sure to find he at home . 'Oh , no ! ' say she ; ' if you wait a minute , he will be sure to come ; for he have business at -' ( that be we market - town ) , ' and will require a little refreshment before he go . ' I submit accordingly , with the best grace I could ; and , happily , I have not long to wait . soon arrive , and , indispose for business as I be at that moment , and little as I care for the field or its owner , I force my attention to the matter in hand , with very creditable determination , and quickly conclude the bargain - perhaps more to the thrifty farmer 's satisfaction than he care to acknowledge . then , leave he to the discussion of he substantial ' refreshment ,' I gladly quit the house , and go to look after my reaper . leave they busy at work on the side of the valley , I ascend the hill , intend to visit a corn-field in the more elevated region , and see when it would be ripe for the sickle . but I do not visit it that day ; for , as I approach , I beheld , at no great distance , and she son come down in the opposite direction . they see I ; and already be run to meet I ; but I immediately turn back and walk steadily homeward ; for I have fully determined never to encounter he mother again ; and regardless of the shrill voice in my ear , call upon I to ' wait a moment ,' I pursue the even tenor of my way ; and he soon relinquish the pursuit as hopeless , or be call away by he mother . at all event , when I look back , five minute after , not a trace of either be to be see . this incident agitate and disturb I most unaccountably - unless you would account for it by say that 's arrow not only have be too sharp for I , but they be barb and deeply root , and I have not yet be able to wrench they from my heart . however that be , I be render doubly miserable for the remainder of the day . next morning , I bethotch I , I , too , have business at -; so I mount my horse , and set forth on the expedition soon after breakfast . it be a dull , drizzly day ; but that be no matter : it be all the more suitable to my frame of mind . it be likely to be a lonely journey ; for it be no market - day , and the road I traverse be little frequented at any other time ; but that suit I all the better too . as I trott along , however , chew the cud of - bitter fancie , I hear another horse at no great distance behind I ; but I never conjecture who
who the rider might be , or trouble my head about he , till , on slacken my pace to ascend a gentle acclivity , or rather , suffer my horse to slacke he pace into a lazy walk - for , rapt in my own reflection , I be let it jog on as leisurely as it think proper - I lose ground , and my fellow - traveller overtake I . he accost I by name , for it be no stranger - it be ! Instinctively the finger of my whip - hand tingle , and grasp they charge with convulsive energy ; but I restrain the impulse , and answer he salutation with a nod , attempt to push on ; but he push on beside I , and begin to talk about the weather and the crop . I give the briefest possible answer to he query and observation , and fall back . he fall back too , and ask if my horse be lame . I reply with a look , at which he placidly smile . I be as much astonished as exasperate at this singular pertinacity and imperturbable assurance on he part . I have think the circumstance of we last meeting would have leave such a impression on he mind as to render he cold and distant ever after : instead of that , he appear not only to have forget all former offence , but to be impenetrable to all present incivility . Formerly , the slightest hint , or mere fancie coldness in tone or glance , have suffice to repulse he : now , positive rudeness could not drive he away . have he hear of my disappointment ; and be he come to witness the result , and triumph in my despair ? I grasp my whip with more determined energy than before - but still forbore to raise it , and ride on in silence , wait for some more tangible cause of offence , before I open the floodgate of my soul and pour out the dam - up fury that be foam and swell within . ' , ' say he , in he usual quiet tone , ' why do you quarrel with you friend , because you have be disappoint in one quarter ? you have find you hope defeat ; but how be I to blame for it ? I warn you beforehand , you know , but you would not - ' he say no more ; for , impell by some fiend at my elbow , I have seize my whip by the small end , and - swift and sudden as a flash of lightning - bring the other down upon he head . it be not without a feeling of savage satisfaction that I beheld the instant , deadly pallor that overspread he face , and the few red drop that trickl down he forehead , while he reel a moment in he saddle , and then fall backward to the ground . the pony , surprise to be so strangely relieve of its burden , start and cape , and kick a little , and then make use of its freedom to go and crop the grass of the hedge - bank : while its master lay as still and silent as a corpse . have I kill he ? - a icy hand seem to grasp my heart and check its pulsation , as I bend over he , gaze with breathless intensity upon the ghastly , upturned face . but no ; he move he eyelid and uttere a slight groan . I breathe again - he be only stun by the fall . it serve he right - it would teach he better manners in future . should I help he to he horse ? no . for any other combination of offence I would ; but he be too unpardonable . he might mound it himself , if he like - in a while : already he be begin to stir and look about he - and there it be for he , quietly browse on the road - side . so with a muttered execration I leave the fellow to he fate , and clapp spur to my own horse , gallop away , excit by a combination of feeling it would not be easy to analyse ; and perhaps , if I do so , the result would not be very creditable to my disposition ; for I be not sure that a species of exultation in what I have do be not one principal concomitant . shortly , however , the effervescence begin to abate , and not many minute elapse before I have turn and go back to look after the fate of my victim . it be no generous impulse - no kind relenting that lead I to this - nor even the fear of what might be the consequence to myself , if I finish my assault upon the squire by leave he thus neglect , and expose to further injury ; it be , simply , the voice of conscience ; and I take great credit to myself for attending so promptly to its dictate - and judge the merit of the deed by the sacrifice it cost , I be not far wrong . and he pony have both alte they position in some degree . the pony have wander eight or ten yard further away ; and he have manage , somehow , to remove himself from the middle of the road : I find he seat in a recumbent position on the bank , - look very white and sickly still , and hold he cambric handkerchief ( now more red than white ) to he head . it must have be a powerful blow ; but half the credit - or
or the blame of it ( which you please ) must be attribute to the whip , which be garnish with a massive horse 's head of plate metal . the grass , be sodden with rain , afford the young gentleman a rather inhospitable couch ; he clothes be considerably bemire ; and he hat be roll in the mud on the other side of the road . but he thought seem chiefly bent upon he pony , on which he be wistfully gazing - half in helpless anxiety , and half in hopeless abandonment to he fate . I dismount , however , and have fasten my own animal to the nearest tree , first pick up he hat , intend to clap it on he head ; but either he consider he head unfit for a hat , or the hat , in its present condition , unfin for he head ; for shrink away the one , he take the other from my hand , and scornfully cast it aside . ' it be good enough for you ,' I mutter . my next good office be to catch he pony and bring it to he , which be soon accomplish ; for the beast be quiet enough in the main , and only wince and flirt a trifle till I get hold of the bridle - but then , I must see he in the saddle . ' here , you fellow - scoundrel - dog - give I you hand , and I will help you to mount . ' no ; he turn from I in disgust . I attempt to take he by the arm . he shrank away as if there have be contamination in my touch . ' what , you will not ! well ! you may sit there till doomsday , for what I care . but I suppose you do not want to lose all the blood in you body - I will just condescmend to bind that up for you . ' ' let I alone , if you please . ' 'Humph ; with all my heart . you may go to the -l , if you choose - and say I send you . ' but before I abandon he to he fate I fling he pony 's bridle over a stake in the hedge , and throw he my handkerchief , as he own be now saturate with blood . he take it and cast it back to I in abhorrence and contempt , with all the strength he could muster . it want but this to fill the measure of he offence . with execration not loud but deep I leave he to live or die as he could , well satisfi that I have do my duty in attempt to save he - but forget how I have er in bring he into such a condition , and how insultingly my after - service have be offer - and sullenly prepare to meet the consequence if he should choose to say i have attempt to murder he - which I think not unlikly , as it seem probable he be actuate by such spiteful motive in so perseveringly refuse my assistance . have remount my horse , I just look back to see how he be get on , before I ride away . he have risen from the ground , and grasp he pony 's mane , be attempt to resume he seat in the saddle ; but scarcely have he put he foot in the stirrup , when a sickness or dizziness seem to overpower he : he lean forward a moment , with he head droop on the animal 's back , and then make one more effort , which prove ineffectual , he sank back on the bank , where I leave he , repose he head on the oozy turf , and to all appearance , as calmly recline as if he have be take he rest on he sofa at home . I ought to have help he in spite of himself - to have bound up the wound he be unable to staunch , and insist upon get he on he horse and see he safe home ; but , besides my bitter indignation against himself , there be the question what to say to he servants - and what to my own family . either I should have to acknowledge the deed , which would set I down as a madman , unless I acknowledge the motive too - and that seem impossible - or I must get up a lie , which seem equally out of the question - especially as would probably reveal the whole truth , and thereby bring I to tenfold disgrace - unless I be avillain enough , presum on the absence of witness , to persist in my own version of the case , and make he out a still greater scoundrel than he be . no ; he have only receive a cut above the temple , and perhaps a few bruise from the fall , or the hoof of he own pony : that could not kill he if he lay there half the day ; and , if he could not help himself , surely some one would be come by : it would be impossible that a whole day should pass and no one traverse the road but ourselves . as for what he might choose to say hereafter , I would take my chance about it : if he tell lie , I would contradict he ; if he tell the truth , I would bear it as best I could . I be not oblige to enter into explanations further than I think proper . perhaps he might choose to be silent on the subject , for fear of raising inquirie as
as to the cause of the quarrel , and draw the public attention to he connection with , which , whether for she sake or he own , he seem so very desirous to conceal . thus reason , I trot away to the town , where I duly transact my business , and perform various little commission for my mother and rose , with very laudable exactitude , consider the different circumstance of the case . in return home , I be trouble with sundry misgiving about the unfortunate Lawrence . the question , what if I should find he lie still on the damp earth , fairly die of cold and exhaustion - or already stark and chill ? thrust itself most unpleasently upon my mind , and the appal possibility picture itself with painful vividness to my imagination as I approach the spot where I have leave he . but no , thank heaven , both man and horse be gone , and nothing be leave to witness against I but two object - unpleasant enough in themselves to be sure , and present a very ugly , not to say murderous appearance - in one place , the hat saturate with rain and coate with mud , indent and break above the brim by that villainous whip - handle ; in another , the crimson handkerchief , soak in a deeply tinctured pool of water - for much rain have fall in the interim . bad news fly fast : it be hardly four o'clock when I get home , but my mother gravely accost I with - , ! - such a accident ! Rose have be shop in the village , and she be hear that have be throw from he horse and bring home die ! ' this shocke I a trifle , as you may suppose ; but I be comforte to hear that he have frightfully fracture he skull and break a leg ; for , assure of the falsehood of this , I trust the rest of the story be equally exaggerate ; and when I hear my mother and sister so feelingly deplor he condition , I have considerable difficulty in prevent myself from tell they the real extent of the injury , as far as I know they . ' you must go and see he to - morrow , ' say my mother . 'Or to - day , ' suggest : ' there be plenty of time ; and you can have the pony , as you horse be tired . will not you , - as soon as you have have something to eat ? ' ' no , no - how can we tell that it be not all a false report ? it be highly im -' ' oh , I be sure it be not ; for the village be all alive about it ; and I see two people that have see other that have see the man that find he . that sound far - fetch ; but it be not so when you think of it . ' ' well , but be a good rider ; it be not likely he would fall from he horse at all ; and if he do , it be highly improbable he would break he bone in that way . it must be a gross exaggeration at least . ' ' no ; but the horse kick he - or something . ' ' what , he quiet little pony ? ' ' how do you know it be that ? ' ' he seldom rides any other . ' ' at any rate , ' say my mother , ' you will call to - morrow . whether it be true or false , exaggerate or otherwise , we shall like to know how he be . ' ' Fergus may go . ' ' why not you ? ' ' he have more time . I be busy just now . ' 'Oh ! but , , how can you be so compose about it ? you will not mind business for a hour or two in a case of this sort , when you friend be at the point of death . ' ' he be not , I tell you . ' ' for anything you know , he may be : you can not tell till you have see he . at all event , he must have meet with some terrible accident , and you ought to see he : he will take it very unkind if you do not . ' ' Confound it ! I can not . he and I have not be on good term of late . ' ' oh , my dear boy ! surely , surely you be not so unforgiving as to carry you little difference to such a length as - ' ' Little difference , indeed ! ' I mutter . ' well , but only remember the occasion . think how - ' ' well , well , do not bother I now - I will see about it ,' I reply . and my see about it be to send next morning , with my mother 's compliment , to make the requisite inquiry ; for , of course , my go be out of the question - or send a message either . he bring back intelligence that the young squire be lay up with the complicated evils of a broken head and certain contusion ( occasion by a fall - of which he do not trouble himself to relate the particular - and the subsequent misconduct of he horse ) , and a severe cold , the consequence of lie on the wet ground in the rain ; but there be no broken bone , and no immediate prospect of dissolution .
. it be evident , then , that for 's sake it be not he intention to criminate I . that day be rainy like it be predecessor ; but towards evening it begin to clear up a little , and the next morning be fair and promise . I be out on the hill with the reaper . a light wind sweep over the corn , and all nature laugh in the sunshine . the lark be rejoice among the silvery float cloud . the late rain have so sweetly freshened and clear the air , and wash the sky , and leave such glitter gem on branch and blade , that not even the farmer could have the heart to blame it . but no ray of sunshine could reach my heart , no breeze could freshan it ; nothing could fill the void my faith , and hope , and joy in have leave , or drive away the keen regret and bitter dregs of lingering love that still oppress it . while I stand with fold arm abstractedly gaze on the undulating swell of the corn , not yet disturb by the reaper , something gently pull my skirt , and a small voice , no longer welcome to my ear , arouse I with the startling word , - ' , want you . ' ' want I , ? ' ' yes . why do you look so queer ? ' say he , half laugh , half frightene at the unexpected aspect of my face in suddenly turn towards he , - ' and why have you keep so long away ? come ! will not you come ? ' 'I be busy just now ,' I reply , scarce know what to answer . he look up in childish bewilderment ; but before I could speak again the lady herself be at my side . ' , I must speak with you ! ' say she , in a tone of suppress vehemence . I look at she pale cheek and glitter eye , but answer nothing . ' only for a moment , ' plead she . ' just step aside into this other field . ' she glance at the reaper , some of whom be direct look of impertinent curiosity towards she . 'I will not keep you a minute . ' I accompany she through the gap . ' Arthur , darl , run and gather those bluebell , ' say she , point to some that be gleam at some distance under the hedge along which we walk . the child hesitate , as if unwilling to quit my side . 'Go , love ! ' repeat she more urgently , and in a tone which , though not unkind , demand prompt obedience , and obtain it . ' well , ? ' say I , calmly and coldly ; for , though I see she be miserable , and pitie she , I feel glad to have it in my power to torment she . she fix she eye upon I with a look that pierce I to the heart ; and yet it make I smile . 'I do not ask the reason of this change , , ' say she , with bitter calmness : 'I know it too well ; but though I could see myself suspect and condemn by every one else , and bear it with calmness , I can not endure it from you . - why do you not come to hear my explanation on the day I appoint to give it ? ' ' because I happen , in the interim , to learn all you would have tell I - and a trifle more , I imagine . ' ' impossible , for I would have tell you all ! ' cry she , passionately - ' but I will not now , for I see you be not worthy of it ! ' and she pale lip quiver with agitation . ' why not , may I ask ? ' she repell my mocking smile with a glance of scornful indignation . ' because you never understand I , or you would not soon have listen to my traducer - my confidence would be misplace in you - you be not the man I think you . go ! I will not care what you think of I . ' she turn away , and I go ; for I think that would torment she as much as anything ; and I believe I be right ; for , look back a minute after , I see she turn half round , as if hope or expect to find I still beside she ; and then she stand still , and cast one look behind . it be a look less expressive of anger than of bitter anguish and despair ; but I immediately assume a aspect of indifference , and affect to be gaze carelessly around I , and I suppose she go on ; for after linger awhile to see if she would come back or call , I venture one more glance , and see she a good way off , move rapidly up the field , with little run by she side and apparently talk as he go ; but she keep she face avert from he , as if to hide some uncontrollable emotion . and I return to my business . but I soon begin to regret my precipitancy in leave she so soon . it be evident she love I - probably she be tired of , and wish to exchange he for I ; and if I have love and reverence she less to begin with , the preference might have gratify and amuse I ; but now the contrast between she outward see and she inward mind
mind , as I suppose , - between my former and my present opinion of she , be so harrowing - so distressing to my feeling , that it swallow up every lighter consideration . but still I be curious to know what sort of a explanation she would have give I - or would give now , if I press she for it - how much she would confess , and how she would endeaavor to excuse herself . I longe to know what to despise , and what to admire in she ; how much to pity , and how much to hate ; - and , what be more , I would know . I would see she once more , and fairly satisfy myself in what light to regard she , before we part . lose to I she be , for ever , of course ; but still I could not bear to think that we have part , for the last time , with so much unkindness and misery on both side . that last look of hers have sunk into my heart ; I could not forget it . but what a fool I be ! have she not deceive I , injure I - blight my happiness for life ? ' well , I will see she , however , ' be my concluding resolve , ' but not to - day : to - day and to - night she may think upon she sins , and be as miserable as she will : to -morrow I will see she once again , and know something more about she . the interview may be serviceable to she , or it may not . at any rate , it will give a breath of excitement to the life she have doom to stagnation , and may calm with certainty some agitat thought . ' I do go on the morrow , but not till towards evening , after the business of the day be conclude , that be , between six and seven ; and the westering sun be gleam redly on the old Hall , and flam in the latticed window , as I reach it , impart to the place a cheerfulness not its own . I need not dilate upon the feeling with which I approach the shrine of my former divinity - that spot teem with a thousand delightful recollection and glorious dream - all darken now by one disastrous truth admit I into the parlour , and go to call she mistress , for she be not there : but there be she desk leave open on the little round table beside the high - back chair , with a book laid upon it . she limit but choice collection of book be almost as familiar to I as my own ; but this volume I have not see before . I take it up . it be 's ' last day of a , ' and on the first leaf be write , ' . ' I close the book , but keep it in my hand , and stood face the door , with my back to the fire - place , calmly wait she arrival ; for I do not doubt she would come . and soon I hear she step in the hall . my heart be begin to throb , but I check it with a internal rebuke , and maintain my composure - outwardly at least . she enter , calm , pale , collect . ' to what be I indebt for this favour , ? ' say she , with such severe but quiet dignity as almost disconcert I ; but I answer with a smile , and impudently enough , - ' well , I be come to hear you explanation . ' 'I tell you I would not give it , ' say she . 'I say you be unworthy of my confidence . ' 'Oh , very well , ' reply I , move to the door . ' stay a moment , ' say she . ' this be the last time I shall see you : do not go just yet . ' I remain , await she further command . ' tell I , ' resume she , 'on what grounds you believe these thing against I ; who tell you ; and what do they say ? ' I pause a moment . she meet my eye as unflinchingly as if she bosom have be steel with conscious innocence . she be resolve to know the worst , and determined to dare it too . 'I can crush that bold spirit ,' think I . but while I secretly exult in my power , I feel dispose to dally with my victim like a cat . show she the book that I still hold , in my hand , and point to the name on the fly - leaf , but fix my eye upon she face , I ask , - ' do you know that gentleman ? ' ' of course I do , ' reply she ; and a sudden flush suffuse she feature - whether of shame or anger I could not tell : it rather resemble the latter . ' what next , sir ? ' ' how long be it since you see he ? ' ' who give you the right to catechize I on this or any other subject ? ' 'Oh , no one ! - it be quite at you option whether to answer or not . and now , let I ask - have you hear what have lately befall this friend of yours ? - because , if you have not - ' 'I will not be insulted , ! ' cry she , almost infuriate at my manner . '
' so you have better leave the house at once , if you come only for that . ' 'I do not come to insult you : I come to hear you explanation . ' ' and I tell you I will not give it ! ' retort she , pace the room in a state of strong excitement , with she hand clasp tightly together , breathe short , and flash fire of indignation from she eyes . 'I will not condescmend to explain myself to one that can make a jest of such horrible suspicion , and be so easily lead to entertain they . ' 'I do not make a jest of they , , ' return I , drop at once my tone of taunting sarcasm . ' I heartily wish I could find they a jesting matter . and as to be easily lead to suspect , only know what a blind , incredulous fool I have hithertoo be , perseveringly shutt my eye and stop my ear against everything that threaten to shake my confidence in you , till proof itself confound my infatuation ! ' ' what proof , sir ? ' ' well , I will tell you . you remember that even when I be here last ? ' 'I do . ' ' even then you drop some hint that might have open the eye of a wiser man ; but they have no such effect upon I : I go on trusting and believe , hope against hope , and adore where I could not comprehend . it so happen , however , that after I leave you I turn back - draw by pure depth of sympathy and ardour of affection - not da to intrude my presence openly upon you , but unable to resist the temptation of catch one glimpse through the window , just to see how you be : for I have leave you apparently in great affliction , and I partly blame my own want of forbearance and discretion as the cause of it . if I do wrong , love alone be my incentive , and the punishment be severe enough ; for it be just as I have reach that tree , that you come out into the garden with you friend . not choose to show myself , under the circumstance , I stand still , in the shadow , till you have both pass by . ' ' and how much of we conversation do you hear ? ' 'I hear quite enough , . and it be well for I that I do hear it ; for nothing less could have cure my infatuation . I always say and think , that I would never believe a word against you , unless I hear it from you own lip . all the hint and affirmation of other I treat as malignant , baseless slander ; you own self - accusation I believe to be overstrain ; and all that seem unaccountable in you position I truste that you could account for if you choose . ' have discontinue she walk . she lean against one end of the chimney - piece , opposite that near which I be stand , with she ching rest on she close hand , she eye - no longer burn with anger , but gleam with restless excitement - sometimes glance at I while I speak , then course the opposite wall , or fix upon the carpet . ' you should have come to I after all , ' say she , ' and hear what I have to say in my own justification . it be ungenerous and wrong to withdraw yourself so secretly and suddenly , immediately after such ardent protestation of attachment , without ever assign a reason for the change . you should have tell I all - no matter how bitterly . it would have be better than this silence . ' ' to what end should I have do so ? you could not have enlighten I further , on the subject which alone concern I ; nor could you have make I discredit the evidence of my sense . I desire we intimacy to be discontinue at once , as you yourself have acknowledge would probably be the case if I know all ; but I do not wish to upbraid you , - though ( as you also acknowledge ) you have deeply wronge I . yes , you have do I a injury you can never repair - or any other either - you have blight the freshness and promise of youth , and make my life a wilderness ! I might live a hundred year , but I could never recover from the effect of this withering blow - and never forget it ! Hereafter - you smile , , ' say I , suddenly stop short , check in my passionate declamation by unutterable feeling to behold she actually smile at the picture of the ruin she have wrotch . ' do I ? ' reply she , look seriously up ; be not aware of it . if I do , it be not for pleasure at the thought of the harm I have do you . know I have have torment enough at the bare possibility of that ; it be for joy to find that you have some depth of soul and feel after all , and to hope that I have not be utterly mistaken in you worth . but smile and tear be so alike with I , they be neither of they confin to any particular feeling : I often cry when I be happy , and smile when I be sad . ' she look at I again , and seem to expect a reply ; but I continue silent . ' would you be
be very glad , ' resume she , 'too find that you be mistaken in you conclusion ? ' ' how can you ask it , ? ' 'I do not say I can clear myself altogether , ' say she , speak low and fast , while she heart beat visibly and she bosom heav with excitement , - ' but would you be glad to discover I be better than you think I ? ' ' anything that could in the least degree tend to restore my former opinion of you , to excuse the regard I still feel for you , and alleviate the pang of unutterable regret that accompany it , would be only too gladly , too eagerly receive ! ' she cheek burn , and she whole frame tremble , now , with excess of agitation . she do not speak , but fly to she desk , and snatch thence what see a thick album or manuscript volume , hastily tore away a few leave from the end , and thrust the rest into my hand , say , ' you need not read it all ; but take it home with you , ' and hurrie from the room . but when I have leave the house , and be proceed down the walk , she open the window and call I back . it be only to say , - ' bring it back when you have read it ; and do not breathe a word of what it tell you to any living being . I trust to you honour . ' before I could answer she have close the casement and turn away . I see she cast herself back in the old oak chair , and cover she face with she hand . she feeling have be wrotch to a pitch that render it necessary to seek relief in tear . Pan with eagerness , and struggle to suppress my hope , I hurrie home , and rush up - stair to my room , have first provide myself with a candle , though it be scarcely twilight yet - then , shut and bolt the door , determine to tolerate no interruption ; and sit down before the table , open out my prize and deliver myself up to its perusal - first hastily turn over the leave and snatch a sentence here and there , and then set myself steadily to read it through . I have it now before I ; and though you could not , of course , peruse it with half the interest that I do , I know you would not be satisfied with a abbreviation of its contents , and you shall have the whole , save , perhaps , a few passage here and there of merely temporary interest to the writer , or such as would serve to encumber the story rather than elucidate it . it begin somewhat abruptly , thus - but we will reserve its commencement for another chapter . 1st , 1821 . - we have just return to - that be , we return some day ago , and I be not yet settle , and feel as if I never should be . we leave town sooner than be intend , in consequence of my uncle 's indisposition ; - I wonder what would have be the result if we have stay the full time . I be quite asham of my new - sprung distaste for country life . all my former occupation seem so tedious and dull , my former amusement so insipid and unprofitable . I can not enjoy my music , because there be no one to hear it . I can not enjoy my walk , because there be no one to meet . I can not enjoy my book , because they have not power to arrest my attention : my head be so haunted with the recollection of the last few week , that I can not attend to they . my draw suit I best , for I can draw and think at the same time ; and if my productions can not now be see by any one but myself , and those who do not care about they , they , possibly , may be , hereafter . but , then , there be one face I be always try to paint or to sketch , and always without success ; and that vex I . as for the owner of that face , I can not get he out of my mind - and , indeed , I never try . I wonder whether he ever think of I ; and I wonder whether I shall ever see he again . and then might follow a train of other wonderment - question for time and fate to answer - conclude with - Suppose all the rest be answer in the affirmative , I wonder whether I shall ever repent it ? as my aunt would tell I I should , if she know what I be think about . how distinctly I remember we conversation that even before we departure for town , when we be sit together over the fire , my uncle have go to be with a slight attack of the gout . ' , ' say she , after a thoughtful silence , 'do you ever think about marriage ? ' ' yes , aunt , often . ' ' and do you ever contemplate the possibility of be marry yourself , or engage , before the season be over ? ' ' sometimes ; but I do not think it at all likely that I ever shall . ' ' why so ? ' ' because , I imagine , there must be only a very , very few man in the world that I should like
like to marry ; and of those few , it be ten to one I may never be acquainted with one ; or if I should , it be twenty to one he may not happen to be single , or to take a fancy to I . ' ' that be no argument at all . it may be very true - and I hope be true , that there be very few man whom you would choose to marry , of yourself . it be not , indeed , to be suppose that you would wish to marry any one till you be ask : a girl 's affection should never be won unsotch . but when they be seek - when the citadel of the heart be fairly besieged - it be apt to surrender sooner than the owner be aware of , and often against she better judgment , and in opposition to all she preconceive idea of what she could have love , unless she be extremely careful and discreet . now , I want to warn you , , of these thing , and to exhort you to be watchful and circumspect from the very commencement of you career , and not to suffer you heart to be steal from you by the first foolish or unprincipled person that covet the possession of it . - you know , my dear , you be only just eighteen ; there be plenty of time before you , and neither you uncle nor I be in any hurry to get you off we hand , and I may venture to say , there will be no lack of suitor ; for you can boast a good family , a pretty considerable fortune and expectation , and , I may as well tell you likewise - for , if I do not , other will - that you have a fair share of beauty beside - and I hope you may never have cause to regret it ! ' 'I hope not , aunt ; but why should you fear it ? ' ' because , my dear , beauty be that quality which , next to money , be generally the most attractive to the worst kind of man ; and , therefore , it be likely to entail a great deal of trouble on the possessor . ' ' have you be troublead in that way , aunt ? ' 'no , , ' say she , with reproachful gravity , ' but I know many that have ; and some , through carelessness , have be the wretched victim of deceit ; and some , through weakness , have fall into snare and temptation terrible to relate . ' ' well , I shall be neither careless nor weak . ' , ! do not boast , but watch . keep a guard over you eye and ear as the inlet of you heart , and over you lip as the outlet , lest they betray you in a moment of unwariness . receive , coldly and dispassionately , every attention , till you have ascertaine and duly consider the worth of the aspirant ; and let you affections be consequent upon approbation alone . first study ; then approve ; then love . let you eye be blind to all external attraction , you ear deaf to all the fascination of flattery and light discourse . - these be nothing - and worse than nothing - snare and wile of the tempter , to lure the thoughtless to they own destruction . principle be the first thing , after all ; and next to that , good sense , respectability , and moderate wealth . if you should marry the handsomest , and most accomplished and superficially agreeable man in the world , you little know the misery that would overwhelm you if , after all , you should find he to be a worthless reprobate , or even a impracticable fool . ' ' but what be all the poor fool and reprobate to do , aunt ? if everybody follow you advice , the world would soon come to a end . ' ' never fear , my dear ! the male fool and reprobate will never want for partner , while there be so many of the other sex to match they ; but do you follow my advice . and this be no subject for , - I be sorry to see you treat the matter in that light way . believe I , matrimony be a serious thing . ' and she speak it so seriously , that one might have fancie she have know it to she cost ; but I ask no more impertinent question , and merely answer , - 'I know it be ; and I know there be truth and sense in what you say ; but you need not fear I , for I not only should think it wrong to marry a man that be deficient in sense or in principle , but I should never be tempted to do it ; for I could not like he , if he be ever so handsome , and ever so charming , in other respects ; I should hate he - despise he - pity he - anything but love he . my affection not only ought to be founde on approbation , but they will and must be so : for , without approve , I can not love . it be needless to say , I ought to be able to respect and honour the man I marry , as well as love he , for I can not love he without . so set you mind at rest . ' 'I hope it may be so , ' answer she . 'I know it be so , ' persist I
I . ' you have not be try yet , - we can but hope , ' say she in she cold , cautious way . be vex at she incredulity ; but I be not sure she doubt be entirely without sagacity ; I fear I have find it much easier to remember she advice than to profit by it ; - indeed , I have sometimes be lead to question the soundness of she doctrine on those subject . she counsels may be good , as far as they go - in the main point at least ; - but there be some thing she have overlook in she calculation . I wonder if she be ever in love . I commence my career - or my first campaign , as my uncle call it - kindling with bright hope and fancie - chiefly raise by this conversation - and full of confidence in my own discretion . at first , I be delighte with the novelty and excitement of we life ; but soon I begin to weary of its mingled turbulence and constraint , and sigh for the freshness and freedom of home . my new acquaintance , both male and female , disappoint my expectation , and vex and depresse I by turn ; I for I soon grow tired of study they peculiarity , and laugh at they foible - particularly as I be oblige to keep my criticisms to myself , for my aunt would not hear they - and they - the lady especially - appear so provokingly mindless , and heartless , and artificial . the gentleman scorne better , but , perhaps , it be because I know they less - perhaps , because they flatter I ; but I do not fall in love with any of they ; and , if they attention please I one moment , they provoke I the next , because they put I out of humour with myself , by reveal my vanity and make I fear I be become like some of the ladie I so heartily despise . there be one elderly gentleman that annoye I very much ; a rich old friend of my uncle 's , who , I believe , think I could not do better than marry he ; but , besides be old , he be ugly and disagreeable , - and wick , I be sure , through my aunt scold I for say so ; but she allow he be no saint . and there be another , less hateful , but still more tiresome , because she favour he , and be always thrust he upon I , and sound he praise in my ear - by name , 'em , as I prefer spell it , for a terrible bore he be : I shudder still at the remembrance of he voice - drone , drone , drone , in my ear - while he sit beside I , prose away by the half - hour together , and beguil himself with the notion that he be improve my mind by useful information , or impress he dogma upon I and reform my error of judgment , or perhaps that he be talk down to my level , and amuse I with entertaining discourse . yet he be a decent man enough in the main , I daresay ; and if he have keep he distance , I never would have hate he . as it be , it be almost impossible to help it , for he not only bother I with the infliction of he own presence , but he keep I from the enjoyment of more agreeable society . one night , however , at a ball , he have be more than usually torment , and my patience be quite exhaust . it appear as if the whole evening be fate to be insupportable : I have just have one dance with a empty - headed coxcomb , and then have come upon I and seem determined to cling to I for the rest of the night . he never dance himself , and there he sit , pok he head in my face , and impress all beholder with the idea that he be a confirm , acknowledge lover ; my aunt look complacently on all the time , and wish he - speed . in vain I attempt to drive he away by give a loose to my exasperated feeling , even to positive rudeness : nothing could convince he that he presence be disagreeable . silence be take for rapt attention , and give he greater room to talk ; sharp answer be receive as smart sally of girlish vivacity , that only require a indulgent rebuke ; and flat contradiction be but as oil to the flame , call forth new strains of argument to support he dogma , and bring down upon I endless flood of reasoning to overwhelm I with conviction . but there be one present who seem to have a better appreciation of my frame of mind . a gentleman stand by , who have be watch we conference for some time , evidently much amused at my companion 's remorseless pertinacity and my manifest annoyance , and laugh to himself at the asperity and uncompromising spirit of my reply . at length , however , he withdraw , and go to the lady of the house , apparently for the purpose of ask a introduction to I , for , shortly after , they both come up , and she introduce he as , the son of a late friend of my uncle 's . he ask I to dance . I gladly consent , of course ; and he be my companion during the remainder of my stay , which be not long , for my aunt , as
as usual , insiste upon a early departure . I be sorry to go , for I have find my new acquaintance a very lively and entertaine companion . there be a certain graceful ease and freedom about all he say and do , that give a sense of repose and expansion to the mind , after so much constraint and formality as I have be doom to suffer . there might be , it be true , a little too much careless boldness in he manner and address , but I be in so good a humour , and so grateful for my late deliverance from , that it do not anger I . ' well , Helen , how do you like now ? ' say my aunt , as we take we seat in the carriage and drive away . ' worse than ever ,' I reply . she look displeased , but say no more on that subject . ' who be the gentleman you dance with last , ' resume she , after a pause - ' that be so officious in help you on with you shawl ? ' ' he be not officious at all , aunt : he never attempt to help I till he see come to do so ; and then he step laughingly forward and say , " come , I will preserve you from that infliction . "' ' who be it , I ask ? ' say she , with frigid gravity . ' it be , the son of uncle 's old friend . ' 'I have hear you uncle speak of young . I have hear he say , " he be a fine lad , that young , but a bit wildish , I fancy . " so I would have you beware . ' ' what do " a bit wildish " mean ? ' I inquire . ' it mean destitute of principle , and pro to every vice that be common to youth . ' ' but I have hear uncle say he be a sad wild fellow himself , when he be young . ' she sternly shook she head . ' he be jest then , I suppose , ' say I , ' and here he be speak at random - at least , I can not believe there be any harm in those laugh blue eye . ' ' false reasoning , ! ' say she , with a sigh . ' well , we ought to be charitable , you know , aunt - beside , I do not think it be false : I be a excellent physiognomist , and I always judge of people 's character by they look - not by whether they be handsome or ugly , but by the general cast of the countenance . for instance , I should know by you countenance that you be not of a cheerful , sanguine disposition ; and I should know by 's , that he be a worthless old reprobate ; and by 's , that he be not a agreeable companion ; and by 's , that he be neither a fool nor a knave , though , possibly , neither a sage nor a saint - but that be no matter to I , as I be not likely to meet he again - unless as a occasional partner in the ball - room . ' it be not so , however , for I meet he again next morning . he come to call upon my uncle , apologise for not have do so before , by say he be only lately return from the continent , and have not hear , till the previous night , of my uncle 's arrival in town ; and after that I often meet he ; sometimes in public , sometimes at home ; for he be very assiduous in pay he respects to he old friend , who do not , however , consider himself greatly oblige by the attention . 'I wonder what the deuce the lad mean by come so often ,' he would say , - ' can you tell , ? - hey ? he want none of ' my company , nor I he - that be certain . ' 'I wish you would tell he so , then , ' say my aunt . ' why , what for ? if I do not want he , somebody do , mayhap ' ( wink at I ) . ' , he be a pretty tidy fortune , , you know - not such a catch as ; but then Helen will not hear of that match : for , somehow , these old chap do not go down with the girl - with all they money , and they experience to boot . I will bet anything she would rather have this young fellow without a penny , than with he house full of gold . would not you , ? ' ' yes , uncle ; but that be not say much for ; for I would rather be a old maid and a pauper than . ' ' and ? what would you rather be than - eh ? ' 'I will tell you when I have consider the matter . ' 'Ah ! it need consideration , then ? but come , now - would you rather be a old maid - let alone the pauper ? ' 'I can not tell till I be ask . ' and I leave the room immediately , to escape further examination . but five minute after , in look from my window , I beheld come up to the door . I wait nearly half - a - hour in uncomfortable suspense , expect every minute to be call , and vainly long to hear
hear he go . then footstep be hear on the stair , and my aunt enter the room with a solemn countenance , and close the door behind she . ' here be , , ' say she . ' he wish to see you . ' 'Oh , aunt ! - can not you tell he I be indispose ? - I be sure I be - to see he . ' ' Nonsense , my dear ! this be no trifling matter . he be come on a very important errand - to ask you hand in marriage of you uncle and I . ' 'I hope my uncle and you tell he it be not in you power to give it . what right have he to ask any one before I ? ' ! ' ' what do my uncle say ? ' ' he say he would not interfere in the matter ; if you like to accept 's obliging offer , you - ' ' do he say oblige offer ? ' ' no ; he say if you like to take he you might ; and if not , you might please yourself . ' ' he say right ; and what do you say ? ' ' it be no matter what I say . what will you say ? - that be the question . he be now wait to ask you himself ; but consider well before you go ; and if you intend to refuse he , give I you reason . ' 'I shall refuse he , of course ; but you must tell I how , for I want to be civil and yet decide - and when I have get rid of he , I will give you my reason afterwards . ' ' but stay , Helen ; sit down a little and compose yourself . be in no particular hurry , for he have little doubt of you acceptance ; and I want to speak with you . tell I , my dear , what be you objection to he ? do you deny that he be a upright , honourable man ? ' ' no . ' ' do you deny that he be sensible , sober , respectable ? ' ' no ; he may be all this , but - ' ' but , ! how many such man do you expect to meet with in the world ? Upright , honourable , sensible , sober , respectable ! be this such a every - day character that you should reject the possessor of such noble quality without a moment 's hesitation ? yes , noble I may call they ; for think of the full meaning of each , and how many inestimable virtue they include ( and I might add many more to the list ) , and consider that all this be laid at you foot . it be in you power to secure this inestimable blessing for life - a worthy and excellent husband , who love you tenderly , but not too fondly so as to blind he to you fault , and will be you guide throughout life 's pilgrimage , and you partner in eternal bliss . think how - ' ' but I hate he , aunt , ' say I , interrupt this unusual flow of eloquence . 'Hate he , Helen ! be this a spirit ? - you hate he ? and he so good a man ! ' 'I do not hate he as a man , but as a husband . as a man , I love he so much that I wish he a better wife than I - one as good as himself , or better - if you think that possible - provide she could like he ; but I never could , and therefore - ' ' but why not ? what objection do you find ? ' ' firstly , he be at least forty year old - considerably more , I should think - and I be but eighteen ; secondly , he be narrow - minded and bigote in the extreme ; thirdly , he taste and feeling be wholly dissimilar to mine ; fourthly , he look , voice , and manner be particularly displease to I ; and , finally , I have a aversion to he whole person that I never can surmount . ' ' then you ought to surmount it . and please to compare he for a moment with , and , good look apart ( which contribute nothing to the merit of the man , or to the happiness of married life , and which you have so often profess to hold in light esteem ) , tell I which be the better man . ' 'I have no doubt be a much better man than you think he ; but we be not talk about he now , but about ; and as I would rather grow , live , and die in single blessedness - than be he wife , it be but right that I should tell he so at once , and put he out of suspense - so let I go . ' ' but do not give he a flat denial ; he have no idea of such a thing , and it would offend he greatly : say you have no thought of matrimony at present - ' ' but I have thoughts of it . ' 'Or that you desire a further acquaintance . ' ' but I do not desire a further acquaintance - quite the contrary . ' and without wait for further admonition I leave the room and go to seek . he be walk up and down the draw - room , hum snatch of tune and nibbl the end of he cane
cane . ' my dear young lady , ' say he , bow and smirk with great complacency , 'I have you kind guardian 's permission - ' 'I know , sir , ' say I , wish to shorten the scene as much as possible , ' and I be greatly oblige for you preference , but must beg to decline the honour you wish to confer , for I think we be not make for each other , as you yourself would shortly discover if the experiment be try . ' my aunt be right . it be quite evident he have have little doubt of my acceptance , and no idea of a positive denial . he be amaze , astounde at such a answer , but too incredulous to be much offended ; and after a little humming and haw , he return to the attack . 'I know , my dear , that there exist a considerable disparity between we in year , in temperament , and perhaps some other thing ; but let I assure you , I shall not be severe to mark the fault and foible of a young and ardent nature such as yours , and while I acknowledge they to myself , and even rebuke they with all a father 's care , believe I , no youthful lover could be more tenderly indulgent towards the object of he affections than I to you ; and , on the other hand , let I hope that my more experienced year and graver habits of reflection will be no disparagement in you eye , as I shall endeaavor to make they all conducive to you happiness . come , now ! what do you say ? let we have no young lady 's affectation and caprice , but speak out at once . ' 'I will , but only to repeat what I say before , that I be certain we be not make for each other . ' ' you really think so ? ' 'I do . ' ' but you do not know I - you wish for a further acquaintance - a longer time to - ' ' no , I do not . I know you as well as I ever shall , and better than you know I , or you would never dream of unit yourself to one so incongruous - so utterly unsuitable to you in every way . ' ' but , my dear young lady , I do not look for perfection ; I can excuse - ' ' thank you , , but I will not trespass upon you goodness . you may save you indulgence and consideration for some more worthy object , that will not tax they so heavily . ' ' but let I beg you to consult you aunt ; that excellent lady , I be sure , will - ' 'I have consult she ; and I know she wish coincide with yours ; but in such important matter , I take the liberty of judging for myself ; and no persuasion can alter my inclination , or induce I to believe that such a step would be conducive to my happiness or yours - and I wonder that a man of you experience and discretion should think of choose such a wife . ' 'Ah , well ! ' say he , 'I have sometimes wonder at that myself . I have sometimes say to myself , " now , what be this you be after ? take care , man - look before you leap ! this be a sweet , bewitch creature , but remember , the brightest attraction to the lover too often prove the husband 's greatest torment ! " I assure you my choice have not be make without much reasoning and reflection . the seem imprudence of the match have cost I many a anxious thought by day , and many a sleepless hour by night ; but at length I satisfy myself that it be not , in very deed , imprudent . I see my sweet girl be not without she fault , but of these she youth , I trust , be not one , but rather a earnest of virtue yet unblown - a strong ground of presumption that she little defect of temper and error of judgment , opinion , or manner be not irremediable , but might easily be remove or mitigate by the patient effort of a watchful and judicious adviser , and where I fail to enlighten and control , I think I might safely undertake to pardon , for the sake of she many excellence . therefore , my dearest girl , since I be satisfied , why should you object - on my account , at least ? ' ' but to tell you the truth , Boarham , it be on my own account I principally object ; so let we - drop the subject ,' I would have say , ' for it be worse than useless to pursue it any further , ' but he pertinaciously interrupt I with , - ' but why so ? I would love you , cherish you , protect you , ' & c. , &c . I shall not trouble myself to put down all that pass between we . Suffice it to say , that I find he very troublesome , and very hard to convince that I really mean what I say , and really be so obstinate and blind to my own interest , that there be no shadow of a chance that either he or my aunt would ever be able to overcome my objection . indeed , I be not sure that I succeed after all ; though weary with he so pertinaciously return to the same point and repeat the same argument over
over and over again , force I to reiterate the same reply , I at length turn short and sharp upon he , and my last word be , - 'I tell you plainly , that it can not be . no consideration can induce I to marry against my inclination . I respect you - at least , I would respect you , if you would behave like a sensible man - but I can not love you , and never could - and the more you talk the further you repel I ; so pray do not say any more about it . ' Whereupon he wish I a good - morning , and withdraw , disconcert and offend , no doubt ; but surely it be not my fault . the next day i accompany my uncle and aunt to a dinner - party at 's . he have two lady stay with he : he niece , a fine dashing girl , or rather young woman , - of some five - and - twenty , too great a flirt to be marry , accord to she own assertion , but greatly admire by the gentleman , who universally pronounce she a splendid woman ; and she gentle cousin , , who have take a violent fancy to I , mistake I for something vastly better than I be . and I , in return , be very fond of she . I should entirely exclude poor Milicent in my general animadversion against the ladie of my acquaintance . but it be not on she account , or she cousin 's , that I have mention the party : it be for the sake of another of 's guest , to wit . I have good reason to remember he presence there , for this be the last time I see he . he do not sit near I at dinner ; for it be he fate to hand in a capacious old dowager , and mine to be hand in by , a friend of he , but a man I very greatly dislike : there be a sinister cast in he countenance , and a mixture of lurking ferocity and fulsome insincerity in he demeanour , that I could not away with . what a tiresome custom that be , by - the - by - one among the many source of factitious annoyance of this ultra-civilised life . if the gentleman must lead the lady into the dining - room , why can not they take those they like best ? I be not sure , however , that would have take I , if he have be at liberty to make he own selection . it be quite possible he might have choose ; for she see bend upon engrosse he attention to herself , and he seem nothing loth to pay the homage she demand . I think so , at least , when I see how they talk and laugh , and glance across the table , to the neglect and evident umbrage of they respective neighbour - and afterwards , as the gentleman join we in the drawing - room , when she , immediately upon he entrance , loudly call upon he to be the arbiter of a dispute between herself and another lady , and he answer the summon with alacrity , and decide the question without a moment 's hesitation in she favour - though , to my thinking , she be obviously in the wrong - and then stand chat familiarly with she and a group of other lady ; while I sit with at the opposite end of the room , look over the latter 's drawing , and aid she with my critical observation and advice , at she particular desire . but in spite of my effort to remain compose , my attention wander from the drawing to the merry group , and against my better judgment my wrath rise , and doubtless my countenance lower ; for , observe that I must be tired of she daub and scratch , beg I would join the company now , and defer the examination of the remainder to another opportunity . but while I be assure she that I have no wish to join they , and be not tired , himself come up to the little round table at which we sit . ' be these yours ? ' say he , carelessly take up one of the drawing . ' no , they be 's . ' 'Oh ! well , let 's have a look at they . ' and , regardless of 's protestation that they be not worth look at , he draw a chair to my side , and receive the drawing , one by one from my hand , successively scan they over , and throw they on the table , but say not a word about they , though he be talk all the time . I do not know what think of such conduct , but I find he conversation extremely interesting ; though , as I afterwards discover , when I come to analyse it , it be chiefly confin to quiz the different member of the company present ; and albeit he make some clever remark , and some excessively droll one , I do not think the whole would appear anything very particular , if write here , without the adventitious aids of look , and tone , and gesture , and that ineffable but indefinite charm , which cast a halo over all he do and say , and which would have make it a delight to look in he face , and hear the music of he voice , if he have be talk positive nonsense - and which , moreover , make I feel so bitter against my aunt
aunt when she put a stop to this enjoyment , by come composedly forward , under pretence of wishing to see the drawing , that she care and know nothing about , and while make believe to examine they , address herself to , with one of she coldest and most repellent aspect , and begin a series of the most common - place and formidably formal question and observation , on purpose to wrest he attention from I - on purpose to vex I , as I think : and have now look through the portfolio , I leave they to they Tete -e - Tete , and seate myself on a sofa , quite apart from the company - never think how strange such conduct would appear , but merely to indulge , at first , the vexation of the moment , and subsequently to enjoy my private thought . but I be not leave long alone , for , of all man the least welcome , take advantage of my isolated position to come and plant himself beside I . I have flatter myself that I have so effectually repulse he advances on all former occasion , that I have nothing more to apprehend from he unfortunate predilection ; but it seem I be mistaken : so great be he confidence , either in he wealth or he remain power of attraction , and so firm he conviction of feminine weakness , that he think himself warrant to return to the siege , which he do with renovated ardour , enkindle by the quantity of wine he have drunk - a circumstance that render he infinitely the more disgusting ; but greatly as I abhor he at that moment , I do not like to treat he with rudeness , as I be now he guest , and have just be enjoy he hospitality ; and I be no hand at a polite but determine rejection , nor would it have greatly avail I if I have , for he be too coarse - minded to take any repulse that be not as plain and positive as he own effrontery . the consequence be , that he wax more fulsomely tender , and more repulsively warm , and I be drive to the very verge of desperation , and about to say I know not what , when I feel my hand , that hang over the arm of the sofa , suddenly take by another and gently but fervently press . Instinctively , I guess who it be , and , on look up , be less surprised than delighted to see smile upon I . it be like turn from some purgatorial fiend to a angel of light , come to announce that the season of torment be past . ' , ' say he ( he frequently call I , and I never resent the freedom ) , 'I want you to look at this picture . will excuse you a moment , I be sure . ' I rise with alacrity . he draw my arm within he , and lead I across the room to a splendid painting of 's that I have notice before , but not sufficiently examine . after a moment of silent contemplation , I be begin to comment on its beauty and peculiarity , when , playfully press the hand he still retain within he arm , he interrupt I with , - ' never mind the picture : it be not for that I bring you here ; it be to get you away from that scoundrelly old profligate yonder , who be look as if he would like to challenge I for the affront . ' 'I be very much oblige to you , ' say I . ' this be twice you have deliver I from such unpleasant companionship . ' ' do not be too thankful ,' he answer : ' it be not all kindness to you ; it be partly from a feeling of spite to you tormentor that make I delighted to do the old fellow a bad turn , though I do not think I have any great reason to dread they as rival . have I , ? ' ' you know I detest they both . ' ' and I ? ' 'I have no reason to detest you . ' ' but what be you sentiment towards I ? - ! how do you regard I ? ' and again he press my hand ; but I fear there be more of conscious power than tenderness in he demeanour , and I feel he have no right to extort a confession of attachment from I when he have make no correspondent avowal himself , and know not what to answer . at last I say , - ' how do you regard I ? ' ' sweet angel , I adore you ! I - ' ' , I want you a moment , ' say the distinct , low voice of my aunt , close beside we . and I leave he , mutter malediction against he evil angel . ' well , aunt , what be it ? what do you want ? ' say I , follow she to the embrasure of the window . 'I want you to join the company , when you be fit to be see , ' return she , severely regard I ; ' but please to stay here a little , till that shock colou be somewhat abated , and you eye have recovere something of they natural expression . I should be asham for anyone to see you in you present state . ' of course , such a remark have no effect in reduce the ' shocking colour ' ; on the contrary , I feel my face glow with redouble fire kind by a
a complication of emotion , of which indignant , swelling anger be the chief . I offer no reply , however , but push aside the curtain and look into the night - or rather into the lamp - lit square . ' be propose to you , ? ' inquire my too watchful relative . ' no . ' ' what be he say then ? I hear something very like it . ' 'I do not know what he would have say , if you have not interrupt he . ' ' and would you have accept he , , if he have propose ? ' ' of course not - without consult uncle and you . ' 'Oh ! I be glad , my dear , you have so much prudence leave . well , now , ' she add , after a moment 's pause , ' you have make yourself conspicuous enough for one evening . the lady be direct inquire glance towards we at this moment , I see : I shall join they . do you come too , when you be sufficiently compose to appear as usual . ' 'I be so now . ' ' speak gently then , and do not look so malicious , ' say my calm , but provoke aunt . ' we shall return home shortly , and then , ' she add with solemn significance , 'I have much to say to you . ' so I go home prepare for a formidable lecture . be say by either party in the carriage during we short transit homeward ; but when I have enter my room and throw myself into a easy - chair , to reflect on the event of the day , my aunt follow I thither , and have dismiss , who be carefully stow away my ornament , close the door ; and place a chair beside I , or rather at right angles with mine , sit down . with due deference I offer she my more commodious seat . she decline it , and thus open the conference : ' do you remember , , we conversation the night but one before we leave ? ' ' yes , aunt . ' ' and do you remember how I warn you against let you heart be steal from you by those unworthy of its possession , and fix you affections where approbation do not go before , and where reason and judgment withheld they sanction ? ' ' yes ; but my reason - ' ' I - and do you remember assure I that there be no occasion for uneasiness on you account ; for you should never be tempted to marry a man who be deficient in sense or principle , however handsome or charme in other respects he might be , for you could not love he ; you should hate - despise - pity - anything but love he - be not those you word ? ' ' yes ; but - ' ' and do you not say that you affection must be found on approbation ; and that , unless you could approve and honour and respect , you could not love ? ' ' yes ; but I do approve , and honour , and respect - ' ' how so , my dear ? be a good man ? ' ' he be a much better man than you think he . ' ' that be nothing to the purpose . be he a good man ? ' ' yes - in some respects . he have a good disposition . ' ' be he a man of principle ? ' ' perhaps not , exactly ; but it be only for want of thought . if he have some one to advise he , and remind he of what be right - ' ' he would soon learn , you think - and you yourself would willingly undertake to be he teacher ? but , my dear , he be , I believe , full ten year older than you - how be it that you be so beforehand in moral acquirement ? ' ' thanks to you , aunt , I have be well bring up , and have good example always before I , which he , most likely , have not ; and , beside , he be of a sanguine temperament , and a gay , thoughtless temper , and I be naturally inclin to reflection . ' ' well , now you have make he out to be deficient in both sense and principle , by you own confession - ' ' then , my sense and my principle be at he service . ' ' that sound presumptuous , Helen . do you think you have enough for both ; and do you imagine you merry , thoughtless profligate would allow himself to be guide by a young girl like you ? ' ' no ; I should not wish to guide he ; but I think I might have influence sufficient to save he from some error , and I should think my life well spend in the effort to preserve so noble a nature from destruction . he always listen attentively now when I speak seriously to he ( and I often venture to reprove he random way of talk ) , and sometimes he say that if he have I always by he side he should never do or say a wicked thing , and that a little dailly talk with I would make he quite a saint . it may he partly jest and partly flattery , but still - ' ' but still you think it may be truth ? ' ' if I do think there be any mixture of truth in it , it be not from confidence
confidence in my own power , but in he natural goodness . and you have no right to call he a profligate , aunt ; he be nothing of the kind . ' ' who tell you so , my dear ? what be that story about he intrigue with a married lady - who be it ? - herself be tell you the other day ? ' ' it be false - false ! ' I cry . 'I do not believe a word of it . ' ' you think , then , that he be a virtuous , well - conduct young man ? ' 'I know nothing positive respecte he character . I only know that I have hear nothing definite against it - nothing that could be prove , at least ; and till people can prove they slanderous accusation , I will not believe they . and I know this , that if he have commit error , they be only such as be common to youth , and such as nobody think anything about ; for I see that everybody like he , and all the mamma smile upon he , and they daughter - and herself - be only too glad to attract he attention . ' ' , the world may look upon such offence as venial ; a few unprincipled mother may be anxious to catch a young man of fortune without reference to he character ; and thoughtless girl may be glad to win the smile of so handsome a gentleman , without seek to penetrate beyond the surface ; but you , I trust , be better inform than to see with they eye , and judge with they perverted judgment . I do not think you would call these venial error ! ' ' nor do I , aunt ; but if I hate the sins , I love the sinner , and would do much for he salvation , even suppose you suspicions to be mainly true , which I do not and will not believe . ' ' well , my dear , ask you uncle what sort of company he keep , and if he be not ban with a set of loose , profligate young man , whom he call he friend , he jolly companion , and whose chief delight be to wallow in vice , and vie with each other who can run fastest and furthest down the headlong road to the place prepare for the and he angel . ' ' then I will save he from they . ' 'Oh , , ! you little know the misery of unit you fortune to such a man ! ' 'I have such confidence in he , aunt , notwithstand all you say , that I would willingly risk my happiness for the chance of secure he . I will leave better man to those who only consider they own advantage . if he have do amiss , I shall consider my life well spend in save he from the consequence of he early error , and strive to recall he to the path of virtue . grant I success ! ' here the conversation end , for at this juncture my uncle 's voice be hear from he chamber , loudly call upon my aunt to come to bed . he be in a bad humour that night ; for he gout be worse . it have be gradually increase upon he ever since we come to town ; and my aunt take advantage of the circumstance next morning to persuade he to return to the country immediately , without wait for the close of the season . he physician support and enforce she argument ; and contrary to she usual habit , she so hurrie the preparations for removal ( as much for my sake as my uncle 's , I think ) , that in a very few day we depart ; and I see no more of . my aunt flatter herself I shall soon forget he - perhaps she think I have forget he already , for I never mention he name ; and she may continue to think so , till we meet again - if ever that should be . I wonder if it will ? 25th . - I be now quite settle down to my usual routine of steady occupations and quiet amusement - tolerably contente and cheerful , but still look forward to spring with the hope of returning to town , not for its gaiety and dissipation , but for the chance of meeting once again ; for still he be always in my thought and in my dream . in all my employment , whatever I do , or see , or hear , have a ultimate reference to he ; whatever skill or knowledge I acquire be some day to be turn to he advantage or amusement ; whatever new beautie in nature or art I discover be to be depict to meet he eye , or store in my memory to be tell he at some future period . this , at least , be the hope that I cherish , the fancy that light I on my lonely way . it may be only a ignis fatuus , after all , but it can do no harm to follow it with my eye and rejoice in its lustre , as long as it do not lure I from the path I ought to keep ; and I think it will not , for I have think deeply on my aunt 's advice , and I see clearly , now , the folly of throw myself away on one that be unworthy of all the love I have to give , and incapable of responding to the best and deepest feeling of my inmost heart - so clearly
clearly , that even if I should see he again , and if he should remember I and love I still ( which , alas ! be too little probable , consider how he be situate , and by whom surround ) , and if he should ask I to marry he - I be determine not to consent until I know for certain whether my aunt 's opinion of he or mine be nearest the truth ; for if mine be altogether wrong , it be not he that I love ; it be a creature of my own imagination . but I think it be not wrong - no , no - there be a secret something - a inward instinct that assure I I be right . there be essential goodness in he ; - and what delight to unfold it ! if he have wander , what bliss to recall he ! if he be now expose to the baneful influence of corrupting and wick companion , what glory to deliver he from they ! oh ! if I could but believe that have design I for this ! * * * * * to - day be the first of ; but my uncle have order the gamekeeper to spare the partridge till the gentleman come . ' what gentleman ? ' I ask when I hear it . a small party he have invite to shoot . he friend be one , and my aunt 's friend , , another . this struck I as terrible news at the moment ; but all regret and apprehension vanish like a dream when I hear that be actually to be a third ! my aunt be greatly against he come , of course : she earnestly endeavoure to dissuade my uncle from ask he ; but he , laugh at she objection , tell she it be no use talk , for the mischief be already do : he have invite and he friend before we leave , and nothing now remain but to fix the day for they come . so he be safe , and I be sure of see he . I can not express my joy . I find it very difficult to conceal it from my aunt ; but I do not wish to trouble she with my feeling till I know whether I ought to indulge they or not . if I find it my absolute duty to suppress they , they shall trouble no one but myself ; and if I can really feel myself justified in indulge this attachment , I can dare anything , even the anger and grief of my best friend , for its object - surly , I shall soon know . but they be not come till about the middle of the month . we be to have two lady visitor also : be to bring he niece and she cousin . I suppose my aunt think the latter will benefit I by she society , and the salutary example of she gentle deportment and lowly and tractable spirit ; and the former I suspect she intend as a species of counter-attraction to win 's attention from I . I do not thank she for this ; but I shall be glad of 's company : she be a sweet , good girl , and I wish I be like she - more like she , at least , than I be . * * * * * 19th . - they be come . they come the day before yesterday . the gentleman be all go out to shoot , and the lady be with my aunt , at work in the drawing - room . I have retire to the library , for I be very unhappy , and I want to be alone . book can not divert I ; so have open my desk , I will try what may be do by detail the cause of my uneasiness . this paper will serve instead of a confidential friend into whose ear I might pour forth the overflowing of my heart . it will not sympathise with my distress , but then it will not laugh at they , and , if I keep it close , it can not tell again ; so it be , perhaps , the best friend I could have for the purpose . first , let I speak of he arrival - how I sit at my window , and watch for nearly two hour , before he carriage enter the park - gate - for they all come before he , - and how deeply I be disappointed at every arrival , because it be not he . first come and the lady . when have get into she room , I quit my post a few minute to look in upon she and have a little private conversation , for she be now my intimate friend , several long epistle have pass between we since we part . on return to my window , I beheld another carriage at the door . be it he ? no ; it be 's plain dark chariot ; and there stand he upon the step , carefully superintend the dislodging of he various boxe and package . what a collection ! one would have think he project a visit of six month at least . a considerable time after , come in he barouche . be he one of the profligate friend , I wonder ? I should think not ; for no one could call he a jolly companion , I be sure , - and , besides , he appear too sober and gentlemanly in he demeanour to merit such suspicions . he be a tall , thing , gloomy - look man , apparently between thirty and forty , and of a
a somewhat sickly , careworn aspect . at last , 's light phaeton come bowle merrily up the lawn . I have but a transient glimpse of he : for the moment it stop , he spring out over the side on to the portico step , and disappear into the house . I now submit to be dress for dinner - a duty which have be urge upon I for the last twenty minute ; and when that important business be complete , I repair to the drawing - room , where I find and and already assemble . shortly after , enter , and then , who seem quite willing to forget and forgive my former conduct , and to hope that a little conciliation and steady perseverance on he part might yet succeed in bring I to reason . while I stand at the window , converse with , he come up to I , and be begin to talk in nearly he usual strain , when enter the room . ' how will he greet I , I wonder ? ' say my bounding heart ; and , instead of advancing to meet he , I turn to the window to hide or subdue my emotion . but have salute he host and hostess , and the rest of the company , he come to I , ardently squeeze my hand , and murmure he be glad to see I once again . at that moment dinner be announce : my aunt desire he to take into the dining - room , and odious , with unspeakable grimace , offer he arm to I ; and I be condemn to sit between himself and . but afterwards , when we be all again assemble in the drawing - room , I be indemnified for so much suffer by a few delightful minute of conversation with . in the course of the evening , be call upon to s and play for the amusement of the company , and I to exhibit my drawing , and , though he like music , and she be a accomplished musician , I think I be right in affirming , that he pay more attention to my drawing than to she music . so far so good ; - but hear he pronounce , sottoo voce , but with peculiar emphasis , concern one of the piece , ' this be better than all ! ' - I look up , curiious to see which it be , and , to my horror , beheld he complacently gaze at the back of the picture :- it be he own face that I have sketch there and forget to rub out ! to make matter worse , in the agony of the moment , I attempt to snatch it from he hand ; but he prevent I , and exclaim , ' no - by , I will keep it ! ' place it against he waistcoat and button he coat upon it with a delighted chuckle . then , draw a candle close to he elbow , he gather all the drawing to himself , as well what he have see as the other , and mutter , ' I must look at both side now ,' he eagerly commence a examination , which I watch , at first , with tolerable composure , in the confidence that he vanity would not be gratify by any further discoveries ; for , though I must plead guilty to have disfigure the back of several with abortive attempt to delineate that too fascinating physiognomy , I be sure that , with that one unfortunate exception , I have carefully obliterate all such witness of my infatuation . but the pencil frequently leave a impression upon cardboard that no amount of rubbing can efface . , it seem , be the case with most of these ; and , I confess , I tremble when I see he hold they so close to the candle , and poring so intently over the see blank ; but still , I trust , he would not be able to make out these dim trace to he own satisfaction . I be mistaken , however . have end he scrutiny , he quietly remark , - 'I perceive the back of young lady ' drawing , like the postscript of they letter , be the most important and interesting part of the concern . ' then , lean back in he chair , he reflect a few minute in silence , complacently smile to himself , and while I be concoct some cutting speech wherewith to check he gratification , he rise , and pass over to where sit vehemently coquett with , seat himself on the sofa beside she , and attach himself to she for the rest of the evening . ' so then ,' think I , ' he despise I , because he know I love he . ' and the reflection make I so miserable I know not what to do . come and begin to admire my drawing , and make remark upon they ; but I could not talk to she - I could talk to no one , and , upon the introduction of tea , I take advantage of the open door and the slight diversion cause by its entrance to slip out - for I be sure I could not take any - and take refuge in the library . my aunt send in quest of I , to ask if I be not come to tea ; but I bay he say I should not take any to - night , and , happily , she be too much occupy with she guest to make any further inquirie at the time . as most of the company have travel far that day , they retire early
early to rest ; and have hear they all , as I think , go up - stair , I venture out , to get my candlestick from the drawing - room sideboard . but have linger behind the rest . he be just at the foot of the stair when I open the door , and hear my step in the hall - though I could hardly hear it myself - he instantly turn back . ' Helen , be that you ? ' say he . ' why do you run away from we ? ' ' good - night , , ' say I , coldly , not choose to answer the question . and I turn away to enter the drawing - room . ' but you will shake hand , will not you ? ' say he , place himself in the doorway before I . and he seize my hand and hold it , much against my will . ' let I go , , ' say I . 'I want to get a candle . ' ' the candle will keep , ' return he . I make a desperate effort to free my hand from he grasp . ' why be you in such a hurry to leave I , ? ' he say , with a smile of the most provoke self - sufficiency . ' you do not hate I , you know . ' ' yes , I do - at this moment . ' ' not you . it be you hate , not I . ' 'I have nothing to do with , ' say I , burn with indignation . ' but I have , you know , ' return he , with peculiar emphasis . ' that be nothing to I , sir ,' I retort . ' be it nothing to you , ? will you swear it ? will you ? ' ' no i will not , ! and I will go , ' cry I , not know whether to laugh , or to cry , or to break out into a tempest of fury . 'Go , then , you vixen ! ' he say ; but the instant he release my hand he have the audacity to put he arm round my neck , and kiss I . Trembl with anger and agitation , and I do not know what besides , I break away , and get my candle , and rush up - stair to my room . he would not have do so but for that hateful picture . and there he have it still in he possession , a eternal monument to he pride and my humiliation . it be but little sleep I get that night , and in the morning I rise perplex and trouble with the thought of meet he at breakfast . I know not how it be to be do . a assumption of dignified , cold indifference would hardly do , after what he know of my devotion - to he face , at least . yet something must be do to check he presumption - I would not submit to be tyrannise over by those bright , laugh eye . and , accordingly , I receive he cheerful morning salutation as calmly and coldly as my aunt could have wish , and defeat with brief answer he one or two attempt to draw I into conversation , while I comport myself with unusual cheerfulness and complaisance towards every other member of the party , especially , and even she uncle and be treat with a extra amount of civility on the occasion , not from any motives of coquetry , but just to show he that my particular coolness and reserve arise from no general ill - humour or depression of spirit . he be not , however , to be repell by such acting as this . he do not talk much to I , but when he do speak it be with a degree of freedom and openness , and kindliness too , that plainly seem to intimate he know he word be music to my ear ; and when he look meet mine it be with a smile - presumptuous , it might be - but oh ! so sweet , so bright , so genial , that I could not possibly retain my anger ; every vestige of displeasure soon melt away beneath it like morning clouds before the summer sun . after breakfast all the gentleman save one , with boyish eagerness , set out on they expedition against the hapless partridge ; my uncle and on they shooting pony , and on they leg : the one exception be , who , in consideration of the rain that have fall during the night , think it prudent to remain behind a little and join they in a while when the sun have dry the grass . and he favour we all with a long and minute disquisition upon the evils and dangers attendant upon damp foot , deliver with the most imperturbable gravity , amid the jeer and laughter of and my uncle , who , leave the prudent sportsman to entertain the lady with he medical discussion , sally forth with they gun , bend they step to the stable first , to have a look at the horse and let out the dog . not desirous of share 's company for the whole of the morning , I betake myself to the library , and there bring forth my easel and begin to paint . the easel and the painting apparatus would serve as a excuse for abandon the drawing - room if my aunt should come to complain of the desertion , and besides I want to finish the picture . it be one I have take great pain with
with , and I intend it to be my masterpiece , though it be somewhat presumptuous in the design . by the bright azure of the sky , and by the warm and brilliant lights and deep long shadow , I have endeavoure to convey the idea of a sunny morning . I have venture to give more of the bright verdure of spring or early summer to the grass and foliage than be commonly attempt in painting . the scene represent be a open glade in a wood . a group of dark Scotch fir be introduce in the middle distance to relieve the prevailing freshness of the rest ; but in the foreground be part of the gnarled trunk and of the spreading bough of a large forest - tree , whose foliage be of a brilliant golden green - not golden from autumnal mellowness , but from the sunshine and the very immaturity of the scarce expand leave . upon this bough , that stand out in bold relief against the sombre fir , be seat a amorous pair of turtle dove , whose soft sad - coloured plumage afforde a contrast of another nature ; and beneath it a young girl be knee on the daisy - spangle turf , with head throw back and mass of fair hair fal on she shoulders , she hand clasp , lips part , and eye intently gaze upward in pleased yet earnest contemplation of those feathered lover - too deeply absorb in each other to notice she . I have scarcely settled to my work , which , however , want but a few touch to the finishing , when the sportsman pass the window on they return from the stable . it be partly open , and must have see I as he go by , for in half a minute he come back , and set he gun against the wall , throw up the sash and spring in , and set himself before my picture . ' very pretty , i'faith , ' say he , after attentively regard it for a few seconds ; ' and a very fitting study for a young lady . spring just open into summer - morning just approach noon - girlhood just ripen into womanhood , and hope just verge on fruition . she be a sweet creature ! but why do not you make she black hair ? ' 'I think light hair would suit she better . you see I have make she blue - eyed and plump , and fair and rosy . ' ' upon my word - a very Hebe ! I should fall in love with she if I have not the artist before I . sweet innocent ! she be think there will come a time when she will be woo and win like that pretty hen - dove by as fond and fervent a lover ; and she be think how pleasant it will be , and how tender and faithful he will find she . ' ' and perhaps , ' suggest I , ' how tender and faithful she shall find he . ' ' perhaps , for there be no limit to the wild extravagance of 's imagining at such a age . ' ' do you call that , then , one of she wild , extravagant delusion ? ' ' no ; my heart tell I it be not . I might have think so once , but now , I say , give I the girl I love , and I will swear eternal constancy to she and she alone , through summer and winter , through youth and age , and life and death ! if age and death must come . ' he speak this in such serious earnest that my heart bound with delight ; but the minute after he change he tone , and ask , with a significant smile , if I have ' any more portrait . ' ' no , ' reply I , redden with confusion and wrath . but my portfolio be on the table : he take it up , and coolly sit down to examine its contents . ' , those be my unfinished sketch , ' cry I , ' and I never let any one see they . ' and I place my hand on the portfolio to wrest it from he , but he maintain he hold , assure I that he ' like unfinished sketch of all thing . ' ' but I hate they to be see , ' return I . 'I can not let you have it , indeed ! ' ' let I have its bowel then , ' say he ; and just as I wrench the portfolio from he hand , he deftly abstract the greater part of its contents , and after turn they over a moment he cry out , - ' bless my star , here be another ;' and slipp a small oval of ivory paper into he waistcoat pocket - a complete miniature portrait that I have sketch with such tolerable success as to be induce to colour it with great pain and care . but I be determine he should not keep it . ' , ' cry I , ' I insist upon have that back ! it be mine , and you have no right to take it . give it I directly - I will never forgive you if you do not ! ' but the more vehemently I insist , the more he aggravate my distress by he insulting , gleeful laugh . at length , however , he restore it to I , say , - ' well , well , since you value it so much , I will not deprive you of it . ' to show he how I value
value it , I tore it in two and throw it into the fire . he be not prepare for this . he merriment suddenly cease , he star in mute amazement at the consum treasure ; and then , with a careless ' Humph ! I will go and shoot now ,' he turn on he heel and vacate the apartment by the window as he come , and set on he hat with a air , take up he gun and walk away , whistl as he go - and leave I not too much agitate to finish my picture , for I be glad , at the moment , that I have vex he . when I return to the drawing - room , I find have venture to follow he comrade to the field ; and shortly after lunch , to which they do not think of return , I volunteer to accompany the lady in a walk , and show and Milicent the beauty of the country . we take a long ramble , and re-enter the park just as the sportsman be return from they expedition . Toil - spend and travel - stain , the main body of they cross over the grass to avoid we , but , all spatter and splash as he be , and stain with the blood of he prey - to the no small offence of my aunt 's strict sense of propriety - come out of he way to meet we , with cheerful smile and word for all but I , and place himself between and myself , walk up the road and begin to relate the various exploit and disaster of the day , in a manner that would have convulse I with laughter if I have be on good term with he ; but he address himself entirely to , and I , of course , leave all the laughter and all the badinage to she , and affect the utmost indifference to whatever pass between they , walk along a few pace apart , and look every way but theirs , while my aunt and go before , link arm in arm and gravely discourse together . at length turn to I , and address I in a confidential whisper , say , - ' Helen , why do you burn my picture ? ' ' because I wish to destroy it ,' I answer , with a asperity it be useless now to lament . 'Oh , very good ! ' be the reply ; ' if you do not value I , I must turn to somebody that will . ' I think it be partly in - a half - playful mixture of mock resignation and pretend indifference : but immediately he resum he place beside , and from that hour to this - during all that evening , and all the next day , and the next , and the next , and all this morning ( the 22nd ) , he have never give I one kind word or one pleasant look - never speak to I , but from pure necessity - never glance towards I but with a cold , unfriendly look I think he quite incapable of assuming . my aunt observe the change , and though she have not inquire the cause or make any remark to I on the subject , I see it give she pleasure . observe it , too , and triumphantly ascribe it to she own superior charms and blandishment ; but I be truly miserable - more so than I like to acknowledge to myself . pride refuse to aid I . it have bring I into the scrape , and will not help I out of it . he mean no harm - it be only he joyous , playful spirit ; and I , by my acrimonious resentment - so serious , so disproportion to the offence - have so wounded he feeling , so deeply offend he , that I fear he will never forgive I - and all for a mere jest ! he think I dislike he , and he must continue to think so . I must lose he for ever , and may win he , and triumph as she will . but it be not my loss nor she triumph that I deplore so greatly as the wreck of my fond hope for he advantage , and she unworthiness of he affection , and the injury he will do himself by trust he happiness to she . she do not love he : she think only off herself . she can not appreciate the good that be in he : she will neither see it , nor value it , nor cherish it . she will neither deplore he fault nor attempt they amendment , but rather aggravate they by she own . and I doubt whether she will not deceive he after all . I see she be play double between he and , and while she amuse herself with the lively , she try she utmost to enslave he moody friend ; and should she succeed in bring both to she foot , the fascinating commoner will have but little chance against the lordly peer . if he observe she artful by - play , it give he no uneasiness , but rather add new zest to he diversion by oppose a stimulate check to he otherwise too easy conquest . Messr . and have severally take occasion by he neglect of I to renew they advance ; and if I be like and some other I should take advantage of they perseverance to endeaavor to pique he into a revival of affection ; but , justice and honesty apart , I could not bear to do it . I be annoye enough by they present persecution without
without encourage they further ; and even if I do it would have precious little effect upon he . he see I suffer under the condescending attentions and prosaic discourse of the one , and the repulsive obtrusion of the other , without so much as a shadow of commiseration for I , or resentment against my tormentor . he never could have love I , or he would not have resign I so willingly , and he would not go on talk to everybody else so cheerfully as he do - laugh and jest with and my uncle , tease , and flirt with - as if nothing be on he mind . oh ! why can not I hate he ? I must be infatuate , or I should scorn to regret he as I do . but I must rally all the power I have remain , and try to tear he from my heart . there go the dinner - bell , and here come my aunt to scold I for sit here at my desk all day , instead of stay with the company : wish the company be - gone . : night . - what have I do ? and what will be the end of it ? I can not calmly reflect upon it ; I can not sleep . I must have recourse to my diary again ; I will commit it to paper to - night , and see what I shall think of it to - morrow . I go down to dinner resolve to be cheerful and well - conduct , and keep my resolution very creditably , consider how my head ach and how internally wretch I feel . I do not know what be come over I of late ; my very energie , both mental and physical , must be strangely impaired , or I should not have act so weakly in many respects as I have do ; but I have not be well this last day or two . I suppose it be with sleeping and eat so little , and think so much , and be so continually out of humwe . but to return . I be exert myself to se and play for the amusement , and at the request , of my aunt and Milicent , before the gentleman come into the drawing - room ( never like to waste she musical effort on lady 's ears alone ) . have ask for a little song , and I be just in the middle of it when they enter . the first thing do be to walk up to . ' now , , will not you give we some music to - night ? ' say he . ' do now ! I know you will , when I tell you that I have be hunger and thirst all day for the sound of you voice . come ! the piano 's vacant . ' it be , for I have quit it immediately upon hear he petition . have I be endow with a proper degree of self -possession , I should have turn to the lady myself , and cheerfully join my entreaty to he , whereby I should have disappoint he expectation , if the affront have be purposely give , or make he sensible of the wrong , if it have only arisen from thoughtlessness ; but I feel it too deeply to do anything but rise from the music - stool , and throw myself back on the sofa , suppresse with difficulty the audible expression of the bitterness I feel within . I know 's musical talents be superior to mine , but that be no reason why I should be treat as a perfect nonentity . the time and the manner of he ask she appear like a gratuitous insult to I ; and I could have weep with pure vexation . meantime , she exultingly seat herself at the piano , and favour he with two of he favourite song , in such superior style that even I soon lose my anger in admiration , and listen with a sort of gloomy pleasure to the skilful modulation of she full - toned and powerful voice , so judiciously aide by she reound and spirite touch ; and while my ear drank in the sound , my eye rest on the face of she principal auditor , and derive a equal or superior delight from the contemplation of he speak countenance , as he stand beside she - that eye and brow light up with keen enthusiasm , and that sweet smile pass and appear like gleam of sunshine on a day . no wonder he should hunger and thirst to hear she sing . I now forgave he from my heart he reckless slight of I , and I feel asham at my pettish resentment of such a trifle - asham to of those bitter envious pang that gnaw my inmost heart , in spite of all this admiration and delight . ' there now , ' say she , playfully run she finger over the key when she have conclude the second song . ' what shall I give you next ? ' but in say this she look back at , who be stand a little behind , lean against the back of a chair , a attentive listener , too , experience , to judge by he countenance , much the same feeling of mingled pleasure and sadness as I do . but the look she give he plainly say , ' do you choose for I now : I have do enough for he , and will gladly exert myself to gratify you ;' and thus encourage , he lordship come forward , and turn over the music , presently set before she a little song that
that I have notice before , and read more than once , with a interest arise from the circumstance of my connect it in my mind with the reign tyrant of my thought . and now , with my nerf already accit and half unstrung , I could not hear those word so sweetly warble forth without some symptom of emotion I be not able to suppress . Tears rise unbidden to my eye , and I bury my face in the sofa -pillow that they might flow unseen while I listen . the air be simple , sweet , and sad . it be still run in my head , and so be the word :- Farewell to thee ! but not farewell to all my fondest thought of thee : within my heart they still shall dwell ; and they shall cheer and comfort I . of beautiful , and full of grace ! if thou hadst never meet mine eye , I have not dream a living face could fancie charms so far outvie . if I may ne 'er behold again that form and face so dear to I , hear thy voice , still would I fain , for aye , they memory . that voice , the magic of whose tone can wake a echo in my breast , create feeling that , alone , can make my trance spirit blest . that laugh eye , whose sunny beam my memory would not cherish less ; - and oh , that smile ! I whose joyous gleam no mortal languish can express . ! but let I cherish , still , the hope with which I can not part . Contempt may wound , and coldness chill , but still it linger in my heart . and who can tell but , at last , May answer all my thousand prayer , and bid the future pay the past with joy for anguish , smile for tear . when it cease , I longe for nothing so much as to be out of the room . the sofa be not far from the door , but I do not dare to raise my head , for I know be stand near I , and I know by the sound of he voice , as he speak in answer to some remark of 's , that he face be turn towards I . perhaps a half - suppressed sob have catch he ear , and cause he to look round - heaven forbid ! but with a violent effort , I check all further sign of weakness , dry my tear , and , when I think he have turn away again , rise , and instantly leave the apartment , take refuge in my favourite resort , the library . there be no light there but the faint red glow of the neglect fire ; - but I do not want a light ; I only want to indulge my thought , unnoticed and undisturbed ; and sit down on a low stool before the easy - chair , I sink my head upon its cushioned seat , and think , and think , until the tear gush out again , and I weep like any child . presently , however , the door be gently open and someone enter the room . I trust it be only a servant , and do not stir . the door be close again - but I be not alone ; a hand gently touch my shoulder , and a voice say , softly , - ' , what be the matter ? ' I could not answer at the moment . ' you must , and shall tell I , ' be add , more vehemently , and the speaker throw himself on he knee beside I on the rug , and forcibly possess himself of my hand ; but I hastily catch it away , and reply , - ' it be nothing to you , . ' ' be you sure it be nothing to I ? ' he return ; ' can you swear that you be not think of I while you weep ? ' this be unendurable . I make a effort to rise , but he be knee on my dress . ' tell I , ' continue he - 'I want to know , - because if you be , I have something to say to you , - and if not , I will go . ' 'Go then ! ' I cry ; but , fear he would obey too well , and never come again , I hastily add - ' or say what you have to say , and have do with it ! ' ' but which ? ' say he - ' for I shall only say it if you really be think of I . so tell I , . ' ' you be excessively impertinent , ! ' ' not at all - too pertinent , you mean . so you will not tell I ? - well , I will spare you woman 's pride , and , construe you silence into " yes , " I will take it for grant that I be the subject of you thought , and the cause of you affliction - ' ' indeed , sir - ' ' if you deny it , I will not tell you my secret , ' threaten he ; and I do not interrupt he again , or even attempt to repulse he : though he have take my hand once more , and half embrace I with he other arm , I be scarcely conscious of it at the time . ' it be this , ' resume he : ' that , in comparison with you , be like a flaunting peony compare with a
a sweet , wild rosebuld gem with dew - and I love you to distraction ! - now , tell I if that intelligence give you any pleasure . Silence again ? that mean yes . then let I add , that I can not live without you , and if you answer no to this last question , you will drive I mad . - will you bestow yourself upon I ? - you will ! ' he cry , nearly squeeze I to death in he arm . ' no , no ! ' I exclaim , struggle to free myself from he - ' you must ask my uncle and aunt . ' ' they will not refuse I , if you do not . ' 'I be not so sure of that - my aunt dislike you . ' ' but you do not , - say you love I , and I will go . ' 'I wish you would go ! ' I reply . 'I will , this instant , - if you will only say you love I . ' ' you know I do ,' I answer . and again he catch I in he arm , and smother I with kiss . at that moment my aunt open wide the door , and stand before we , candle in hand , in shocked and horrified amazement , gaze alternately at and I - for we have both start up , and now stand wide enough asunder . but he confusion be only for a moment . rally in a instant , with the most enviable assurance , he begin , - beg ten thousand pardon , ! do not be too severe upon I . I have be ask you sweet niece to take I for better , for worse ; and she , like a good girl , inform I she can not think of it without she uncle ' and aunt be consent . so let I implore you not to condemn I to eternal wretchedness : if you favour my cause , I be safe ; for , I be certain , can refuse you nothing . ' ' we will talk of this to - morrow , sir , ' say my aunt , coldly . ' it be a subject that demand mature and serious deliberation . at present , you have better return to the drawing - room . ' ' but meantime , ' plead he , ' let I commend my cause to you most indulgent - ' ' no indulgence for you , , must come between I and the consideration of my niece 's happiness . ' 'Ah , true ! I know she be a angel , and I be a presumptuous dog to dream of possesse such a treasure ; but , nevertheless , I would sooner die than relinquish she in favour of the best man that ever go to heaven - and as for she happiness , I would sacrifice my body and soul - ' ' body and soul , - sacrifice you soul ? ' ' well , I would lay down life - ' ' you would not be require to lay it down . ' 'I would spend it , then - devote my life - and all its power to the promotion and preservation - ' 'Another time , sir , we will talk of this - and I should have feel dispose to judge more favourably of you pretension , if you too have choose another time and place , and let I add - another manner for you declaration . ' ' why , you see , Maxwell ,' he begin - ' pardon I , sir , ' say she , with dignity - ' the company be inquire for you in the other room . ' and she turn to I . ' then you must plead for I , , ' say he , and at length withdrew . ' you have better retire to you room , , ' say my aunt , gravely . 'I will discuss this matter with you , too , to - morrow . ' ' do not be angry , aunt , ' say I . ' my dear , I be not angry , ' she reply : 'I be surprised . if it be true that you tell he you could not accept he offer without we consent - ' ' it be true , ' interrupt I . ' then how could you permit -? ' 'I could not help it , aunt ,' I cry , burst into tear . they be not altogether the tear of sorrow , or of fear for she displeasure , but rather the outbreak of the general tumultuous excitement of my feeling . but my good aunt be touch at my agitation . in a softer tone , she repeat she recommendation to retire , and , gently kiss my forehead , bade I good - night , and put she candle in my hand ; and I go ; but my brain work so , I could not think of sleeping . I feel calmer now that I have write all this ; and I will go to bed , and try to win tired nature 's sweet restorer . 24th . - in the morning I rise , light and cheerful - nay , intensely happy . the hovering clould cast over I by my aunt 's view , and by the fear of not obtain she consent , be lose in the bright effulgence of my own hope , and the too delightful consciousness of requit love . it be a splendid morning ; and I go out to enjoy it , in a quiet ramble , in company with my own blissful thought . the dew
dew be on the grass , and ten thousand gossamer be waive in the breeze ; the happy red - breast be pour out its little soul in song , and my heart overflow with silent hymn of gratitude and praise to heaven . but I have not wander far before my solitude be interrupt by the only person that could have disturb my musing , at that moment , without be look upon as a unwelcome intruder : come suddenly upon I . so unexpected be the apparition , that I might have think it the creation of a over - excited imagination , have the sense of sight alone borne witness to he presence ; but immediately I feel he strong arm round my waist and he warm kiss on my cheek , while he keen and gleeful salutation , ' my own Helen ! ' be ring in my ear . ' not yours yet ! ' say I , hastily swerve aside from this too presumptuous greeting . ' remember my guardian . you will not easily obtain my aunt 's consent . do not you see she be prejudice against you ? ' 'I do , dearest ; and you must tell I why , that I may best know how to combat she objection . I suppose she think I be a prodigal , ' pursue he , observe that I be unwilling to reply , ' and conclude that I shall have but little worldly goods wherewith to endow my better half ? if so , you must tell she that my property be mostly entail , and I can not get rid of it . there may be a few mortgage on the rest - a few trifling debt and incumbrance here and there , but nothing to speak of ; and though I acknowledge I be not so rich as I might be - or have be - still , I think , we could manage pretty comfortably on what be leave . my father , you know , be something of a miser , and in he latter day especially see no pleasure in life but to amass riche ; and so it be no wonder that he son should make it he chief delight to spend they , which be accordingly the case , until my acquaintance with you , dear , teach I other view and nobler aim . and the very idea of have you to care for under my roof would force I to moderate my expense and live like a - not to speak of all the prudence and virtue you would instil into my mind by you wise counsel and sweet , attractive goodness . ' ' but it be not that , ' say I ; ' it be not money my aunt think about . she know better than to value worldly wealth above its price . ' ' what be it , then ? ' ' she wish I to - to marry none but a really good man . ' ' what , a man of " decide piety " ? - ahem ! - well , come , I will manage that too ! it be to - day , be not it ? I will go to church morning , afternoon , and evening , and comport myself in such a godly sort that she shall regard I with admiration and sisterly love , as a brand pluck from the burning . I will come home sigh like a furnace , and full of the savour and unction of dear 's discourse - ' ' . , ' say I , dryly . 'Is a " sweet preacher , " - a " dear , delightful , heavenly - minded man " ? ' ' he be a good man , . I wish I could say half as much for you . ' ' oh , I forget , you be a saint , too . I crave you pardon , dearest - but do not call I ; my name be . ' 'I will call you nothing - for I will have nothing at all to do with you if you talk in that way any more . if you really mean to deceive my aunt as you say , you be very wicked ; and if not , you be very wrong to jest on such a subject . ' 'I stand correcte , ' say he , conclude he laugh with a sorrowful sigh . ' now , ' resume he , after a momentary pause , ' let we talk about something else . and come nearer to I , Helen , and take my arm ; and then I will let you alone . I can not be quiet while I see you walk there . ' I comply ; but say we must soon return to the house . ' no one will be down to breakfast yet , for long enough ,' he answer . ' you speak of you guardian just now , , but be not you father still liive ? ' ' yes , but I always look upon my uncle and aunt as my guardian , for they be so in deed , though not in name . my father have entirely give I up to they care . I have never see he since dear mamma die , when I be a very little girl , and my aunt , at she request , offer to take charge of I , and take I away to , where I have remain ever since ; and I do not think he would object to anything for I that she think proper to sanction . ' ' but would he sanction anything to which she think proper to object ? ' ' no , I do not
not think he care enough about I . ' ' he be very much to blame - but he do not know what a angel he have for he daughter - which be all the better for I , as , if he do , he would not be willing to part with such a treasure . ' ' and , ' say I , 'I suppose you know I be not a heiress ? ' he protest he have never give it a thought , and beg I would not disturb he present enjoyment by the mention of such uninteresting subject . I be glad of this proof of disinterested affection ; for be the probable heiress to all she uncle 's wealth , in addition to she late father 's property , which she have already in possession . I now insist upon retrace we step to the house ; but we walk slowly , and go on talk as we proceed . I need not repeat all we say : let I rather refer to what pass between my aunt and I , after breakfast , when call my uncle aside , no doubt to make he proposal , and she beckon I into another room , where she once more commence a solemn remonstrance , which , however , entirely fail to convince I that she view of the case be preferable to my own . ' you judge he uncharitably , aunt , I know , ' say I . ' he very friend be not half so bad as you represent they . there be , 's brother , for one : he be but a little lower than the angels , if half she say of he be true . she be continually talk to I about he , and laud he many virtue to the sky . ' ' you will form a very inadequate estimate of a man 's character , ' reply she , ' if you judge by what a fond sister say of he . the worst of they generally know how to hide they misdeed from they sister 's eye , and they mother 's , too . ' ' and there be , ' continue I , ' quite a decent man . ' ' who tell you so ? be a desperate man . he have dissipate he fortune in gambling and other thing , and be now seek a heiress to retrieve it . I tell so ; but you be all alike : she haughtily answer she be very much oblige to I , but she believe she know when a man be seek she for she fortune , and when for herself ; she flatter herself she have have experience enough in those matters to be justified in trusting to she own judgment - and as for he lordship 's lack of fortune , she care nothing about that , as she hope she own would suffice for both ; and as for he wildness , she suppose he be no worse than other - beside , he be reform now . yes , they can all play the hypocrite when they want to take in a fond , misguided woman ! ' ' well , I think he be about as good as she be , ' say I . ' but when be marry , he will not have many opportunity of consorting with he bachelor friend ; - and the worse they be , the more I long to deliver he from they . ' 'To be sure , my dear ; and the worse he be , I suppose , the more you long to deliver he from himself . ' ' yes , provide he be not incorrigible - that be , the more I long to deliver he from he fault - to give he a opportunity of shaking off the adventitious evil get from contact with other worse than himself , and shine out in the unclouded light of he own genuine goodness - to do my utmost to help he better self against he worse , and make he what he would have be if he have not , from the beginning , have a bad , selfish , miserly father , who , to gratify he own sordid passion , restrict he in the most innocent enjoyment of childhood and youth , and so disgust he with every kind of restraint ; - and a foolish mother who indulge he to the top of he bent , deceive she husband for he , and do she utmost to encourage those germ of folly and vice it be she duty to suppress , - and then , such a set of companion as you represent he friend to be - ' ' poor man ! ' say she , sarcastically , ' he kind have greatly wronge he ! ' ' they have ! ' cry I - ' and they shall wrong he no more - he wife shall undo what he mother do ! ' ' well , ' say she , after a short pause , ' I must say , , I think better of you judgment than this - and you taste too . how you can love such a man I can not tell , or what pleasure you can find in he company ; for " what fellowship hath light with darkness ; or he that believeth with a infidel ? "' ' he be not a infidel ; - and I be not light , and he be not darkness ; he worst and only vice be thoughtlessness . ' ' and thoughtlessness , ' pursue my aunt , ' may lead to every crime , and will but poorly excuse we error in the sight of . , I suppose , be not without the common
common faculty of man : he be not so light - head as to be irresponsible : he have endow he with reason and conscience as well as the rest of we ; the Scripture be open to he as well as to other ; - and " if he hear not they , neither will he hear though one rise from the dead . " and remember , , ' continue she , solemnly , ' " the wick shall be turn into hell , and they that forget ! " ' and suppose , even , that he should continue to love you , and you he , and that you should pass through life together with tolerable comfort - how will it be in the end , when you see yourselves part for ever ; you , perhaps , take into eternal bliss , and he cast into the lake that burneth with unquenchable fire - there for ever to - ' ' not for ever ,' I exclaim , ' " only till he have pay the uttermost farthing ; " for " if any man 's work abide not the fire , he shall suffer loss , yet himself shall be save , but so as by fire ; " and he that " be able to subdue all thing to himself will have all man to be save , " and " will , in the fulness of time , gather together in one all thing in , who taste death for every man , and in whom will reconcile all thing to himself , whether they be thing in earth or thing in heaven . " ' 'Oh , ! where do you learn all this ? ' 'In the , aunt . I have search it through , and find nearly thirty passage , all tending to support the same theory . ' ' and be that the use you make of you ? and do you find no passage tend to prove the danger and the falsity of such a belief ? ' 'no : I find , indeed , some passage that , take by themselves , might seem to contradict that opinion ; but they will all bear a different construction to that which be commonly give , and in most the only difficulty be in the word which we translate " everlast " or " eternal . " I do not know the , but I believe it strictly mean for age , and might signify either endless or long - enduring . and as for the danger of the belief , I would not publish it abroad if I think any poor wretch would be likely to presume upon it to he own destruction , but it be a glorious thought to cherish in one 's own heart , and I would not part with it for all the world can give ! ' here we conference end , for it be now high time to prepare for church . every one attend the morning service , except my uncle , who hardly ever go , and , who stay at home with he to enjoy a quiet game of cribbage . in the afternoon and likewise excuse themselves from attending ; but vouchsaf to accompany we again . whether it be to ingratiate himself with my aunt I can not tell , but , if so , he certainly should have behave better . I must confess , I do not like he conduct during service at all . hold he prayer - book upside down , or open at any place but the right , he do nothing but stare about he , unless he happen to catch my aunt 's eye or mine , and then he would drop he own on he book , with a puritanical air of mock solemnity that would have be ludicrous , if it have not be too provoke . once , during the sermon , after attentively regard for a few minute , he suddenly produce he gold pencil - case and snatch up a . perceive that I observe the movement , he whisper that he be go to make a note of the sermon ; but instead of that , as I sit next he , I could not help see that he be make a caricature of the preacher , give to the respectable , pious , elderly gentleman , the air and aspect of a most absurd old hypocrite . and yet , upon he return , he talk to my aunt about the sermon with a degree of modest , serious discrimination that temp I to believe he have really attend to and profit by the discourse . just before dinner my uncle call I into the library for the discussion of a very important matter , which be dismiss in few word . ' now , , ' say he , 'this young have be ask for you : what must I say about it ? you aunt would answer " no " - but what say you ? ' 'I say yes , uncle , ' reply I , without a moment 's hesitation ; for I have thoroughly make up my mind on the subject . ' very good ! ' cry he . ' now that be a good honest answer - wonderful for a girl ! - well , I will write to you father to - morrow . he be sure to give he consent ; so you may look on the matter as settled . you would have do a deal better if you would take , I can tell you ; but that you will not believe . at you time of life , it be love that rule the roast : at mine , it be solid , serviceable gold . I suppose now
now , you would never dream of look into the state of you husband 's finances , or trouble you head about settlement , or anything of that sort ? ' 'I do not think I should . ' ' well , be thankful , then , that you have wiser head to think for you . I have not have time , yet , to examine thoroughly into this young rascal 's affair , but I see that a great part of he father 's fine property have be squander away ; - but still , I think , there be a pretty fair share of it leave , and a little careful nursing may make a handsome thing of it yet ; and then we must persuade you father to give you a decent fortune , as he have only one besides yourself to care for ; - and , if you behave well , who know but what I may be induced to remember you in my will ! ' continue he , put he finger to he nose , with a know wink . ' thanks , uncle , for that and all you kindness , ' reply I . ' well , and I question this young spark on the matter of settlement , ' continue he ; ' and he seem dispose to be generous enough on that point - ' 'I know he would ! ' say I . ' but pray do not trouble you head - or he , or mine about that ; for all I have will be he , and all he have will be mine ; and what more could either of we require ? ' and I be about to make my exit , but he call I back . ' stop , stop ! ' cry he ; 'we have not mention the time yet . when must it be ? you aunt would put it off till the know when , but he be anxious to be bound as soon as may be : he will not hear of waiting beyond next month ; and you , I guess , will be of the same mind , so - ' ' not at all , uncle ; on the contrary , I should like to wait till after , at least . ' 'Oh ! pooh , pooh ! never tell I that tale - I know better , ' cry he ; and he persist in he incredulity . nevertheless , it be quite true . I be in no hurry at all . how can I be , when I think of the momentous change that await I , and of all I have to leave ? it be happiness enough to know that we be to be united ; and that he really love I , and I may love he as devotedly , and think of he as often as I please . however , I insist upon consult my aunt about the time of the wedding , for I determine she counsels should not be utterly disregard ; and no conclusion on that particular be come to yet . 1st . - all be settle now . my father have give he consent , and the time be fix for , by a sort of compromise between the respective advocate for hurry and delay . be to be one bridesmaid and Wilmot the other - not that I be particularly fond of the latter , but she be a intimate of the family , and I have not another friend . when I tell of my engagement , she rather provoke I by she manner of talk it . after star a moment in mute surprise , she say , - ' well , Helen , I suppose I ought to congratulate you - and I be glad to see you so happy ; but I do not think you would take he ; and I can not help feel surprise that you should like he so much . ' ' why so ? ' ' because you be so superior to he in every way , and there be something so bold and reckless about he - so , I do not know how - but I always feel a wish to get out of he way when I see he approach . ' ' you be timid , Milicent ; but that be no fault of he . ' ' and then he look , ' continue she . ' people say he be handsome , and of course he be ; but I do not like that kind of beauty , and I wonder that you should . ' ' why so , pray ? ' ' well , you know , I think there be nothing noble or lofty in he appearance . ' 'In fact , you wonder that I can like any one so unlike the stil heroe of romance . well , give I my flesh and blood lover , and I will leave all the and to you - if you can find they . ' 'I do not want they , ' say she . 'I will be satisfied with flesh and blood too - only the spirit must shine through and predominate . but do not you think 's face be too red ? ' ' no ! ' cry I , indignantly . ' it be not red at all . there be just a pleasant glow , a healthy freshness in he complexion - the warm , pinky tint of the whole harmonise with the deeper colour of the cheek , exactly as it ought to do . I hate a man to be red and white , like a pain doll , or all sickly white , or smoky black , or cadaverous yellow . ' '
' well , taste differ - but I like pale or dark , ' reply she . ' but , to tell you the truth , , I have be delude myself with the hope that you would one day be my sister . I expect would be introduce to you next season ; and I think you would like he , and be certain he would like you ; and I flatter myself I should thus have the felicity of see the two person I like best in the world - except mamma - united in one . he may not be exactly what you would call handsome , but he be far more distinguished - look , and nicer and better than ; - and I be sure you would say so , if you know he . ' ' impossible , Milicent ! you think so , because you be he sister ; and , on that account , I will forgive you ; but nobody else should so disparage to I with impunity . ' express she feeling on the subject almost as openly . ' and so , , ' say she , come up to I with a smile of no amiable import , ' you be to be , I suppose ? ' ' yes , ' reply I . ' do not you envy I ? ' 'Oh , dear , no ! ' she exclaim . 'I shall probably be Lady Lowborough some day , and then you know , dear , I shall be in a capacity to inquire , " do not you envy I ? "' ' Henceforth I shall envy no one , ' return I . ' indeed ! be you so happy then ? ' say she , thoughtfully ; and something very like a cloud of disappointment shadowed she face . ' and do he love you - I mean , do he idolise you as much as you do he ? ' she add , fix she eye upon I with ill - disguise anxiety for the reply . 'I do not want to be idolise ,' I answer ; ' but I be well assure that he love I more than anybody else in the world - as I do he . ' ' exactly , ' say she , with a nod . 'I wish - ' she pause . ' what do you wish ? ' ask I , annoye at the vindictive expression of she countenance . 'I wish , ' return , she , with a short laugh , ' that all the attractive point and desirable qualification of the two gentleman be united in one - that have 's handsome face and good temper , and all he wit , and mirth and charm , or else that have 's pedigree , and title , and delightful old family seat , and I have he ; and you might have the other and welcome . ' ' thank you , dear Annabella : I be better satisfied with thing as they be , for my own part ; and for you , I wish you be as well contend with you intend as I be with mine , ' say I ; and it be true enough ; for , though vex at first at she unamiable spirit , she frankness touch I , and the contrast between we situation be such , that I could well afford to pity she and wish she well . 's acquaintance appear to be no better pleased with we approaching union than mine . this morning 's post bring he letter from several of he friend , during the perusal of which , at the breakfast - table , he excite the attention of the company by the singular variety of he grimace . but he crush they all into he pocket , with a private laugh , and say nothing till the meal be conclude . then , while the company be hang over the fire or loiter through the room , previous to settle to they various morning avocation , he come and lean over the back of my chair , with he face in contact with my curl , and commence with a quiet little kiss , pour forth the follow complaint into my ear :- ' Helen , you witch , do you know that you have entail upon I the curse of all my friend ? I write to they the other day , to tell they of my happy prospect , and now , instead of a bundle of congratulation , I have get a pocketful of bitter execration and reproach . there be not one kind wish for I , or one good word for you , among they all . they say there will be no more fun now , no more merry day and glorious night - and all my fault - I be the first to break up the jovial band , and other , in pure despair , will follow my example . I be the very life and prop of the community , they do I the honour to say , and I have shamefully betraye my trust - ' ' you may join they again , if you like , ' say I , somewhat pique at the sorrowful tone of he discourse . 'I should be sorry to stand between any man - or body of man , and so much happiness ; and perhaps I can manage to do without you , as well as you poor desert friend . ' ' bless you , no , ' murmure he . ' it be " all for love or the world well lose , " with I . let they go to - where they belong , to speak politely . but if you see how
how they abuse I , Helen , you would love I all the more for have ventured so much for you sake . ' he pull out he crumple letter . I think he be go to show they to I , and tell he I do not wish to see they . 'I be not go to show they to you , love , ' say he . ' they be hardly fit for a lady 's eye - the most part of they . but look here . this be 's scrawl - only three line , the sulky dog ! he do not say much , to be sure , but he very silence imply more than all the other 's word , and the less he say , the more he think - and this be 's missive . he be particularly grieve at I , because , forsooth he have fall in love with you from he sister 's report , and mean to have marry you himself , as soon as he have sow he wild oat . ' 'I be vastly oblige to he , ' observe I . ' and so be I , ' say he . ' and look at this . this be 's - every page stuff full of railing accusation , bitter curse , and lamentable complaint , end up with swearing that he will get marry himself in revenge : he will throw himself away on the first old maid that choose to set she cap at he , - as if I care what he do with himself . ' ' well , ' say I , ' if you do give up you intimacy with these man , I do not think you will have much cause to regret the loss of they society ; for it be my belief they never do you much good . ' ' maybe not ; but we would a merry time of it , too , though mingle with sorrow and pain , as know to he cost - ha , ha ! ' and while he be laugh at the recollection of 's trouble , my uncle come and slap he on the shoulder . ' come , my lad ! ' say he . ' be you too busy make love to my niece to make war with the pheasant ? - first of , remember ! shines out - rain cease - even be not afraid to venture in he waterproof boot ; and and I be go to beat you all . I declare , we old ' un be the keenest sportsman of the lot ! ' 'I will show you what I can do to - day , however , ' say my companion . 'I will murder you bird by wholesale , just for keep I away from better company than either you or they . ' and so say he depart ; and I see no more of he till dinner . it seem a weary time ; I wonder what I shall do without he . it be very true that the three elder gentleman have prove themselves much keener sportsman than the two younger one ; for both and have of late almost dailly neglect the shoot excursion to accompany we in we various ride and ramble . but these merry time be fast draw to a close . in less than a fortnight the party break up , much to my sorrow , for every day I enjoy it more and more - now that . and have cease to tease I , and my aunt have cease to lecture I , and I have cease to be jealous of - and even to dislike she - and now that be become my Arthur , and I may enjoy he society without restraint . what shall I do without he , I repeat ? 5th . - my cup of sweet be not unmingle : it be dash with a bitterness that I can not hide from myself , disguise it as I will . I may try to persuade myself that the sweetness overpower it ; I may call it a pleasant aromatic flavour ; but say what I will , it be still there , and I can not but taste it . I can not shut my eye to 's fault ; and the more I love he the more they trouble I . he very heart , that I trust so , be , I fear , less warm and generous than I think it . at least , he give I a specimen of he character to - day that seem to merit a harder name than thoughtlessness . he and be accompany and I in a long , delightful ride ; he be ride by my side , as usual , and and be a little before we , the latter bending towards he companion as if in tender and confidential discourse . ' those two will get the start of we , , if we do not look sharp , ' observe . ' they will make a match of it , as sure as can be . that Lowborough 's fairly besot . but he will find himself in a fix when he be get she , I doubt . ' ' and she will find herself in a fix when she be get he , ' say I , ' if what I have hear of he be true . ' ' not a bit of it . she know what she be about ; but he , poor fool , delude himself with the notion that she will make he a good wife , and because she have amuse he with some rodomontade about despising rank and wealth in matter of love and marriage , he flatter
flatter himself that she be devotedly attach to he ; that she will not refuse he for he poverty , and do not court he for he rank , but love he for himself alone . ' ' but be not he court she for she fortune ? ' 'no , not he . that be the first attraction , certainly ; but now he have quite lost sight of it : it never enter he calculation , except merely as a essential without which , for the lady 's own sake , he could not think of marry she . no ; he be fairly in love . he think he never could be again , but he be in for it once more . he be to have be marry before , some two or three year ago ; but he lose he bride by lose he fortune . he get into a bad way among we in : he have a unfortunate taste for gambling ; and surely the fellow be bear under a unlucky star , for he always lose thrice where he gain once . that be a mode of self -torment I never be much addicte to . when I spend my money I like to enjoy the full value of it : I see no fun in waste it on thief and blackleg ; and as for gain money , hitherto I have always have sufficient ; it be time enough to be clutch for more , I think , when you begin to see the end of what you have . but I have sometimes frequent the gaming - house just to watch the on - goings of those mad votary of chance - a very interesting study , I assure you , , and sometimes very divert : I have have many a laugh at the booby and bedlamite . be quite infatuated - not willingly , but of necessity , - he be always resolve to give it up , and always break he resolution . every venture be the ' just once more :' if he gain a little , he hope to gain a little more next time , and if he lose , it would not do to leave off at that juncture ; he must go on till he have retrieve that last misfortune , at least : bad luck could not last for ever ; and every lucky hit be look upon as the dawn of better time , till experience prove the contrary . at length he grow desperate , and we be daily on the look - out for a case of - Se - no great matter , some of we whisper , as he existence have cease to be a acquisition to we club . at last , however , he come to a check . he make a large stake , which he determine should be the last , whether he lose or win . he have often so determined before , to be sure , and as often break he determination ; and so it be this time . he lose ; and while he antagonist smilingly sweep away the stake , he turn chalky white , draw back in silence , and wip he forehead . I be present at the time ; and while he stand with fold arm and eye fix on the ground , I know well enough what be pass in he mind . ' " be it to be the last , Lowborough ? " say I , step up to he . ' " the last but one , " he answer , with a grim smile ; and then , rush back to the table , he strike he hand upon it , and , raise he voice high above all the confusion of jingling coin and mutter oath and curse in the room , he swore a deep and solemn oath that , come what would , this trial should be the last , and imprecate unspeakable curse on he head if ever he should shuffle a card or rattle a dice - box again . he then double he former stake , and challenge any one present to play against he . instantly present himself . glar fiercely at he , for be almost as celebrate for he luck as he be for he ill - fortune . however , they fall to work . but have much skill and little scruple , and whether he take advantage of the other 's trembling , blind eagerness to deal unfairly by he , I can not undertake to say ; but Lowborough lose again , and fall dead sick . ' " you would better try once more , " say , lean across the table . and then he wink at I . ' " I have nothing to try with , " say the poor devil , with a ghastly smile . ' " oh , will lend you what you want , " say the other . ' " no ; you hear my oath , " answer , turn away in quiet despair . and I take he by the arm and lead he out . ' " be it to be the last , Lowborough ? " I ask , when I get he into the street . ' " the last , " he answer , somewhat against my expectation . and I take he home - that be , to we club - for he be as submissive as a child - and ply he with brandy - and - water till he begin to look rather brighter - rather more alive , at least . ' " , I be ruin ! " say he , take the third glass from my hand - he have drunk the other in dead silence .
. ' " not you , " say I . " you will find a man can live without he money as merrily as a tortoise without its head , or a wasp without its body . ' " but I be in debt , " say he - " deep in debt . and I can never , never get out of it . " ' " well , what of that ? many a better man than you have liv and die in debt ; and they can not put you in prison , you know , because you be a peer . " and I hand he he fourth tumbler . ' " but I hate to be in debt ! " he shoute . " I be not bear for it , and I can not bear it . " ' " what can not be cured must be endure , " say I , begin to mix the fifth . ' " and then , I have lose my . " and he begin to snivel then , for the brandy have soften he heart . ' " no matter , " I answer , " there be more Carolines in the world than one . " ' " there be only one for I , " he reply , with a dolorous sigh . " and if there be fifty more , who be to get they , I wonder , without money ? " ' " oh , somebody will take you for you title ; and then you have you family estate yet ; that be entail , you know . " ' " I wish to I could sell it to pay my debt , " he mutter . ' " and then , " say , who have just come in , " you can try again , you know . I would have more than one chance , if I be you . I would never stop here . " ' " I will not , I tell you ! " shoute he . and he start up , and leave the room - walk rather unsteadily , for the liquor have get into he head . he be not so much use to it then , but after that he take to it kindly to solace he car . ' he keep he oath about gambling ( not a little to the surprise of we all ) , though do he utmost to tempt he to break it , but now he have get hold of another habit that bother he nearly as much , for he soon discover that the demon of drink be as black as the demon of play , and nearly as hard to get rid of - especially as he kind friend do all they could to second the prompting of he own insatiable craving . ' ' then , they be demon themselves , ' cry I , unable to contain my indignation . ' and you , , it seem , be the first to tempt he . ' 'Well , what could we do ? ' reply he , deprecatingly . - ' we mean it in kindness - we could not bear to see the poor fellow so miserable :- and beside , he be such a damper upon we , sit there silent and glum , when he be under the threefold influence - of the loss of he sweetheart , the loss of he fortune , and the reaction of the lost night 's debauch ; whereas , when he have something in he , if he be not merry himself , he be a unfailing source of merriment to we . even could chuckle over he odd saying : they delight he far more than my merry jest , or 's riotous mirth . but one evening , when we be sit over we wine , after one of we club dinner , and all have be hearty together , - Lowborough give we mad toast , and hear we wild song , and bear a hand in the applause , if he do not help we to s they himself , - he suddenly relapse into silence , sink he head on he hand , and never lift he glass to he lip ; - but this be nothing new ; so we let he alone , and go on with we jollification , till , suddenly raise he head , he interrupt we in the middle of a roar of laughter by exclaiming , - ' , where be all this to end ? - will you just tell I that now ? - where be it all to end ? ' he rise . ' " a speech , a speech ! " shoute we . " hear , hear ! have go to give we a speech ! " ' he wait calmly till the thunder of applause and jingling of glass have cease , and then proceed , - " it be only this , gentlemen , - that I think we would better go no further . we would better stop while we can . " ' " just so ! " cry - " , poor sinner , stop and think before you further go , no longer sport upon the brink of everlasting woe . " ' " exactly ! " reply he lordship , with the utmost gravity . " and if you choose to visit the bottomless pit , I will not go with you - we must part company , for I swear I will not move another step towards it ! - what be this ? ' he say , take up he glass of wine . ' " taste it , " suggest I . ' " this be hell broth ! " he
he exclaim . " I renounce it for ever ! " and he throw it out into the middle of the table . ' " fill again ! " say I , hand he the bottle - " and let we drink to you renunciation . " ' " it be rank poison , " say he , grasp the bottle by the neck , " and I forswear it ! I have give up gambling , and I will give up this too . " he be on the point of deliberately pour the whole contents of the bottle on to the table , but wrest it from he . " on you be the curse , then ! " say he . and , back from the room , he shoute , " farewell , ye tempter ! " and vanish amid shout of laughter and applause . ' we expect he back among we the next day ; but , to we surprise , the place remain vacant : we see nothing of he for a whole week ; and we really begin to think he be go to keep he word . at last , one evening , when we be most of we assemble together again , he enter , silent and grim as a ghost , and would have quietly slipp into he usual seat at my elbow , but we all rise to welcome he , and several voice be raise to ask what he would have , and several hand be busy with bottle and glass to serve he ; but I know a smoke tumbler of brandy - and - water would comfort he best , and have nearly prepare it , when he peevishly push it away , say , - ' " do let I alone , ! do be quiet , all of you ! I be not come to join you : I be only come to be with you awhile , because I can not bear my own thought . " and he fold he arm , and lean back in he chair ; so we let he be . but I leave the glass by he ; and , after awhile , direct my attention towards it , by a significant wink ; and , on turn my head , I see it be drain to the bottom . he make I a sign to replenish , and quietly push up the bottle . I willingly comply ; but detect the pantomime , and , nettle at the intelligent grin that be pass between we , snatch the glass from my hand , dash the contents of it in 's face , throw the empty tumbler at I , and then bolt from the room . ' 'I hope he break you head , ' say I . 'no , love , ' reply he , laugh immoderately at the recollection of the whole affair ; ' he would have do so , - and perhaps , spoil my face , too , but , providentially , this forest of curl ' ( take off he hat , and show he luxuriant chestnut lock ) ' save my skull , and prevent the glass from breaking , till it reach the table . ' 'After that ,' he continue , ' Lowborough keep aloon from we a week or two longer . I use to meet he occasionally in the town ; and then , as I be too good - natured to resent he unmannerly conduct , and he bear no malice against I , - he be never unwilling to talk to I ; on the contrary , he would cling to I , and follow I anywhere but to the club , and the game - hous , and such - like dangerous place of resort - he be so weary of he own moping , melancholy mind . at last , I get he to come in with I to the club , on condition that I would not tempt he to drink ; and , for some time , he continue to look in upon we pretty regularly of a evening , - still abstain , with wonderful perseverance , from the " rank poison " he have so bravely forswear . but some of we member protest against this conduct . they do not like to have he sit there like a skeleton at a feast , instead of contribute he quota to the general amusement , cast a cloud over all , and watch , with greedy eye , every drop they carry to they lip - they vow it be not fair ; and some of they maintain that he should either be compelle to do as other do , or expel from the society ; and swore that , next time he show himself , they would tell he as much , and , if he do not take the warning , proceed to active measure . however , I befriend he on this occasion , and recommend they to let he be for a while , intimat that , with a little patience on we part , he would soon come round again . but , to be sure , it be rather provoke ; for , though he refuse to drink like a honest , it be well know to I that he keep a private bottle of laudanum about he , which he be continually soak at - or rather , hold off and on with , abstain one day and exceed the next - just like the spirit . ' one night , however , during one of we orgy - one of we high festival , I mean - he glide in , like the ghost in " , " and seate himself , as usual , a little back from the
the table , in the chair we always place for " the spectre , " whether it choose to fill it or not . I see by he face that he be suffer from the effect of a overdose of he insidious comforter ; but nobody speak to he , and he speak to nobody . a few sidelong glance , and a whispered observation , that " the ghost be come , " be all the notice he draw by he appearance , and we go on with we merry carousal as before , till he start we all by suddenly draw in he chair , and lean forward with he elbow on the table , and exclaim with portentous solemnity , - " well ! it puzzle I what you can find to be so merry about . what you see in life I do not know - I see only the blackness of darkness , and a fearful look for of judgment and fiery indignation ! " ' all the company simultaneously push up they glass to he , and I set they before he in a semicircle , and , tenderly pat he on the back , bid he drink , and he would soon see as bright a prospect as any of we ; but he push they back , mutter , - ' " take they away ! I will not taste it , I tell you . I will not - I will not ! " so I hande they down again to the owner ; but I see that he follow they with a glare of hungry regret as they depart . then he clasp he hand before he eye to shut out the sight , and two minute after lift he head again , and say , in a hoarse but vehement whisper , - ' " and yet I must ! , get I a glass ! " ' " take the bottle , man ! " say I , thrust the brandy - bottle into he hand - but stop , I be tell too much , ' mutter the narrator , start at the look I turn upon he . ' but no matter ,' he recklessly add , and thus continue he relation : ' in he desperate eagerness , he seize the bottle and suck away , till he suddenly drop from he chair , disappear under the table amid a tempest of applause . the consequence of this imprudence be something like a apoplectic fit , follow by a rather severe brain fever - ' ' and what do you think of yourself , sir ? ' say I , quickly . ' of course , I be very penitent ,' he reply . 'I go to see he once or twice - nay , twice or thrice - or by 'r lady , some four time - and when he get better , I tenderly bring he back to the fold . ' ' what do you mean ? ' 'I mean , I restore he to the bosom of the club , and compassionat the feebleness of he health and extreme lowness of he spirit , I recommend he to " take a little wine for he stomach 's sake , " and , when he be sufficiently re-established , to embrace the media -via , ni-jamais - ni-toujour plan - not to kill himself like a fool , and not to abstain like a ninny - in a word , to enjoy himself like a rational creature , and do as I do ; for , do not think , , that I be a tippler ; I be nothing at all of the kind , and never be , and never shall be . I value my comfort far too much . I see that a man can not give himself up to drink without be miserable one - half he day and mad the other ; besides , I like to enjoy my life at all side and end , which can not be do by one that suffer himself to be the slave of a single propensity - and , moreover , drink spoil one be good look ,' he conclude , with a most conceited smile that ought to have provoke I more than it do . ' and do Lowborough profit by you advice ? ' I ask . ' why , yes , in a manner . for a while he manage very well ; indeed , he be a model of moderation and prudence - something too much so for the taste of we wild community ; but , somehow , have not the gift of moderation : if he stumble a little to one side , he must go down before he could right himself : if he overshoot the mark one night , the effect of it render he so miserable the next day that he must repeat the offence to mmend it ; and so on from day to day , till he clamorous conscience bring he to a stand . and then , in he sober moments , he so bother he friend with he remorse , and he terror and woe , that they be oblige , in self - defence , to get he to dry he sorrow in wine , or any more potent beverage that come to hand ; and when he first scruple of conscience be overcome , he would need no more persuading , he would often grow desperate , and be as great a blackguard as any of they could desire - but only to lament he own unutterable wickedness and degradation the more when the fit be over . ' at last , one day when he and I be alone together , after ponder a while in one of he gloomy , abstract
abstract mood , with he arm fold and he head sunk on he breast , he suddenly wake up , and vehemently grasp my arm , say , - ' " , this will not do ! I be resolve to have do with it . " ' " what , be you go to shoot yourself ? " say I . ' " no ; I be go to reform . " ' " oh , that be nothing new ! you have be go to reform these twelve month and more . " ' " yes , but you would not let I ; and I be such a fool I could not live without you . but now I see what it be that keep I back , and what be want to save I ; and I would compass sea and land to get it - only I be afraid there be no chance . " and he sigh as if he heart would break . ' " what be it , ? " say I , think he be fairly cracke at last . ' " a wife , " he answer ; " for I can not live alone , because my own mind distract I , and I can not live with you , because you take the devil 's part against I . " ' " who - I ? " ' " yes - all of you do - and you more than any of they , you know . but if I could get a wife , with fortune enough to pay off my debt and set I straight in the world - " ' " to be sure , " say I . ' " and sweetness and goodness enough , " he continue , " to make home tolerable , and to reconcile I to myself , I think I should do yet . I shall never be in love aagain , that be certain ; but perhaps that would be no great matter , it would enable I to choose with my eye open - and I should make a good husband in spite of it ; but could any one be in love with I ? - that be the question . with you good look and power of fascination " ( he be pleased to say ) , " I might hope ; but as it be , , do you think anybody would take I - ruin and wretch as I be ? " ' " yes , certainly . " ' " who ? " ' " why , any neglect old maid , fast sinke in despair , would be delighted to - " ' " no , no , " say he - " it must be somebody that I can love . " ' " why , you just say you never could be in love again ! ' ' " well , love be not the word - but somebody that I can like . I will search all through , at all event ! " he cry , with a sudden burst of hope , or desperation . " succeed or fail , it will be better than rushe headlong to destruction at that would - club : so farewell to it and you . whenever I meet you on honest ground or under a roof , I shall be glad to see you ; but never more shall you entice I to that 's den ! " ' this be shameful language , but I shook hand with he , and we part . he keep he word ; and from that time forward he have be a pattern of propriety , as far as I can tell ; but till lately I have not have very much to do with he . he occasionally seek my company , but as frequently shrink from it , fear lest I should wile he back to destruction , and I find he not very entertaining , especially as he sometimes attempt to awake my conscience and draw I from the perdition he consider himself to have escape ; but when I do happen to meet he , I seldom fail to ask after the progress of he matrimonial effort and research , and , in general , he could give I but a poor account . the mother be repell by he empty coffer and he reputation for gambling , and the daughter by he cloudy brow and melancholy temper - beside , he do not understand they ; he want the spirit and assurance to carry he point . 'I leave he at it when I go to the continent ; and on my return , at the year 's end , I find he still a disconsolate bachelor - though , certainly , look somewhat less like a unblest exile from the tomb than before . the young lady have cease to be afraid of he , and be begin to think he quite interesting ; but the mamma be still unrelenting . it be about this time , , that my good angel bring I into conjunction with you ; and then I have eye and ear for nobody else . but , meantime , become acquainted with we charming friend , - through the intervention of he good angel , no doubt he would tell you , though he do not dare to fix he hope on one so courte and admire , till after they be bring into closer contact here at , and she , in the absence of she other admirer , indubitably court he notice and hold out every encouragement to he timid advance . then , indeed , he begin to hope for a dawn of brighter day ; and if , for a while , I darken he prospect by
by stand between he and he sun - and so nearly plunge he again into the abyss of despair - it only intensify he ardour and strengthen he hope when I choose to abandon the field in the pursuit of a brighter treasure . in a word , as I tell you , he be fairly besot . at first , he could dimly perceive she fault , and they give he considerable uneasiness ; but now he passion and she be together have blind he to everything but she perfection and he amazing good fortune . last night he come to I brimful of he new - found felicity : ' " , I be not a castaway ! " say he , seize my hand and squeeze it like a vice . " there be happiness in store for I yet - even in this life - she love I ! " ' " indeed ! " say I . " have she tell you so ? " ' " no , but I can no longer doubt it . do you not see how pointedly kind and affectionate she be ? and she know the utmost extent of my poverty , and care nothing about it ! she know all the folly and all the wickedness of my former life , and be not afraid to trust I - and my rank and title be no allurement to she ; for they she utterly disregard . she be the most generous , high - minded being that can be conceive of . she will save I , body and soul , from destruction . already , she have ennoble I in my own estimation , and make I three time better , wiser , greater than I be . oh ! if I have but know she before , how much degradation and misery I should have be spare ! but what have I do to deserve so magnificent a creature ? " ' and the cream of the jest , ' continue , laugh , 'is , that the artful minx love nothing about he but he title and pedigree , and " that delightful old family seat . "' ' how do you know ? ' say I . ' she tell I so herself ; she say , " as for the man himself , I thoroughly despise he ; but then , I suppose , it be time to be make my choice , and if I wait for some one capable of elicit my esteem and affection , I should have to pass my life in single blessedness , for I detest you all ! " , ha ! I suspect she be wrong there ; but , however , it be evident she have no love for he , poor fellow . ' ' then you ought to tell he so . ' ' what ! and spoil all she plan and prospect , poor girl ? no , no : that would be a breach of confidence , would not it , ? , ha ! besides , it would break he heart . ' and he laugh again . ' well , , I do not know what you see so amazingly divert in the matter ; I see nothing to laugh at . ' 'I be laugh at you , just now , love , ' say he , redoubl he machination . and leave he to enjoy he merriment alone , I touch with the whip , and canter on to rejoin we companion ; for we have be walk we horse all this time , and be consequently a long way behind . yoArthu be soon at my side again ; but not dispose to talk to he , I break into a gallop . he do the same ; and we do not slacke we pace till we come up with and , which be within half a mile of the park - gate . I avoid all further conversation with he till we come to the end of we ride , when I mean to jump off my horse and vanish into the house , before he could offer he assistance ; but while I be disengage my habit from the crutch , he lift I off , and hold I by both hand , assert that he would not let I go till I have forgive he . 'I have nothing to forgive , ' say I . ' you have not injur I . ' 'no , darl - forbid that I should ! but you be angry because it be to I that confess she lack of esteem for she lover . ' 'no , , it be not that that displease I : it be the whole system of you conduct towards you friend , and if you wish I to forget it , go now , and tell he what sort of a woman it be that he adore so madly , and on whom he have hang he hope of future happiness . ' 'I tell you , , it would break he heart - it would be the death of he - besides be a scandalous trick to poor . there be no help for he now ; he be past pray for . besides , she may keep up the deception to the end of the chapter ; and then he will be just as happy in the illusion as if it be reality ; or perhaps he will only discover he mistake when he have cease to love she ; and if not , it be much better that the truth should daw gradually upon he . so now , my angel , I hope I have make out a clear case , and fully convince you that I can not make the atonement you require
require . what other requisition have you to make ? , and I will gladly obey . ' 'I have none but this , ' say I , as gravely as before : ' that , in future , you will never make a jest of the suffering of other , and always use you influence with you friend for they own advantage against they evil propensity , instead of seconde they evil propensity against themselves . ' 'I will do my utmost , ' say he , 'to remember and perform the injunction of my angel monitress ;' and after kissing both my gloved hand , he let I go . when I enter my room , I be surprised to see stand before my toilet - table , composedly survey she feature in the glass , with one hand flirt she gold - mount whip , and the other hold up she long habit . ' she certainly be a magnificent creature ! ' think I , as I beheld that tall , finely develop figure , and the reflection of the handsome face in the mirror before I , with the glossy dark hair , slightly and not ungracefully disorder by the breezy ride , the rich brown complexion glow with exercise , and the black eye sparkl with unwonted brilliance . on perceive I , she turn round , exclaim , with a laugh that savoure more of malice than of mirth , - ' why , ! what have you be do so long ? I come to tell you my good fortune , ' she continue , regardless of 's presence . ' have propose , and I have be graciously pleased to accept he . do not you envy I , dear ? ' 'no , love , ' say I - 'or he either ,' I mentally add . ' and do you like he , ? ' ' like he ! yes , to be sure - over head and ear in love ! ' ' well , I hope you will make he a good wife . ' ' thank you , my dear ! and what beside do you hope ? ' 'I hope you will both love each other , and both be happy . ' ' thanks ; and I hope you will make a very good wife to ! ' say she , with a queenly bow , and retire . 'Oh , ! how could you say so to she ! ' cry . ' say what ? ' reply I . ' why , that you hope she would make he a good wife . I never hear such a thing ! ' ' because I do hope it , or rather , I wish it ; she be almost past hope . ' ' well , ' say she , 'I be sure I hope he will make she a good husband . they tell queer thing about he downstair . they be say - ' 'I know , . I have hear all about he ; but he be reform now . and they have no business to tell tale about they master . ' 'no , mum - or else , they have say some thing about too . ' 'I will not hear they , ; they tell lie . ' ' yes , mum , ' say she , quietly , as she go on arrange my hair . ' do you believe they , ? ' I ask , after a short pause . ' no , , not all . you know when a lot of servants get together they like to talk about they betters ; and some , for a bit of swagger , like to make it appear as though they know more than they do , and to throw out hint and thing just to astonish the other . but I think , if I be you , , I would look very well before I leape . I do believe a young lady can not be too careful who she marry . ' ' of course not , ' say I ; ' but be quick , will you , ? I want to be dress . ' and , indeed , I be anxious to be rid of the good woman , for I be in such a melancholy frame I could hardly keep the tear out of my eye while she dress I . it be not for - it be not for - it be not for myself - it be for that they rise . * * * * * 13th . - they be gone , and he be gone . we be to be part for more than two month , above ten week ! a long , long time to live and not to see he . but he have promise to write often , and make I promise to write still oftener , because he will be busy settle he affair , and I shall have nothing better to do . well , I think I shall always have plenty to say . but oh ! for the time when we shall be always together , and can exchange we thought without the intervention of these cold go - between , pen , ink , and paper ! 22nd . - I have have several letter from already . they be not long , but pass sweet , and just like himself , full of ardent affection , and playful lively humour ; but there be always a ' but ' in this imperfect world , and I do wish he would sometimes be serious . I can not get he to write or speak in real , solid earnest . I do not much mind it now , but if it be always so
so , what shall I do with the serious part of myself ? 18 , 1822 . - early this morning yoArthu mount he hunter and set off in high glee to meet the - hound . he will be away all day , and so I will amuse myself with my neglected diary , if I can give that name to such a irregular composition . it be exactely four month since I open it last . I be marry now , and settle down as of . I have have eight week ' experience of matrimony . and do I regret the step I have take ? no , though I must confess , in my secret heart , that be not what I think he at first , and if I have know he in the beginning as thoroughly as I do now , I probably never should have love he , and if I love he first , and then make the discovery , I fear I should have think it my duty not to have marry he . to be sure I might have know he , for every one be willing enough to tell I about he , and he himself be no accomplished hypocrite , but I be wilfully blind ; and now , instead of regretting that I do not discern he full character before I be indissolubly bound to he , I be glad , for it have save I a great deal of battling with my conscience , and a great deal of consequent trouble and pain ; and , whatever I ought to have do , my duty now be plainly to love he and to cleave to he , and this just tally with my inclination . he be very fond of I , almost too fond . I could do with less caressing and more rationality . I should like to be less of a pet and more of a friend , if I might choose ; but I will not complain of that : I be only afraid he affection lose in depth where it gain in ardour . I sometimes like it to a fire of dry twig and branch compare with one of solid coal , very bright and hot ; but if it should burn itself out and leave nothing but ash behind , what shall I do ? but it will not , it sha ' not , I be determined ; and surely I have power to keep it alive . so let I dismiss that think at once . but be selfish ; I be constrain to acknowledge that ; and , indeed , the admission give I less pain than might be expect , for , since I love he so much , I can easily forgive he for love himself : he like to be pleased , and it be my delight to please he ; and when I regret this tendency of he , it be for he own sake , not for mine . the first instance he give be on the occasion of we bridal tour . he want to hurry it over , for all the continental scene be already familiar to he : many have lose they interest in he eye , and other have never have anything to lose . the consequence be , that after a fly transit through part of and part of , I come back nearly as ignorant as I go , have make no acquaintance with person and manners , and very little with thing , my head swarm with a motley confusion of object and scene ; some , it be true , leave a deeper and more pleasing impression than other , but these embitter by the recollection that my emotion have not be share by my companion , but that , on the contrary , when I have express a particular interest in anything that I see or desire to see , it have be displease to he , inasmuch as it prove that I could take delight in anything disconnect with himself . as for , we only just touche at that , and he would not give I time to see one - tenth of the beauty and interesting object of . he want to get I home , he say , to have I all to himself , and to see I safely install as the mistress of , just as single - minded , as naive , and piquante as I be ; and as if I have be some frail butterfly , he express himself fearful of rub the silver off my wing by bring I into contact with society , especially that of and ; and , more - over , he do not scruple to tell I that there be lady in both place that would tear he eye out if they happen to meet he with I . of course I be vex at all this ; but still it be less the disappointment to myself that annoye I , than the disappointment in he , and the trouble I be at to frame excuse to my friend for have see and observe so little , without imput one particle of blame to my companion . but when we get home - to my new , delightful home - I be so happy and he be so kind that I freely forgave he all ; and I be begin to think my lot too happy , and my husband actually too good for I , if not too good for this world , when , on the second after we arrival , he shock and horrify I by another instance of he unreasonable exaction . we be walk home from the morning service , for it be a fine frosty day , and as we be so
so near the church , I have request the carriage should not be use . ' , ' say he , with unusual gravity , 'I be not quite satisfied with you . ' I desire to know what be wrong . ' but will you promise to reform if I tell you ? ' ' yes , if I can , and without offend a higher authority . ' 'Ah ! there it be , you see : you do not love I with all you heart . ' 'I do not understand you , ( at least I hope I do not ) : pray tell I what I have do or say amiss . ' ' it be nothing you have do or say ; it be something that you be - you be too religious . now I like a woman to be religious , and I think you piety one of you greatest charms ; but then , like all other good thing , it may be carry too far . to my thinking , a woman 's religion ought not to lessen she devotion to she earthly lord . she should have enough to purify and etherealise she soul , but not enough to refine away she heart , and raise she above all human sympathy . ' ' and be I above all human sympathy ? ' say I . ' no , darl ; but you be make more progress towards that saintly condition than I like ; for all these two hour I have be think of you and want to catch you eye , and you be so absorbed in you devotion that you have not even a glance to spare for I - I declare it be enough to make one jealous of one 's - which be very wrong , you know ; so do not excite such wicked passion again , for my soul 's sake . ' 'I will give my whole heart and soul to my maker if I can ,' I answer , ' and not one atom more of it to you than he allow . what be you , sir , that you should set yourself up as a god , and presume to dispute possession of my heart with to whom I owe all I have and all I be , every blessing I ever do or ever can enjoy - and yourself among the rest - if you be a blessing , which I be half inclin to doubt . ' ' do not be so hard upon I , ; and do not pinch my arm so : you be squeeze you finger into the bone . ' ' , ' continue I , relax my hold of he arm , ' you do not love I half as much as I do you ; and yet , if you love I far less than you do , I would not complain , provide you love you maker more . I should rejoice to see you at any time so deeply absorb in you devotion that you have not a single thought to spare for I . but , indeed , I should lose nothing by the change , for the more you love you the more deep and pure and true would be you love to I . ' at this he only laugh and kiss my hand , call I a sweet enthusiast . then take off he hat , he add : ' but look here , - what can a man do with such a head as this ? ' the head look right enough , but when he place my hand on the top of it , it sunk in a bed of curl , rather alarmingly low , especially in the middle . ' you see I be not make to be a saint , ' say he , laugh , ' if mean I to be religious , why do not he give I a proper organ of veneration ? ' ' you be like the servant ,' I reply , ' who , instead of employ he one talent in he master 's service , restore it to he unimproved , allege , as a excuse , that he know he " to be a hard man , reap where he have not sow , and gather where he have not straw . " of he to whom less be give , less will be require , but we utmost exertion be require of we all . you be not without the capacity of veneration , and faith and hope , and conscience and reason , and every other requisite to a 's character , if you choose to employ they ; but all we talents increase in the using , and every faculty , both good and bad , strengthen by exercise : therefore , if you choose to use the bad , or those which tend to evil , till they become you master , and neglect the good till they dwindle away , you have only yourself to blame . but you have talents , - natural endowment both of heart and mind and temper , such as many a better would be glad to possess , if you would only employ they in 's service . I should never expect to see you a devotee , but it be quite possible to be a good without cease to be a happy , merry - hear man . ' ' you speak like a oracle , , and all you say be indisputably true ; but listen here : I be hungry , and I see before I a good substantial dinner ; I be tell that if I abstain from this to - day I shall have a sumptuous feast to - morrow , consist of all manner
manner of dainty and delicacies . now , in the first place , I should be loth to wait till to - morrow when I have the means of appease my hunger already before I : in the second place , the solid viand of to - day be more to my taste than the dainty that be promise I ; in the third place , I do not see to - morrow 's banquet , and how can I tell that it be not all a fable , get up by the greasy - faced fellow that be advise I to abstain in order that he may have all the good victual to himself ? in the fourth place , this table must be spread for somebody , and , as say , " who can eat , or who else can hasten hereuntoo more than I ? " and finally , with you leave , I will sit down and satisfy my craving of to - day , and leave to - morrow to shift for itself - who know but what I may secure both this and that ? ' ' but you be not require to abstain from the substantial dinner of to - day : you be only advise to partake of these coarser viand in such moderation as not to incapacitate you from enjoy the choicer banquet of to -morrow . if , regardless of that counsel , you choose to make a beast of yourself now , and over -eat and over -drink yourself till you turn the good victual into poison , who be to blame if , hereafter , while you be suffer the torment of yesterday 's gluttony and drunkenness , you see more temperate man sit down to enjoy themselves at that splendid entertainment which you be unable to taste ? ' ' most true , my patron saint ; but again , we friend say , " there be nothing better for a man than to eat and to drink , and to be merry . "' ' and again , ' return I , ' he say , " Rejoice , of young man , in thy youth ; and walk in the way of thine heart , and in the sight of thine eye : but know thou , that for all these thing will bring thee into judgment . " ' 'Well , but , , I be sure I have be very good these last few week . what have you see amiss in I , and what would you have I to do ? ' ' nothing more than you do , : you action be all right so far ; but I would have you thought change ; I would have you to fortify yourself against temptation , and not to call evil good , and good evil ; I should wish you to think more deeply , to look further , and aim higher than you do . ' 25th . - be get tired - not of I , I trust , but of the idle , quiet life he lead - and no wonder , for he have so few source of amusement : he never read anything but newspaper and sport magazine ; and when he see I occupi with a book , he will not let I rest till I close it . in fine weather he generally manage to get through the time pretty well , but on rainy day , of which we have have a good many of late , it be quite painful to witness he ennui . I do all I can to amuse he , but it be impossible to get he to feel interested in what I most like to talk about , while , on the other hand , he like to talk about thing that can not interest I - or even that annoy I - and these please he - the most of all : for he favourite amusement be to sit or loll beside I on the sofa , and tell I story of he former amour , always turn upon the ruin of some confid girl or the cozening of some unsuspecting husband ; and when I express my horror and indignation , he lay it all to the charge of jealousy , and laugh till the tear run down he cheek . I use to fly into passion or melt into tear at first , but see that he delight increase in proportion to my anger and agitation , I have since endeavoure to suppress my feeling and receive he revelation in the silence of calm contempt ; but still he read the inward struggle in my face , and misconstrue my bitterness of soul for he unworthiness into the pang of wounded jealousy ; and when he have sufficiently divert himself with that , or fear my displeasure will become too serious for he comfort , he try to kiss and soothe I into smile again - never be he caress so little welcome as then ! this be double selfishness display to I and to the victim of he former love . there be time when , with a momentary pang - a flash of wild dismay , I ask myself , ' Helen , what have you do ? ' but I rebuke the inward questioner , and repel the obtrusive thought that crowd upon I ; for be he ten time as sensual and impenetrable to good and lofy thought , I well know I have no right to complain . and I do not and will not complain . I do and will love he still ; and I do not and will not regret that I have link my fate with he . 4th . - we have have a downright quarrel . the particular be as follow :
: yoArthu have tell I , at different interval , the whole story of he intrigue with -, which I would not believe before . it be some consolation , however , to find that in this instance the lady have be more to blame than he , for he be very young at the time , and she have decidedly make the first advance , if what he say be true . I hate she for it , for it see as if she have chiefly contribute to he corruption ; and when he be begin to talk about she the other day , I beg he would not mention she , for I detest the very sound of she name . ' not because you love she , Arthur , mind , but because she injure you and deceive she husband , and be altogether a very abominable woman , whom you ought to be asham to mention . ' but he defend she by say that she have a doting old husband , whom it be impossible to love . ' then why do she marry he ? ' say I . ' for he money , ' be the reply . ' then that be another crime , and she solemn promise to love and honour he be another , that only increase the enormity of the last . ' ' you be too severe upon the poor lady , ' laugh he . ' but never mind , , I do not care for she now ; and I never love any of they half as much as I do you , so you need not fear to be forsake like they . ' ' if you have tell I these thing before , , I never should have give you the chance . ' ' would not you , my darling ? ' ' most certainly not ! ' he laugh incredulously . 'I wish I could convince you of it now ! ' cry I , start up from beside he : and for the first time in my life , and I hope the last , I wish I have not marry he . ' , ' say he , more gravely , 'do you know that if I believe you now I should be very angry ? but thank heaven I do not . though you stand there with you white face and flash eye , look at I like a very tigress , I know the heart within you perhaps a trifle better than you know it yourself . ' without another word I leave the room and lock myself up in my own chamber . in about half a hour he come to the door , and first he try the handle , then he knock . ' will not you let I in , ? ' say he . ' no ; you have displease I ,' I reply , ' and I do not want to see you face or hear you voice again till the morning . ' he pause a moment as if dumfound or uncertain how to answer such a speech , and then turn and walk away . this be only a hour after dinner : I know he would find it very dull to sit alone all the evening ; and this considerably soften my resentment , though it do not make I relent . I be determined to show he that my heart be not he slave , and I could live without he if I choose ; and I sit down and write a long letter to my aunt , of course tell she nothing of all this . after ten o'clock I hear he come up again , but he pass my door and go straight to he own dressing - room , where he shut himself in for the night . I be rather anxious to see how he would meet I in the morning , and not a little disappointed to behold he enter the breakfast - room with a careless smile . ' be you cross still , ? ' say he , approach as if to salute I . I coldly turn to the table , and begin to pour out the coffee , observe that he be rather late . he utter a low whistle and saunter away to the window , where he stand for some minute look out upon the pleasing prospect of sullen grey clouds , stream rain , soak lawn , and dripp leafless tree , and mutter execration on the weather , and then sit down to breakfast . while take he coffee he mutter it be have - d cold . ' ' you should not have leave it so long , ' say I . he make no answer , and the meal be conclude in silence . it be a relief to both when the letter - bag be brotch in . it contain upon examination a newspaper and one or two letter for he , and a couple of letter for I , which he toss across the table without a remark . one be from my brother , the other from , who be now in with she mother . he , I think , be business letter , and apparently not much to he mind , for he crush they into he pocket with some mutter expletive that I should have reprove he for at any other time . the paper he set before he , and pretend to be deeply absorb in its contents during the remainder of breakfast , and a considerable time after . the read and answer of my letter , and the direction of household concern , afforde I ample employment for the morning : after lunch I get my drawing , and from dinner till bed - time
time I read . meanwhile , poor Arthur be sadly at a loss for something to amuse he or to occupy he time . he want to appear as busy and as unconcerned as I do . have the weather at all permit , he would doubtless have order he horse and set off to some distant region , no matter where , immediately after breakfast , and not return till night : have there be a lady anywhere within reach , of any age between fifteen and forty - five , he would have seek revenge and find employment in get up , or try to get up , a desperate flirtation with she ; but be , to my private satisfaction , entirely cut off from both these source of diversion , he suffering be truly deplorable . when he have do yawn over he paper and scribbl short answer to he shorter letter , he spend the remainder of the morning and the whole of the afternoon in fidgeting about from room to room , watch the cloud , curse the rain , alternately pet and tease and abuse he dog , sometimes lounge on the sofa with a book that he could not force himself to read , and very often fixedly gaze at I when he think I do not perceive it , with the vain hope of detect some trace of tear , or some token of remorseful anguish in my face . but I manage to preserve a undisturbed though grave serenity throughout the day . I be not really angry : I feel for he all the time , and long to be reconcile ; but I determine he should make the first advance , or at least show some sign of a humble and contrite spirit first ; for , if I begin , it would only minister to he self - conceit , increase he arrogance , and quite destroy the lesson I want to give he . he make a long stay in the dining - room after dinner , and , I fear , take a unusual quantity of wine , but not enough to loosen he tongue : for when he come in and find I quietly occupy with my book , too busy to lift my head on he entrance , he merely murmure a expression of suppress disapprobation , and , shutt the door with a bang , go and stretch himself at full length on the sofa , and compose himself to sleep . but he favourite cocker , , that have be lie at my foot , take the liberty of jumping upon he and begin to lick he face . he struck it off with a smart blow , and the poor dog squeak and run cower back to I . when he wake up , about half a hour after , he call it to he again , but only look sheepish and wag the tip of he tail . he call again more sharply , but only cling the closer to I , and lick my hand , as if implor protection . Enrage at this , he master snatch up a heavy book and hurl it at he head . the poor dog set up a piteous outcry , and run to the door . I let he out , and then quietly take up the book . ' give that book to I , ' say , in no very courteous tone . I give it to he . ' why do you let the dog out ? ' he ask ; ' you know I want he . ' ' by what teak ? ' I reply ; ' by you throw the book at he ? but perhaps it be intend for I ? ' ' no ; but I see you have get a taste of it , ' say he , look at my hand , that have also be struck , and be rather severely graze . I return to my reading , and he endeavoure to occupy himself in the same manner ; but in a little while , after several portentous yawn , he pronounce he book to be 's curse trash , ' and throw it on the table . then follow eight or ten minute of silence , during the greater part of which , I believe , he be stare at I . at last he patience be tire out . ' what be that book , ? ' he exclaim . I tell he . ' be it interesting ? ' ' yes , very . ' I go on reading , or pretend to read , at least - I can not say there be much communication between my eye and my brain ; for , while the former run over the page , the latter be earnestly wonder when yoArthu would speak next , and what he would say , and what I should answer . but he do not speak again till I rise to make the tea , and then it be only to say he should not take any . he continue lounge on the sofa , and alternately close he eye and look at he watch and at I , till bed - time , when I rise , and take my candle and retire . ' Helen ! ' cry he , the moment I have leave the room . I turn back , and stood await he command . ' what do you want , ? ' I say at length . ' nothing , ' reply he . 'Go ! ' I go , but hear he mutter something as I be close the door , I turn again . it sound very like ' confound slut , ' but I be quite willing it should be something else
else . ' be you speak , ? ' I ask . ' no , ' be the answer , and I shut the door and depart . I see nothing more of he till the follow morning at breakfast , when he come down a full hour after the usual time . ' you be very late , ' be my morning 's salutation . ' you need not have wait for I , ' be he ; and he walk up to the window again . it be just such weather as yesterday . 'Oh , this confound rain ! ' he mutter . but , after studiously regard it for a minute or two , a bright idea , seem to strike he , for he suddenly exclaim , ' but I know what i will do ! ' and then return and take he seat at the table . the letter - bag be already there , wait to be open . he unlock it and examine the contents , but say nothing about they . ' be there anything for I ? ' I ask . ' no . ' he open the newspaper and begin to read . ' you would better take you coffee , ' suggest I ; ' it will be cold again . ' ' you may go , ' say he , ' if you have do ; I do not want you . ' I rise and withdraw to the next room , wonder if we be to have another such miserable day as yesterday , and wish intensely for a end of these mutually inflict torment . shortly after I hear he ring the bell and give some order about he wardrobe that sound as if he meditate a long journey . he then send for the coachman , and I hear something about the carriage and the horse , and , and seven o'clock to - morrow morning , that start and disturb I not a little . 'I must not let he go to , whatever come of it , ' say I to myself ; ' he will run into all kind of mischief , and I shall be the cause of it . but the question be , how be I to alter he purpose ? well , I will wait awhile , and see if he mention it . ' I wait most anxiously , from hour to hour ; but not a word be speak , on that or any other subject , to I . he whistle and talk to he dog , and wander from room to room , much the same as on the previous day . at last I begin to think I must introduce the subject myself , and be ponder how to bring it about , when unwittingly come to my relief with the follow message from the coachman : ' please , sir , say one of the horse have get a very bad cold , and he think , sir , if you could make it convenient to go the day after to - morrow , instead of to - morrow , he could physic it to - day , so as - ' ' Confound he impudence ! ' interject the master . ' please , sir , he say it would be a deal better if you could , ' persist , ' for he hope there will be a cahange in the weather shortly , and he say it be not likely , when a horse be so bad with a cold , and physick and all - ' ' take the horse ! ' cry the gentleman . ' well , tell he I will think about it ,' he add , after a moment 's reflection . he cast a searching glance at I , as the servant withdrew , expect to see some token of deep astonishment and alarm ; but , be previously prepare , I preserve a aspect of stoical indifference . he countenance fall as he meet my steady gaze , and he turn away in very obvious disappointment , and walk up to the fire - place , where he stand in a attitude of undisguised dejection , lean against the chimney - piece with he forehead sunk upon he arm . ' where do you want to go , ? ' say I . , ' reply he , gravely . ' what for ? ' I ask . ' because I can not be happy here . ' ' why not ? ' ' because my wife do not love I . ' ' she would love you with all she heart , if you deserv it . ' ' what must I do to deserve it ? ' this seem humble and earnest enough ; and I be so much affect , between sorrow and joy , that I be oblige to pause a few seconds before I could steady my voice to reply . ' if she give you she heart , ' say I , ' you must take it , thankfully , and use it well , and not pull it in piece , and laugh in she face , because she can not snatch it away . ' he now turn round , and stand face I , with he back to the fire . ' come , then , , be you go to be a good girl ? ' say he . this sound rather too arrogant , and the smile that accompany it do not please I . I therefore hesitate to reply . perhaps my former answer have imply too much : he have hear my voice falter , and might have see I brush away a tear . ' be you go to forgive I , ? ' he resume , more
more humbly . ' be you penitent ? ' I reply , step up to he and smile in he face . ' heart - break ! ' he answer , with a rueful countenance , yet with a merry smile just lurk within he eye and about the corner of he mouth ; but this could not repulse I , and I fly into he arm . he fervently embrace I , and though I shed a torrent of tear , I think I never be happier in my life than at that moment . ' then you will not go to , ? ' I say , when the first transport of tear and kiss have subside . 'no , love , - unless you will go with I . ' 'I will , gladly , ' I answer , ' if you think the change will amuse you , and if you will put off the journey till next week . ' he readily consent , but say there be no need of much preparation , as he should not be for stay long , for he do not wish I to be Londonize , and to lose my country freshness and originality by too much intercourse with the ladie of the world . I think this folly ; but I do not wish to contradict he now : I merely say that I be of very domestic habit , as he well know , and have no particular wish to mingle with the world . so we be to go to on , the day after to - morrow . it be now four day since the termination of we quarrel , and I be sure it have do we both good : it have make I like a great deal better , and make he behave a great deal better to I . he have never once attempt to annoy I since , by the most distant allusion to -, or any of those disagreeable reminiscence of he former life . I wish I could blot they from my memory , or else get he to regard such matter in the same light as I do . well ! it be something , however , to have make he see that they be not fit subject for a conjugal jest . he may see further some time . I will put no limit to my hope ; and , in spite of my aunt 's foreboding and my own unspoken fear , I trust we shall be happy yet . on the eighth of we go to , on the eighth of I return , in obedience to 's wish ; very much against my own , because I leave he behind . if he have come with I , I should have be very glad to get home again , for he lead I such a round of restless dissipation while there , that , in that short space of time , I be quite tired out . he seem bent upon display I to he friend and acquaintance in particular , and the public in general , on every possible occasion , and to the greatest possible advantage . it be something to feel that he consider I a worthy object of pride ; but I pay dear for the gratification : for , in the first place , to please he I have to violate my cherish predilection , my almost root principle in favour of a plain , dark , sober style of dress - I must sparkle in costly jewel and deck myself out like a pain butterfly , just as I have , long since , determin I would never do - and this be no trifling sacrifice ; in the second place , I be continually strain to satisfy he sanguine expectation and do honou to he choice by my general conduct and deportment , and fear to disappoint he by some awkward misdemeanour , or some trait of inexperienced ignorance about the custom of society , especially when I act the part of hostess , which I be not unfrequently call upon to do ; and , in the third place , as I intimate before , I be weary of the throng and bustle , the restless hurry and ceaseless change of a life so alien to all my previous habit . at last , he suddenly discover that the air do not agree with I , and I be languish for my country home , and must immediately return to . I laughingly assure he that the case be not so urgent as he appear to think it , but I be quite willing to go home if he be . he reply that he should be obliged to remain a week or two longer , as he have business that require he presence . ' then I will stay with you , ' say I . ' but I can not do with you , , ' be he answer : 'as long as you stay I shall attend to you and neglect my business . ' ' but I will not let you ,' I return ; ' now that I know you have business to attend to , I shall insist upon you attending to it , and let I alone ; and , to tell the truth , I shall be glad of a little rest . I can take my ride and walk in the as usual ; and you business can not occupy all you time : I shall see you at meal - time , and in the evening at least , and that will be better than be league away and never see you at all . ' ' but , my love , I can not let you stay . how can I settle my affair when
when I know that you be here , neglect -? ' 'I shall not feel myself neglect : while you be do you duty , , I shall never complain of neglect . if you have tell I before , that you have anything to do , it would have be half do before this ; and now you must make up for lost time by redouble exertion . tell I what it be ; and I will be you taskmaster , instead of be a hindrance . ' ' no , no ,' persist the impracticable creature ; ' you must go home , ; I must have the satisfaction of know that you be safe and well , though far away . you bright eye be fade , and that tender , delicate bloom have quite desert you cheek . ' ' that be only with too much gaiety and fatigue . ' ' it be not , I tell you ; it be the air : you be pin for the fresh breeze of you country home , and you shall feel they before you be two day older . and remember you situation , dearest Helen ; on you health , you know , depend the health , if not the life , of we future hope . ' ' then you really wish to get rid of I ? ' ' Positively , I do ; and I will take you down myself to , and then return . I shall not be absent above a week or fortnight at most . ' ' but if I must go , I will go alone : if you must stay , it be needless to waste you time in the journey there and back . ' but he do not like the idea of send I alone . ' why , what helpless creature do you take I for ,' I reply , ' that you can not trust I to go a hundred mile in we own carriage , with we own footman and a maid to attend I ? if you come with I I shall assuredly keep you . but tell I , , what be this tiresome business ; and why do you never mention it before ? ' ' it be only a little business with my lawyer , ' say he ; and he tell I something about a piece of property he want to sell , in order to pay off a part of the incumbrance on he estate ; but either the account be a little confused , or I be rather dull of comprehension , for I could not clearly understand how that should keep he in town a fortnight after I . still less can I now comprehend how it should keep he a month , for it be nearly that time since I leave he , and no sign of he return as yet . in every letter he promise to be with I in a few day , and every time deceive I , or deceive himself . he excuse be vague and insufficient . I can not doubt that he have get among he former companion again . oh , why do I leave he ! I wish - I do intensely wish he would return ! 29th . - no Arthur yet ; and for many day I have be look and long in vain for a letter . he letter , when they come , be kind , if fair word and endear epithet can give they a claim to the title - but very short , and full of trivial excuse and promise that I can not trust ; and yet how anxiously I look forward to they I how eagerly I open and deavor one of those little , hastily - scribble return for the three or four long letter , hithertoo unanswered , he have have from I ! oh , it be cruel to leave I so long alone ! he know I have no one but to speak to , for we have no neighbour here , except the Hargrave , whose residence I can dimly descry from these upper window embosom among those low , woody hill beyond the Dale . I be glad when I learn that be so near we ; and she company would be a soothing solace to I now ; but she be still in town with she mother ; there be no one at the but little and she french governess , for be always away . I see that paragon of manly perfection in : he seem scarcely to merit the eulogium of he mother and sister , though he certainly appear more conversable and agreeable than , more candid and high - minded than , and more polished and gentlemanly than Hattersley , yoArthu be only other friend whom he judge fit to introduce to I . - oh , , why will not you come ? why will not you write to I at least ? you talk about my health : how can you expect I to gather bloom and vigour here , pin in solitude and restless anxiety from day to day ? - it would serve you right to come back and find my good look entirely waste away . I would beg my uncle and aunt , or my brother , to come and see I , but I do not like to complain of my loneliness to they , and indeed loneliness be the least of my suffering . but what be he , do - what be it that keep he away ? it be this ever - recurr question , and the horrible suggestion it raise , that distract I . 3 rd . - my last bitter letter have wring from he a answer at last , and a
a rather longer one than usual ; but still I do not know what to make of it . he playfully abuse I for the gall and vinegar of my latest effusion , tell I I can have no conception of the multitudinous engagement that keep he away , but avers that , in spite of they all , he will assuredly be with I before the close of next week ; though it be impossible for a man so circumstanced as he be to fix the precise day of he return : meantime he exhort I to the exercise of patience , ' that first of woman 's virtue , ' and desire I to remember the say , ' absence make the heart grow fonder , ' and comfort myself with the assurance that the longer he stay away the better he shall love I when he return ; and till he do return , he beg I will continue to write to he constantly , for , though he be sometimes too idle and often too busy to answer my letter as they come , he like to receive they daily ; and if I fulfil my threat of punishing he see neglect by ceasing to write , he shall be so angry that he will do he utmost to forget I . he add this piece of intelligence respect poor : ' you little friend be likely , before long , to follow you example , and take upon she the yoke of matrimony in conjunction with a friend of mine . Hattersley , you know , have not yet fulfil he direful threat of throw he precious person away on the first old maid that choose to evince a tenderness for he ; but he still preserve a resolute determination to see himself a marry man before the year be out . " only , " say he to I , " I must have somebody that will let I have my own way in everything - not like you wife , : she be a charming creature , but she look as if she have a will of she own , and could play the vixen upon occasion " ( I think " you be right there , man , " but I do not say so ) . " I must have some good , quiet soul that will let I just do what I like and go where I like , keep at home or stay away , without a word of reproach or complaint ; for I can not do with be bother . " " well , " say I , " I know somebody that will suit you to a tee , if you do not care for money , and that be 's sister , . " he desire to be introduce to she forthwith , for he say he have plenty of the needful himself , or should have when he old governor choose to quit the stage . so you see , Helen , I have manage pretty well , both for you friend and mine . ' poor Milicent ! but I can not imagine she will ever be lead to accept such a suitor - one so repugnant to all she idea of a man to be honoure and love . 5th . - ! I be mistaken . I have get a long letter from she this morning , tell I she be already engage , and expect to be marry before the close of the month . ' I hardly know what to say about it , ' she write , 'or what to think . to tell you the truth , Helen , I do not like the thought of it at all . if I be to be 's wife , I must try to love he ; and I do try with all my might ; but I have make very little progress yet ; and the worst symptom of the case be , that the further he be from I the better I like he : he frighten I with he abrupt manners and strange hectoring way , and I dread the thought of marry he . " then why have you accept he ? " you will ask ; and I do not know I have accept he ; but tell I I have , and he seem to think so too . I certainly do not mean to do so ; but I do not like to give he a flat refusal , for fear mamma should be grieve and angry ( for I know she wish I to marry he ) , and I want to talk to she first about it : so I give he what I think be a evasive , half negative answer ; but she say it be as good as a acceptance , and he would think I very capricious if I be to attempt to draw back - and indeed I be so confused and frightene at the moment , I can hardly tell what I say . and next time I see he , he accost I in all confidence as he affiance bride , and immediately begin to setle matters with mamma . I have not courage to contradict they then , and how can I do it now ? I can not ; they would think I mad . besides , mamma be so delighted with the idea of the match ; she think she have manage so well for I ; and I can not bear to disappoint she . I do object sometimes , and tell she what I feel , but you do not know how she talk . , you know , be the son of a rich banker , and as and I have no fortune , and very little ,
, we dear mamma be very anxious to see we all well married , that be , united to rich partner . it be not my idea of be well marry , but she mean it all for the best . she say when I be safe off she hand it will be such a relief to she mind ; and she assure I it will be a good thing for the family as well as for I . even be pleased at the prospect , and when I confess my reluctance to he , he say it be all childish nonsense . do you think it nonsense , ? I should not care if I could see any prospect of be able to love and admire he , but I can not . there be nothing about he to hang one 's esteem and affection upon ; he be so diametrically opposite to what I imagine my husband should be . do write to I , and say all you can to encourage I . do not attempt to dissuade I , for my fate be fix : preparations for the important event be already go on around I ; and do not say a word against , for I want to think well of he ; and though I have speak against he myself , it be for the last time : hereafter , I shall never permit myself to utter a word in he dispraise , however he may seem to deserve it ; and whoever venture to speak slightingly of the man I have promise to love , to honou , and obey , must expect my serious displeasure . after all , I think he be quite as good as , if not better ; and yet you love he , and seem to be happy and content ; and perhaps I may manage as well . you must tell I , if you can , that be better than he seem - that he be upright , honourable , and open - hear - in fact , a perfect diamond in the rough . he may be all this , but I do not know he . I know only the exterior , and what , I trust , be the worst part of he . ' she conclude with ' good - by , dear Helen . I be wait anxiously for you advice - but mind you let it be all on the right side . ' ! poor , what encouragement can I give you ? or what advice - except that it be better to make a bold stand now , though at the expense of disappointing and anger both mother and brother and lover , than to devote you whole life , hereafter , to misery and vain regret ? , 13th . - the week be over , and he be not come . all the sweet summer be pass away without one breath of pleasure to I or benefit to he . and I have all along be look forward to this season with the fond , delusive hope that we should enjoy it so sweetly together ; and that , with 's help and my exertion , it would be the means of elevate he mind , and refin he taste to a due appreciation of the salutary and pure delights of nature , and peace , and holy love . but now - at evening , when I see the round red sun sink quietly down behind those woody hill , leave they sleep in a warm , red , golden haze , I only think another lovely day be lose to he and I ; and at morning , when rouse by the flutter and chirp of the sparrow , and the gleeful twitter of the swallow - all intent upon feed they young , and full of life and joy in they own little frame - I open the window to inhale the balmy , soul - revive air , and look out upon the lovely landscape , laugh in dew and sunshine - I too often shame that glorious scene with tear of thankless misery , because he can not feel its freshening influence ; and when I wander in the ancient wood , and meet the little wild flower smile in my path , or sit in the shadow of we noble ash - tree by the water - side , with they branch gently sway in the light summer breeze that murmur through they feathery foliage - my ear full of that low music mingl with the dreamy hum of insect , my eye abstractedly gaze on the glassy surface of the little lake before I , with the tree that crowd about its bank , some gracefully bend to kiss its water , some rear they stately head high above , but stretch they wide arm over its margin , all faithfully mirror far , far down in its glassy depth - though sometimes the image be partially break by the sport of aquatic insects , and sometimes , for a moment , the whole be shiver into trembling fragment by a transient breeze that sweep the surface too roughly - still I have no pleasure ; for the greater the happiness that nature set before I , the more I lament that he be not here to taste it : the greater the bliss we might enjoy together , the more I feel we present wretchedness apart ( yes , ours ; he must be wretch , though he may not know it ) ; and the more my sense be pleased , the more my heart be oppress ; for he keep it with he confin amid the dust and smoke of - perhaps shut up within the wall of he own abominable club . but most of
of all , at night , when I enter my lonely chamber , and look out upon the summer moon , ' sweet regent of the sky , ' float above I in the ' black blue vault of heaven , ' shed a flood of silver radiance over park , and wood , and water , so pure , so peaceful , so divine - and think , where be he now ? - what be he do at this moment ? wholly unconscious of this heavenly scene - perhaps revell with he boon companion , perhaps - help I , it be too - too much ! 23rd . - thank heaven , he be come at last ! but how alter ! flush and feverish , listless and languid , he beauty strangely diminish , he vigour and vivacity quite depart . I have not upbraide he by word or look ; I have not even ask he what he have be do . I have not the heart to do it , for I think he be asham of himself - he must be so indeed , and such inquiry could not fail to be painful to both . my forbearance please he - touch he even , I be inclin to think . he say he be glad to be home again , and know how glad I be to get he back , even as he be . he lie on the sofa , nearly all day long ; and I play and s to he for hour together . I write he letter for he , and get he everything he want ; and sometimes I read to he , and sometimes I talk , and sometimes only sit by he and soothe he with silent caress . I know he do not deserve it ; and I fear I be spoil he ; but this once , I will forgive he , freely and entirely . I will shame he into virtue if I can , and I will never let he leave I again . he be pleased with my attention - it may be , grateful for they . he like to have I near he : and though he be peevish and testy with he servants and he dog , he be gentle and kind to I . what he would be , if I do not so watchfully anticipate he want , and so carefully avoid , or immediately desist from do anything that have a tendency to irritate or disturb he , with however little reason , I can not tell . how intensely I wish he be worthy of all this care ! last night , as I sit beside he , with he head in my lap , pass my finger through he beautiful curl , this thought make my eye overflow with sorrowful tear - as it often do ; but this time , a tear fell on he face and make he look up . he smile , but not insultingly . ' dear ! ' he say - ' why do you cry ? you know that I love you ' ( and he press my hand to he feverish lip ) , ' and what more could you desire ? ' ' only , , that you would love yourself as truly and as faithfully as you be love by I . ' ' that would be hard , indeed ! ' he reply , tenderly squeeze my hand . 24th . - be himself again , as lusty and reckless , as light of heart and head as ever , and as restless and hard to amuse as a spoilt child , and almost as full of mischief too , especially when wet weather keep he within door . I wish he have something to do , some useful trade , or profession , or employment - anything to occupy he head or he hand for a few hour a day , and give he something besides he own pleasure to think about . if he would play the country gentleman and attend to the farm - but that he know nothing about , and will not give he mind to consider , - or if he would take up with some literary study , or learn to draw or to play - as he be so fond of music , I often try to persuade he to learn the piano , but he be far too idle for such a undertaking : he have no more idea of exerting himself to overcome obstacle than he have of restrain he natural appetite ; and these two thing be the ruin of he . I lay they both to the charge of he harsh yet careless father , and he madly indulgent mother . - if ever I be a mother I will zealously strive against this crime of over - indulgence . I can hardly give it a milder name when I think of the evils it bring . happily , it will soon be the shooting season , and then , if the weather permit , he will find occupation enough in the pursuit and destruction of the partridge and pheasant : we have no grouse , or he might have be similarly occupy at this moment , instead of lie under the acacia - tree pull poor 's ear . but he say it be dull work shoot alone ; he must have a friend or two to help he . ' let they be tolerably decent then , , ' say I . the word ' friend ' in he mouth make I shudder : I know it be some of he ' friend ' that induce he to stay behind I in , and keep he away so long : indeed , from what he have unguardedly
unguardedly tell I , or hint from time to time , I can not doubt that he frequently show they my letter , to let they see how fondly he wife watch over he interest , and how keenly she regret he absence ; and that they induce he to remain week after week , and to plunge into all manner of excess , to avoid be laugh at for a wife - ridden fool , and , perhaps , to show how far he could venture to go without danger of shak the fond creature 's devoted attachment . it be a hateful idea , but I can not believe it be a false one . ' well , ' reply he , 'i thought of for one ; but there be no possibility of get he without he better half , we mutual friend , ; so we must ask they both . you be not afraid of she , be you , ? ' he ask , with a mischievous twinkle in he eye . ' of course not ,' I answer : ' why should I ? and who beside ? ' ' for one . he will be glad to come , though he own place be so near , for he have little enough land of he own to shoot over , and we can extend we depredation into it , if we like ; and he be thoroughly respectable , you know , - quite a lady 's man : and I think , for another : he be a decent , quiet fellow enough . you will not object to ? ' 'I hate he : but , however , if you wish it , I will try to endure he presence for a while . ' ' all a prejudice , , a mere woman 's antipathy . ' ' no ; I have solid grounds for my dislike . and be that all ? ' ' why , yes , I think so . will be too busy billing and cooe , with he bride to have much time to spare for gun and dog at present , ' he reply . and that remind I , that I have have several letter from since she marriage , and that she either be , or pretend to be , quite reconcile to she lot . she profess to have discover numberless virtue and perfection in she husband , some of which , I fear , less partial eye would fail to distinguish , though they seek they carefully with tear ; and now that she be accustom to he loud voice , and abrupt , uncourteous manners , she affirms she find no difficulty in love he as a wife should do , and begs I will burn that letter wherein she speak so unadvisedly against he . so that I trust she may yet be happy ; but , if she be , it will be entirely the reward of she own goodness of heart ; for have she choose to consider herself the victim of fate , or of she mother 's worldly wisdom , she might have be thoroughly miserable ; and if , for duty 's sake , she have not make every effort to love she husband , she would , doubtless , have hat he to the end of she day . 23rd . - we guest arrive about three week ago . and have now be marry above eight month ; and I will do the lady the credit to say that she husband be quite a alte man ; he look , he spirit , and he temper , be all perceptibly change for the better since I last see he . but there be room for improvement still . he be not always cheerful , nor always contente , and she often complain of he ill - humour , which , however , of all persons , she ought to be the last to accuse he of , as he never display it against she , except for such conduct as would provoke a saint . he adore she still , and would go to the world 's end to please she . she know she power , and she use it too ; but well know that to wheedle and coax be safer than to command , she judiciously temper she despotism with flattery and blandishment enough to make he deem himself a favour and a happy man . but she have a way of torment he , in which I be a fellow - sufferer , or might be , if I choose to regard myself as such . this be by openly , but not too glaringly , coquett with , who be quite willing to be she partner in the game ; but I do not care for it , because , with he , I know there be nothing but personal vanity , and a mischievous desire to excite my jealousy , and , perhaps , to torment he friend ; and she , no doubt , be actuate by much the same motive ; only , there be more of malice and less of playfulness in she manoeuvre . it be obviously , therefore , my interest to disappoind they both , as far as I be concerned , by preserve a cheerful , undisturbed serenity throughout ; and , accordingly , I endeaavor to show the fullest confidence in my husband , and the greatest indifference to the art of my attractive guest . I have never reproach the former but once , and that be for laughing at 's depressed and anxious countenance one evening , when they have both be particularly provoke ; and then , indeed , I say a good deal on the subject , and rebuk he sternly enough ;
; but he only laugh , and say , - ' you can feel for he , Helen , can not you ? ' 'I can feel for anyone that be unjustly treat ,' I reply , ' and I can feel for those that injure they too . ' ' why , Helen , you be as jealous as he be ! ' cry he , laugh still more ; and I find it impossible to convince he of he mistake . so , from that time , I have carefully refrain from any notice of the subject whatever , and leave to take care of himself . he either have not the sense or the power to follow my example , though he do try to conceal he uneasiness as well as he can ; but still , it will appear in he face , and he ill - humwe will peep out at interval , though not in the expression of open resentment - they never go far enough for that . but I confess I do feel jealous at time , most painfully , bitterly so ; when she sing and play to he , and he hang over the instrument , and dwell upon she voice with no affect interest ; for then I know he be really delighted , and I have no power to awake similar fervour . I can amuse and please he with my simple song , but not delight he thus . 28th . - yesterday , we all go to the , 's much - neglect home . he mother frequently ask we over , that she may have the pleasure of she dear 's company ; and this time she have invite we to a dinner - party , and get together as many of the country gentry as be within reach to meet we . the entertainment be very well get up ; but I could not help think about the cost of it all the time . I do not like ; she be a hard , pretentious , worldly - minded woman . she have money enough to live very comfortably , if she only know how to use it judiciously , and have teach she son to do the same ; but she be ever strain to keep up appearances , with that despicable pride that shun the semblance of poverty as of a shameful crime . she grind she dependent , pinch she servants , and deprive even she daughter and herself of the real comfort of life , because she will not consent to yield the palm in outward show to those who have three time she wealth ; and , above all , because she be determined she cherish son shall be enable to ' hold up he head with the highest gentleman in the land . ' this same son , I imagine , be a man of expensive habit , no reckless spendthrift and no abandoned sensualist , but one who like to have ' everything handsome about he , ' and to go to a certain length in youthful indulgence , not so much to gratify he own taste as to maintain he reputation as a man of fashion in the world , and a respectable fellow among he own lawless companion ; while he be too selfish to consider how many comforts might be obtain for he fond mother and sister with the money he thus waste upon himself : as long as they can contrive to make a respectable appearance once a year , when they come to town , he give himself little concern about they private stinting and struggle at home . this be a harsh judgament to form of ' dear , noble -minded , generous - hear , ' but I fear it be too just . 's anxiety to make good match for she daughter be partly the cause , and partly the result , of these error : by make a figure in the world , and show they off to advantage , she hope to obtain better chance for they ; and by thus live beyond she legitimate mean , and lavish so much on they brother , she render they portionless , and make they burdens on she hand . poor Milicent , I fear , have already fall a sacrifice to the manoeuvring of this mistaken mother , who congratulate herself on have so satisfactorily discharge she maternal duty , and hope to do as well for . but be a child as yet , a little merry romp of fourteen : as honest - hear , and as guileless and simple as she sister , but with a fearless spirit of she own , that I fancy she mother will find some difficulty in bending to she purpose . 9th . - it be on the night of the 4th , a little after tea , that have be singe and play , with as usual at she side : she have end she song , but still she sit at the instrument ; and he stand lean on the back of she chair , converse in scarcely audible tone , with he face in very close proximity with hers . I look at . he be at the other end of the room , talk with . and ; but I see he dart towards he lady and he host a quick , impatient glance , expressive of intense disquietude , at which smile . determined to interrupt the Tete- e - Tete , I rise , and , select a piece of music from the music stand , step up to the piano , intend to ask the lady to play it ; but I stand transfix and speechless on see she seat there , listen , with what see a exultant smile on she
she flushed face to he soft murmuring , with she hand quietly surrendere to he clasp . the blood rush first to my heart , and then to my head ; for there be more than this : almost at the moment of my approach , he cast a hurried glance over he shoulder towards the other occupant of the room , and then ardently presse the unresisting hand to he lip . on raise he eye , he beheld I , and drop they again , confound and dismay . she see I too , and confront I with a look of hard defiance . I lay the music on the piano , and retire . I feel ill ; but I do not leave the room : happily , it be get late , and could not be long before the company disperse . I go to the fire , and lean my head against the chimney - piece . in a minute or two , some one ask I if I feel unwell . I do not answer ; indeed , at the time , I know not what be say ; but I mechanically look up , and see stand beside I on the rug . ' shall I get you a glass of wine ? ' say he . ' no , thank you ,' I reply ; and , turn from he , I look round . be beside she husband , bend over he as he sit , with she hand on he shoulder , softly talk and smile in he face ; and be at the table , turn over a book of engraving . I seat myself in the nearest chair ; and , finde he service be not desire , judiciously withdraw . shortly after , the company break up , and , as the guest be retire to they room , yoArthu approach I , smile with the utmost assurance . ' be you very angry , ? ' murmure he . ' this be no jest , , ' say I , seriously , but as calmly as I could - ' unless you think it a jest to lose my affection for ever . ' ' what ! so bitter ? ' he exclaim , laughingly , clasp my hand between both he ; but I snatch it away , in indignation - almost in disgust , for he be obviously affect with wine . ' then I must go down on my knee , ' say he ; and knee before I , with clasp hand , uplift in mock humiliation , he continue imploringly - ' forgive I , Helen - dear Helen , forgive I , and I will never do it again ! ' and , bury he face in he handkerchief , he affect to sob aloud . leave he thus employ , I take my candle , and , slipp quietly from the room , hasten up - stair as fast as I could . but he soon discover that I have leave he , and , rush up after I , catch I in he arm , just as I have enter the chamber , and be about to shut the door in he face . ' no , no , by heaven , you sha ' not escape I so ! ' he cry . then , alarm at my agitation , he beg I not to put myself in such a passion , tell I I be white in the face , and should kill myself if I do so . ' let I go , then ,' I murmure ; and immediately he release I - and it be well he do , for I be really in a passion . I sank into the easy - chair and endeavoure to compose myself , for I want to speak to he calmly . he stand beside I , but do not venture to touch I or to speak for a few seconds ; then , approach a little nearer , he drop on one knee - not in mock humility , but to bring himself nearer my level , and lean he hand on the arm of the chair , he begin in a low voice : ' it be all nonsense , - a jest , a mere nothing - not worth a thought . will you never learn ,' he continue more boldly , ' that you have nothing to fear from I ? that I love you wholly and entirely ? - or if ,' he add with a lurking smile , 'i ever give a thought to another , you may well spare it , for those fancie be here and go like a flash of lightning , while my love for you burn on steadily , and for ever , like the sun . you little exorbitant tyrant , will not that -? ' ' be quiet a moment , will you , ? ' say I , ' and listen to I - and do not think I be in a jealous fury : I be perfectly calm . feel my hand . ' and I gravely extend it towards he - but close it upon he with a energy that seem to disprove the assertion , and make he smile . ' you need not smile , sir , ' say I , still tighten my grasp , and look steadfastly on he till he almost quail before I . ' you may think it all very fine , , to amuse yourself with rouse my jealousy ; but take care you do not rouse my hate instead . and when you have once extinguish my love , you will find it no easy matter to kindle it again . ' ' well , , I will not repeat the offence
offence . but I mean nothing by it , I assure you . I have take too much wine , and I be scarcely myself at the time . ' ' you often take too much ; and that be another practice I detest . ' he look up astonished at my warmth . 'yes ,' I continue ; 'I never mention it before , because I be asham to do so ; but now I will tell you that it distress I , and may disgust I , if you go on and suffer the habit to grow upon you , as it will if you do not check it in time . but the whole system of you conduct to be not referable to wine ; and this night you know perfectly well what you be do . ' 'Well , I be sorry for it , ' reply he , with more of sulkiness than contrition : ' what more would you have ? ' ' you be sorry that I see you , no doubt ,' I answer coldly . ' if you have not see I ,' he mutter , fix he eye on the carpet , ' it would have do no harm . ' my heart feel ready to burst ; but I resolutely swallow back my emotion , and answer calmly , ' you think not ? ' ' no , ' reply he , boldly . 'After all , what have I do ? it be nothing - except as you choose to make it a subject of accusation and distress . ' ' what would , you friend , think , if he know all ? or what would you yourself think , if he or any other have act the same part to I , throughout , as you have to ? ' 'I would blow he brain out . ' ' well , then , , how can you call it nothing - a offence for which you would think yourself justified in blow another man 's brain out ? be it nothing to trifle with you friend 's feeling and mine - to endeaavor to steal a woman 's affection from she husband - what he value more than he gold , and therefore what it be more dishonest to take ? be the marriage vow a jest ; and be it nothing to make it you sport to break they , and to tempt another to do the same ? can I love a man that do such thing , and coolly maintain it be nothing ? ' ' you be break you marriage vow yourself , ' say he , indignantly rise and pace to and . ' you promise to honou and obey I , and now you attempt to hector over I , and threat and accuse I , and call I worse than a highwayman . if it be not for you situation , , I would not submit to it so tamely . I will not be dictate to by a woman , though she be my wife . ' ' what will you do then ? will you go on till I hate you , and then accuse I of break my vow ? ' he be silent a . moment , and then reply : ' you never will hate I . ' return and resume he former position at my foot , he repeat more vehemently - ' you can not hate I as long as I love you . ' ' but how can I believe that you love I , if you continue to act in this way ? just imagine yourself in my place : would you think I love you , if I do so ? would you believe my protestation , and honou and trust I under such circumstance ? ' ' the case be different , ' he reply . ' it be a woman 's nature to be constant - to love one and one only , blindly , tenderly , and for ever - bless they , dear creature ! and you above they all ; but you must have some commiseration for we , ; you must give we a little more licence , for , as have it - however we do praise ourselves , we fancie be more giddy and unfirm , more longing , waver , sooner lose and win Than woman 's are . ' ' do you mean by that , that you fancie be lose to I , and win by ? ' ' no ! heaven be my witness that I think she mere dust and ash in comparison with you , and shall continue to think so , unless you drive I from you by too much severity . she be a daughter of earth ; you be a angel of heaven ; only be not too austere in you divinity , and remember that I be a poor , fallible mortal . come now , Helen ; will not you forgive I ? ' he say , gently take my hand , and look up with a innocent smile . ' if I do , you will repeat the offence . ' 'I swear by - ' ' do not swear ; I will believe you word as well as you oath . I wish I could have confidence in either . ' ' try I , then , Hel : only trust and pardon I this once , and you shall see ! come , I be in hell 's torment till you speak the word . ' I do not speak it , but I put my hand on he shoulder and kiss he forehead , and then burst into tear . he embrace I tenderly ; and we have be good friend ever since . he have be
be decently temperate at table , and well - conduct towards . the first day he hold himself aloon from she , as far as he could without any flagrant breach of hospitality : since that he have be friendly and civil , but nothing more - in my presence , at least , nor , I think , at any other time ; for she seem haughty and displease , and be manifestly more cheerful , and more cordial towards he host than before . but I shall be glad when they be go , for I have so little love for that it be quite a task to be civil to she , and as she be the only woman here besides myself , we be necessarily throw so much together . next time call I shall hail she advent as quite a relief . I have a good mind to ask 's leave to invite the old lady to stay with we till we guest depart . I think I will . she will take it as a kind attention , and , though I have little relish for she society , she will be truly welcome as a third to stand between and I . the first time the latter and I be alone together , after that unhappy evening , be a hour or two after breakfast on the follow day , when the gentleman be go out , after the usual time spend in the writing of letter , the reading of newspaper , and desultory conversation . we sit silent for two or three minute . she be busy with she work , and I be run over the column of a paper from which I have extract all the pith some twenty minute before . it be a moment of painful embarrassment to I , and I think it must be infinitely more so to she ; but it seem I be mistaken . she be the first to speak ; and , smile with the coolest assurance , she begin , - ' you husband be merry last night , : be he often so ? ' my blood boil in my face ; but it be better she should seem to attribute he conduct to this than to anything else . ' no , ' reply I , ' and never will be so again , I trust . ' ' you give he a curtain lecture , do you ? ' ' no ! but I tell he I dislike such conduct , and he promise I not to repeat it . ' 'I think he look rather subdue this morning , ' she continue ; 'and you , ? you have be weep , I see - that be we grand resource , you know . but do not it make you eye smart ? and do you always find it to answer ? ' 'I never cry for effect ; nor can I conceive how any one can . ' ' well , I do not know : I never have occasion to try it ; but I think if be to commit such impropriety , I would make he cry . I do not wonder at you be angry , for I be sure I would give my husband a lesson he would not soon forget for a lighter offence than that . but then he never will do anything of the kind ; for I keep he in too good order for that . ' ' be you sure you do not arrogate too much of the credit to yourself . be quite as remarkable for he abstemiousness for some time before you marry he , as he be now , I have hear . ' 'Oh , about the wine you mean - yes , he be safe enough for that . and as to look askance to another woman , he be safe enough for that too , while I live , for he worship the very ground I tread on . ' ' indeed ! and be you sure you deserve it ? ' ' why , as to that , I can not say : you know we be all fallible creature , ; we none of we deserve to be worship . but be you sure you darling deserve all the love you give to he ? ' I know not what to answer to this . I be burn with anger ; but I suppress all outward manifestation of it , and only bit my lip and pretend to arrange my work . ' at any rate , ' resume she , pursue she advantage , ' you can conseal yourself with the assurance that you be worthy of all the love he give to you . ' ' you flatter I , ' say I ; ' but , at least , I can try to be worthy of it . ' and then I turn the conversation . 25th . - last I be a bride , with a heart overflow with present bliss , and full of ardent hope for the future , though not unmingle with foreboding fear . now I be a wife : my bliss be sober , but not destroy ; my hope diminish , but not depart ; my fear increase , but not yet thoroughly confirm ; and , thank heaven , I be a mother too . have send I a soul to educate for heaven , and give I a new and calmer bliss , and stronger hope to comfort I . 25th , 1823 . - another year be gone . my little Arthur lives and thrive . he be healthy , but not robust , full of gentle playfulness and vivacity , already affectionate , and susceptible of passion and emotion it will be long ere he
he can find word to express . he have win he father 's heart at last ; and now my constant terror be , lest he should be ruin by that father 's thoughtless indulgence . but I must beware of my own weakness too , for I never know till now how strong be a parent 's temptation to spoil a only child . I have need of consolation in my son , for ( to this silent paper I may confess it ) I have but little in my husband . I love he still ; and he love I , in he own way - but oh , how different from the love I could have give , and once have hope to receive ! how little real sympathy there exist between we ; how many of my thought and feeling be gloomily cloister within my own mind ; how much of my higher and better self be indeed unmarried - doom either to hare and sour in the sunless shade of solitude , or to quite degenerate and fall away for lack of nutriment in this unwholesome soil ! but , I repeat , I have no right to complain ; only let I state the truth - some of the truth , at least , - and see hereafter if any darker truth will blot these page . we have now be full two year ; the ' romance ' of we attachment must be wear away . surely I have now get down to the lowest gradation in 's affection , and discover all the evils of he nature : if there be any further change , it must be for the better , as we become still more accustom to each other ; surely we shall find no lower depth than this . and , if so , I can bear it well - as well , at least , as I have borne it hithertoo . yoArthu be not what be commonly call a bad man : he have many good quality ; but he be a man without self - restraint or lofty aspiration , a lover of pleasure , give up to animal enjoyment : he be not a bad husband , but he notions of matrimonial duty and comfort be not my notions . judge from appearances , he idea of a wife be a thing to love one devotedly , and to stay at home to wait upon she husband , and amuse he and minister to he comfort in every possible way , while he choose to stay with she ; and , when he be absent , to attend to he interest , domestic or otherwise , and patiently wait he return , no matter how he may be occupy in the meantime . Early in spring he announce he intention of go to : he affair there demand he attendance , he say , and he could refuse it no longer . he express he regret at have to leave I , but hope I would amuse myself with the baby till he return . ' but why leave I ? ' I say . 'I can go with you : I can be ready at any time . ' ' you would not take that child to town ? ' ' yes ; why not ? ' the thing be absurd : the air of the town would be certain to disagree with he , and with I as a nurse ; the late hour and habits would not suit I under such circumstance ; and altogether he assure I that it would be excessively troublesome , injuriious , and unsafe . I over-rule he objection as well as I could , for I tremble at the thought of he go alone , and would sacrifice almost anything for myself , much even for my child , to prevent it ; but at length he tell I , plainly , and somewhat testily , that he could not do with I : he be wear out with the baby 's restless night , and must have some repose . I propose separate apartment ; but it would not do . ' the truth be , ,' I say at last , ' you be weary of my company , and determine not to have I with you . you might as well have say so at once . ' he deny it ; but I immediately leave the room , and fly to the nursery , to hide my feeling , if I could not soothe they , there . I be too much hurt to express any further dissatisfaction with he plan , or at all to refer to the subject again , except for the necessary arrangement concern he departure and the conduct of affair during he absence , till the day before he go , when I earnestly exhort he to take care of himself and keep out of the way of temptation . he laugh at my anxiety , but assure I there be no cause for it , and promise to attend to my advice . 'I suppose it be no use ask you to fix a day for you return ? ' say I . ' why , no ; I hardly can , under the circumstance ; but be assure , love , I shall not be long away . ' 'I do not wish to keep you a prisoner at home ,' I reply ; 'I should not grumble at you staying whole month away - if you can be happy so long without I - provide I know you be safe ; but I do not like the idea of you be there among you friend , as you call they . ' ' Pooh , pooh , you silly girl ! do you think I
I can not take care of myself ? ' ' you do not last time . but this time , ,' I add , earnestly , ' show I that you can , and teach I that I need not fear to trust you ! ' he promise fair , but in such a manner as we seek to soothe a child . and do he keep he promise ? no ; and henceforth I can never trust he word . bitter , bitter confession ! Tears blind I while I write . it be early in that he go , and he do not return till . this time he do not trouble himself to make excuse as before , and he letter be less frequent , and shorter and less affectionate , especially after the first few week : they come slower and slower , and more terse and careless every time . but still , when I omit writing , he complain of my neglect . when I write sternly and coldly , as I confess I frequently do at the last , he blame my harshness , and say it be enough to scare he from he home : when I try mild persuasion , he be a little more gentle in he reply , and promise to return ; but I have learnt , at last , to disregard he promise . those be four miserable month , alternate between intense anxiety , despair , and indignation , pity for he and pity for myself . and yet , through all , I be not wholly comfortless : I have my darling , sinless , inoffensive little one to conseal I ; but even this consolation be embitter by the constantly - recurr thought , ' how shall I teach he hereafter to respect he father , and yet to avoid he example ? ' but I remember that I have bring all these affliction , in a manner wilfully , upon myself ; and I determine to bear they without a murmur . at the same time I resolve not to give myself up to misery for the transgression of another , and endeavoure to divert myself as much as I could ; and besides the companionship of my child , and my dear , faithful , who evidently guess my sorrow and feel for they , though she be too discreet to allude to they , I have my book and pencil , my domestic affair , and the welfare and comfort of 's poor tenant and labourer to attend to : and I sometimes seek and obtain amusement in the company of my young friend : occasionally I ride over to see she , and once or twice I have she to spend the day with I at the Manor . do not visit that season : have no daughter to marry , she think it as well to stay at home and economise ; and , for a wonder , come down to join she in the beginning of , and stay till near the close of . the first time I see he be on a sweet , warm evening , when I be saunter in the park with little and , who be head - nurse and lady be - maid in one - for , with my secluded life and tolerably active habit , I require but little attendance , and as she have nurse I and covet to nurse my child , and be moreover so very trustworthy , I prefer commit the important charge to she , with a young nursery - may under she direction , to engage any one else : besides , it save money ; and since I have make acquaintance with 's affair , I have learn to regard that as no trifling recommendation ; for , by my own desire , nearly the whole of the income of my fortune be devote , for year to come , to the pay off of he debt , and the money he contrive to squander away in be incomprehensible . but to return to . I be stand with beside the water , amuse the laugh baby in she arm with a twig of willow laden with golden catkin , when , greatly to my surprise , he enter the park , mount on he costly black hunter , and cross over the grass to meet I . he salute I with a very fine compliment , delicately word , and modestly deliver withal , which he have doubtless concoct as he ride along . he tell I he have bring a message from he mother , who , as he be ride that way , have desire he to call at the and beg the pleasure of my company to a friendly family dinner to - morrow . ' there be no one to meet but ourselves , ' say he ; ' but be very anxious to see you ; and my mother fear you will feel solitary in this great house so much alone , and wish she could persuade you to give she the pleasure of you company more frequently , and make yourself at home in we more humble dwelling , till 's return shall render this a little more conducive to you comfort . ' ' she be very kind ,' I answer , ' but I be not alone , you see ; - and those whose time be fully occupy seldom complain of solitude . ' ' will you not come to - morrow , then ? she will be sadly disappointe if you refuse . ' I do not relish be thus compassionat for my loneliness ; but , however , I promise to come . ' what a sweet evening this be ! ' observ he , look round upon the sunny park
park , with its imposing swell and slope , its placid water , and majestic clumps of tree . ' and what a paradise you live in ! ' ' it be a lovely evening , ' answer I ; and I sigh to think how little I have feel its loveliness , and how little of a paradise sweet be to I - how still less to the voluntary exile from its scene . whether divine my thought , I can not tell , but , with a half - hesitating , sympathise seriousness of tone and manner , he ask if I have lately hear from . ' not lately ,' I reply . 'I think not ,' he mutter , as if to himself , look thoughtfully on the ground . ' be you not lately return from ? ' I ask . ' only yesterday . ' ' and do you see he there ? ' ' yes - I see he . ' ' be he well ? ' ' yes - that be , ' say he , with increase hesitation and a appearance of suppress indignation , ' he be as well as - as he deserv to be , but under circumstance I should have deem incredible for a man so favoured as he be . ' he here look up and point the sentence with a serious bow to I . I suppose my face be crimson . ' pardon I , ,' he continue , ' but I can not suppress my indignation when I behold such infatuated blindness and perversion of taste ; - but , perhaps , you be not aware - ' he pause . 'I be aware of nothing , sir - except that he delay he come longer than I expect ; and if , at present , he prefer the society of he friend to that of he wife , and the dissipation of the town to the quiet of country life , I suppose I have those friend to thank for it . they taste and occupation be similar to he , and I do not see why he conduct should awake either they indignation or surprise . ' ' you wrong I cruelly , ' answer he . 'I have share but little of 's society for the last few week ; and as for he taste and occupations , they be quite beyond I - lonely wanderer as I be . where I have but sip and taste , he drain the cup to the dregs ; and if ever for a moment I have seek to dry the voice of reflection in madness and folly , or if I have waste too much of my time and talents among reckless and dissipate companion , know I would gladly renounce they entirely and for ever , if I have but half the blessing that man so thanklessly cast behind he back - but half the inducement to virtue and domestic , orderly habit that he despise - but such a home , and such a partner to share it ! it be infamous ! ' he mutter , between he tooth . ' and do not think , ,' he add aloud , ' that I could be guilty of incite he to persevere in he present pursuit : on the contrary , I have remonstrate with he again and again ; I have frequently express my surprise at he conduct , and remind he of he duty and he privileges - but to no purpose ; he only - ' ' enough , ; you ought to be aware that whatever my husband 's fault may be , it can only aggravate the evil for I to hear they from a stranger 's lip . ' ' am I then a stranger ? ' say he in a sorrowful tone . 'I be you nearest neighbour , you son 's godfather , and you husband 's friend ; may I not be yours also ? ' ' intimate acquaintance must precede real friendship ; I know but little of you , , except from report . ' ' have you then forget the six or seven week I spend under you roof last autumn ? I have not forget they . and I know enough of you , , to think that you husband be the most enviable man in the world , and I should be the next if you would deem I worthy of you friendship . ' ' if you know more of I , you would not think it , or if you do you would not say it , and expect I to be flatter by the compliment . ' I step backward as I speak . he see that I wish the conversation to end ; and immediately take the hint , he gravely bow , wish I good - evening , and turn he horse towards the road . he appear grieved and hurt at my unkind reception of he sympathising overture . I be not sure that I have do right in speak so harshly to he ; but , at the time , I have feel irritated - almost insult by he conduct ; it seem as if he be presum upon the absence and neglect of my husband , and insinuat even more than the truth against he . have move on , during we conversation , to some yard ' distance . he ride up to she , and ask to see the child . he take it carefully into he arm , look upon it with a almost paternal smile , and I hear he say , as I approach , - ' and this , too , he have forsaken ! ' he then tenderly kiss it , and restore it to the gratified nurse . ' be
be you fond of child , ? ' say I , a little soften towards he . ' not in general , ' he reply , ' but that be such a sweet child , and so like its mother ,' he add in a lower tone . ' you be mistaken there ; it be its father it resemble . ' 'be I not right , nurse ? ' say he , appeal to . 'I think , sir , there be a bit of both , ' she reply . he depart ; and pronounce he a very nice gentleman . I have still my doubt on the subject . in the course of the follow six week I meet he several time , but always , save once , in company with he mother , or he sister , or both . when I call on they , he always happen to be at home , and , when they call on I , it be always he that drive they over in the phaeton . he mother , evidently , be quite delighted with he dutiful attention and newly - acquire domestic habit . the time that I meet he alone be on a bright , but not oppressively hot day , in the beginning of : I have take little into the wood that skirt the park , and there seat he on the moss - cushion root of a old oak ; and , have gather a handful of bluebell and wild - rose , I be knee before he , and present they , one by one , to the grasp of he tiny finger ; enjoy the heavenly beauty of the flower , through the medium of he smile eye : forget , for the moment , all my care , laugh at he gleeful laughter , and delighte myself with he delight , - when a shadow suddenly eclipse the little space of sunshine on the grass before we ; and look up , I beheld stand and gaze upon we . ' excuse I , , ' say he , ' but I be spell - bound ; I have neither the power to come forward and interrupt you , nor to withdraw from the contemplation of such a scene . how vigorous my little godson grow ! and how merry he be this morning ! ' he approach the child , and stoop to take he hand ; but , on see that he caress be likely to produce tear and lamentation , instead of a reciprocation of friendly demonstration , he prudently draw back . ' what a pleasure and comfort that little creature must be to you , ! ' he observ , with a touch of sadness in he intonation , as he admiringly contemplate the infant . ' it be , ' reply I ; and then I ask after he mother and sister . he politely answer my inquiry , and then return again to the subject I wish to avoid ; though with a degree of timidity that witness he fear to offend . ' you have not hear from lately ? ' he say . ' not this week ,' I reply . not these three week , I might have say . 'I have a letter from he this morning . I wish it be such a one as I could show to he lady . ' he half draw from he waistcoat - pocket a letter with 's still belove hand on the address , scowl at it , and put it back again , add - ' but he tell I he be about to return next week . ' ' he tell I so every time he write . ' ' indeed ! well , it be like he . but to I he always avow it he intention to stay till the present month . ' it struck I like a blow , this proof of premeditated transgression and systematic disregard of truth . ' it be only of a piece with the rest of he conduct , ' observ , thoughtfully regard I , and read , I suppose , my feeling in my face . ' then he be really come next week ? ' say I , after a pause . ' you may rely upon it , if the assurance can give you any pleasure . and be it possible , , that you can rejoice at he return ? ' he exclaim , attentively peruse my feature again . ' of course , ; be he not my husband ? ' 'Oh , ; you know not what you slight ! ' he passionately murmure . I take up my baby , and , wish he good - morning , depart , to indulge my thought unscrutinized , within the sanctum of my home . and be I glad ? yes , delighte ; though I be anger by 's conduct , and though I feel that he have wrong I , and be determine he should feel it too . on the follow morning I receive a few line from he myself , confirm 's intimation respect he approaching return . and he do come next week , but in a condition of body and mind even worse than before . I do not , however , intend to pass over he dereliction this time without a remark ; I find it would not do . but the first day he be weary with he journey , and I be glad to get he back : I would not upbraid he then ; I would wait till to - morrow . next morning he be weary still : I would wait a little longer . but at dinner , when , after breakfaste at twelve o'clock on a bottle of soda -
- water and a cup of strong coffee , and lunch at two on another bottle of soda - water mingl with brandy , he be find fault with everything on the table , and declare we must change we cook , I think the time be come . ' it be the same cook as we have before you go , , ' say I . ' you be generally pretty well satisfied with she then . ' ' you must have be let she get into slovenly habit , then , while I be away . it be enough to poison one , eat such a disgusting mess ! ' and he pettishly push away he plate , and lean back despairingly in he chair . ' I think it be you that be change , not she , ' say I , but with the utmost gentleness , for I do not wish to irritate he . ' it may be so ,' he reply carelessly , as he seize a tumbler of wine and water , add , when he have toss it off , ' for I have a infernal fire in my vein , that all the water of the ocean can not quench ! ' ' what kind it ? ' I be about to ask , but at that moment the butler enter and begin to take away the thing . ' be quick , ; do have do with that infernal clatter ! ' cry he master . ' and do not bring the cheese , unless you want to make I sick outright ! ' , in some surprise , remove the cheese , and do he best to effect a quiet and speedy clearance of the rest ; but , unfortunately , there be a rumple in the carpet , cause by the hasty push back of he master 's chair , at which he trip and stumble , cause a rather alarming concussion with the trayful of crockery in he hand , but no positive damage , save the fall and breaking of a sauce tureen ; but , to my unspeakable shame and dismay , yoArthu turn furiously around upon he , and swore at he with savage coarseness . the poor man turn pale , and visibly tremble as he stoop to pick up the fragment . ' he could not help it , , ' say I ; ' the carpet catch he foot , and there be no great harm do . never mind the piece now , ; you can clear they away afterwards . ' glad to be release , expeditiously set out the dessert and withdrew . ' what could you mean , , by take the servant 's part against I , ' say , as soon as the door be close , ' when you know I be distract ? ' 'I do not know you be distract , : and the poor man be quite frightened and hurt at you sudden explosion . ' ' poor man , indeed ! and do you think I could stop to consider the feeling of a insensate brute like that , when my own nerve be rack and tear to piece by he confounded blunder ? ' 'I never hear you complain of you nerve before . ' ' and why should not I have nerve as well as you ? ' ' oh , I do not dispute you claim to they possession , but I never complain of mine . ' ' no , how should you , when you never do anything to try they ? ' ' then why do you try yours , ? ' ' do you think I have nothing to do but to stay at home and take care of myself like a woman ? ' ' be it impossible , then , to take care of yourself like a man when you go abroad ? you tell I that you could , and would too ; and you promise - ' ' come , come , , do not begin with that nonsense now ; I can not bear it . ' ' can not bear what ? - to be remind of the promise you have break ? ' ' Helen , you be cruel . if you know how my heart throb , and how every nerve thrill through I while you speak , you would spare I . you can pity a dolt of a servant for break a dish ; but you have no compassion for I when my head be split in two and all on fire with this consum fever . ' he lean he head on he hand , and sigh . I go to he and put my hand on he forehead . it be burn indeed . ' then come with I into the drawing - room , Arthur ; and do not take any more wine : you have take several glass since dinner , and eat next to nothing all the day . how can that make you better ? ' with some coaxing and persuasion , I get he to leave the table . when the baby be bring I try to amuse he with that ; but poor little yoArthu be cut he tooth , and he father could not bear he complaint : sentence of immediate banishment be pass upon he on the first indication of fretfulness ; and because , in the course of the evening , I go to share he exile for a little while , I be reproach , on my return , for prefer my child to my husband . I find the latter recline on the sofa just as I have leave he . ' well ! ' exclaim the injured man , in a tone of pseudo-resignation . 'I think I would
would not send for you ; I think I would just see how long it would please you to leave I alone . ' 'I have not be very long , have I , ? I have not be a hour , I be sure . ' 'Oh , of course , a hour be nothing to you , so pleasantly employ ; but to I - ' ' it have not be pleasantly employ , ' interrupt I . 'I have be nurse we poor little baby , who be very far from well , and I could not leave he till I get he to sleep . ' 'Oh , to be sure , you be overflow with kindness and pity for everything but I . ' ' and why should I pity you ? what be the matter with you ? ' ' well ! that pass everything ! after all the wear and tear that I have have , when I come home sick and weary , long for comfort , and expect to find attention and kindness , at least from my wife , she calmly ask what be the matter with I ! ' ' there be nothing the matter with you , ' return I , ' except what you have wilfully bring upon yourself , against my earnest exhortation and entreaty . ' ' now , , ' say he emphatically , half rise from he recumbent posture , ' if you bother I with another word , I will ring the bell and order six bottle of wine , and , by heaven , I will drink they dry before I stir from this place ! ' I say no more , but sit down before the table and draw a book towards I . ' do let I have quietness at least ! ' continue he , ' if you deny I every other comfort ;' and sink back into he former position , with a impatient expiration between a sigh and a groan , he languidly close he eye , as if to sleep . what the book be that lay open on the table before I , I can not tell , for I never look at it . with a elbow on each side of it , and my hand clasp before my eye , I deliver myself up to silent weeping . but be not asleep : at the first slight sob , he raise he head and look round , impatiently exclaim , ' what be you cry for , ? what the deuce be the matter now ? ' 'I be cry for you , ,' I reply , speedily dry my tear ; and start up , I throw myself on my knee before he , and clasp he nerveless hand between my own , continue : ' do not you know that you be a part of myself ? and do you think you can injure and degrade yourself , and I not feel it ? ' ' Degray myself , ? ' ' yes , degrade ! what have you be do all this time ? ' ' you would better not ask , ' say he , with a faint smile . ' and you have better not tell ; but you can not deny that you have degrad yourself miserably . you have shamefully wrong yourself , body and soul , and I too ; and I can not endure it quietly , and I will not ! ' ' well , do not squeeze my hand so frantically , and do not agitate I so , for heaven 's sake ! oh , ! you be right : this woman will be the death of I , with she keen feeling and she interesting force of character . there , there , do spare I a little . ' ' Arthur , you must repent ! ' cry I , in a frenzy of desperation , throw my arm around he and bury my face in he bosom . ' you shall say you be sorry for what you have do ! ' ' well , well , I be . ' ' you be not ! you will do it again . ' 'I shall never live to do it again if you treat I so savagely , ' reply he , push I from he . ' you have nearly squeeze the breath out of my body . ' he press he hand to he heart , and look really agitated and ill . ' now get I a glass of wine , ' say he , 'to remedy what you have do , you she tiger ! I be almost ready to faint . ' I flow to get the require remedy . it seem to revive he considerably . ' what a shame it be , ' say I , as I take the empty glass from he hand , ' for a strong young man like you to reduce yourself to such a state ! ' ' if you know all , my girl , you would say rather , " what a wonder it be you can bear it so well as you do ! " I have liv more in these four month , , than you have in the whole course of you existence , or will to the end of you day , if they number a hundred year ; so I must expect to pay for it in some shape . ' ' you will have to pay a higher price than you anticipate , if you do not take care : there will be the total loss of you own health , and of my affection too , if that be of any value to you . ' ' what ! you be at that game of threaten
threaten I with the loss of you affection again , be you ? I think it could not have be very genuine stuff to begin with , if it be so easily demolish . if you do not mind , my pretty tyrant , you will make I regret my choice in good earnest , and envy my friend he meek little wife : she be quite a pattern to she sex , . he have she with he in all the season , and she be no trouble at all . he might amuse himself just as he please , in regular bachelor style , and she never complain of neglect ; he might come home at any hour of the night or morning , or not come home at all ; be sullen , sober , or glorious drunk ; and play the fool or the madman to he own heart 's desire , without any fear or botheration . she never give he a word of reproach or complaint , do what he will . he say there be not such a jewel in all , and swear he would not take a kingdom for she . ' ' but he make she life a curse to she . ' ' not he ! she have no will but he , and be always contented and happy as long as he be enjoy himself . ' ' in that case she be as great a fool as he be ; but it be not so . I have several letter from she , express the greatest anxiety about he proceedings , and complain that you incite he to commit those extravagance - one especially , in which she implore I to use my influence with you to get you away from , and affirms that she husband never do such thing before you come , and would certainly discontinue they as soon as you depart and leave he to the guidance of he own good sense . ' ' the detestable little traitor ! give I the letter , and he shall see it as sure as I be a living man . ' ' no , he shall not see it without she consent ; but if he do , there be nothing there to anger he , nor in any of the other . she never speak a word against he : it be only anxiety for he that she express . she only allude to he conduct in the most delicate term , and make every excuse for he that she can possibly think of ; and as for she own misery , I rather feel it than see it express in she letter . ' ' but she abuse I ; and no doubt you help she . ' ' no ; I tell she she over -rate my influence with you , that I would gladly draw you away from the temptation of the town if I could , but have little hope of success , and that I think she be wrong in supposing that you entice or any one else into error . I have myself hold the contrary opinion at one time , but I now believe that you mutually corrupt each other ; and , perhaps , if she use a little gentle but serious remonstrance with she husband , it might be of some service ; as , though he be more rough - hewn than mine , I believe he be of a less impenetrable material . ' ' and so that be the way you go on - hearten each other up to mutiny , and abuse each other 's partner , and throw out implication against you own , to the mutual gratification of both ! ' 'Accord to you own account , ' say I , 'my evil counsel have have but little effect upon she . and as to abuse and aspersion , we be both of we far too deeply asham of the error and vex of we other halve , to make they the common subject of we correspondence . friend as we be , we would willingly keep you failings to ourselves - even from ourselves if we could , unless by know they we could deliver you from they . ' 'Well , well ! do not worry I about they : you will never effect any good by that . have patience with I , and bear with my languor and crossness a little while , till I get this curse low fever out of my vein , and then you will find I cheerful and kind as ever . why can not you be gentle and good , as you be last time ? - I be sure I be very grateful for it . ' ' and what good do you gratitude do ? I delude myself with the idea that you be asham of you transgression , and hope you would never repeat they again ; but now you have leave I nothing to hope ! ' ' my case be quite desperate , be it ? a very blessed consideration , if it will only secure I from the pain and worry of my dear anxious wife 's effort to convert I , and she from the toil and trouble of such exertion , and she sweet face and silver accent from the ruinous effect of the same . a burst of passion be a fine rousing thing upon occasion , , and a flood of tear be marvellously affect , but , when indulge too often , they be both deuce plaguy thing for spoiling one 's beauty and ti out one 's friend . ' Thenceforth I restrain my tear and passion as much as I could . I spa he my exhortation and fruitless effort at conversion too , for I
I see it be all in vain : might awake that heart , supine and stupefy with self - indulgence , and remove the film of sensual darkness from he eye , but I could not . he injustice and ill - humour towards he inferior , who could not defend themselves , I still resent and withstand ; but when I alone be they object , as be frequently the case , I endure it with calm forbearance , except at time , when my temper , wear out by repeat annoyance , or sting to distraction by some new instance of irrationality , give way in spite of myself , and expose I to the imputation of fierceness , cruelty , and impatience . I attend carefully to he want and amusement , but not , I own , with the same devoted fondness as before , because I could not feel it ; besides , I have now another claimant on my time and care - my ailing infant , for whose sake I frequently brave and suffer the reproach and complaint of he unreasonably exact father . but be not naturally a peevish or irritable man ; so far from it , that there be something almost ludicrous in the incongruity of this adventitious fretfulness and nervous irritability , rather calculate to excite laughter than anger , if it be not for the intensely painful consideration attendant upon those symptom of a disorder frame , and he temper gradually improve as he bodily health be restore , which be much sooner than would have be the case but for my strenuous exertion ; for there be still one thing about he that I do not give up in despair , and one effort for he preservation that I would not remit . he appetite for the stimulus of wine have increase upon he , as I have too well foresee . it be now someth more to he than a accessory to social enjoyment : it be a important source of enjoyment in itself . in this time of weakness and depression he would have make it he medicine and support , he comforter , he recreation , and he friend , and thereby sunk deeper and deeper , and bound himself down for ever in the batho whereinto he have fall . but I determine this should never be , as long as I have any influence leave ; and though I could not prevent he from take more than be good for he , still , by incessant perseverance , by kindness , and firmness , and vigilance , by coaxing , and daring , and determination , I succeed in preserve he from absolute bondage to that detestable propensity , so insidious in its advance , so inexorable in its tyranny , so disastrous in its effect . and here I must not forget that I be not a little indebted to he friend . about that time he frequently call at , and often dine with we , on which occasion I fear yoArthu would willingly have cast prudence and decorum to the wind , and make 'a night of it , ' as often as he friend would have consent to join he in that exalt pastime ; and if the latter have choose to comply , he might , in a night or two , have ruin the labour of week , and overthrow with a touch the frail bulwark it have cost I such trouble and toil to construct . I be so fearful of this at first , that I humble myself to intimate to he , in private , my apprehension of 's proneness to these excess , and to express a hope that he would not encourage it . he be pleased with this mark of confidence , and certainly do not betray it . on that and every subsequent occasion he presence serve rather as a check upon he host , than a incitement to further act of intemperance ; and he always succeed in bring he from the dining - room in good time , and in tolerably good condition ; for if disregard such intimation as ' well , I must not detain you from you lady , ' or ' we must not forget that be alone ,' he would insist upon leave the table himself , to join I , and he host , however unwillingly , be obliged to follow . hence I learn to welcome as a real friend to the family , a harmless companion for , to cheer he spirits and preserve he from the tedium of absolute idleness and a total isolation from all society but mine , and a useful ally to I . I could not but feel grateful to he under such circumstance ; and I do not scruple to acknowledge my obligation on the first convenient opportunity ; yet , as I do so , my heart whisper all be not right , and bring a glow to my face , which he heighten by he steady , serious gaze , while , by he manner of receive those acknowledgment , he more than double my misgiving . he high delight at be able to serve I be chasten by sympathy for I and commiseration for himself - about , I know not what , for I would not stay to inquire , or suffer he to unbure he sorrow to I . he sigh and intimation of suppressed affliction seem to come from a full heart ; but either he must contrive to retain they within it , or breathe they forth in other ear than mine : there be enough of confidence between we already . it seem wrong that there should exist a secret understanding between my husband 's friend and I , unknown to he , of which he
he be the object . but my after -thotch be , ' if it be wrong , surely 's be the fault , not mine . ' and indeed I know not whether , at the time , it be not for he rather than myself that I blush ; for , since he and I be one , I so identify myself with he , that I feel he degradation , he failings , and transgression as my own : I blush for he , I fear for he ; I repent for he , weep , pray , and feel for he as for myself ; but I can not act for he ; and hence I must be , and I be , debase , contaminate by the union , both in my own eye and in the actual truth . I be so determined to love he , so intensely anxious to excuse he error , that I be continually dwell upon they , and labour to extenuate the loosest of he principle and the worst of he practice , till I be familiarise with vice , and almost a partaker in he sins . thing that formerly shocke and disgust I , now seem only natural . I know they to be wrong , because reason and 's word declare they to be so ; but I be gradually lose that instinctive horror and repulsion which be give I by nature , or instil into I by the precept and example of my aunt . perhaps then I be too severe in my judgments , for I abhor the sinner as well as the sin ; now I flatter myself I be more charitable and considerate ; but be I not become more indifferent and insensate too ? fool that I be , to dream that I have strength and purity enough to save myself and he ! such vain presumption would be rightly serve , if I should perish with he in the gulf from which I seek to save he ! yet , preserve I from it , and he too ! yes , poor Arthur , I will still hope and pray for you ; and though I write as if you be some abandon wretch , past hope and past reprieve , it be only my anxious fear , my strong desire that make I do so ; one who love you less would be less bitter , less dissatisfied . he conduct have , of late , be what the world call irreproachable ; but then I know he heart be still unchanged ; and I know that spring be approach , and deeply dread the consequence . as he begin to recover the tone and vigour of he exhausted frame , and with it something of he former impatience of retirement and repose , I suggest a short residence by the sea -side , for he recreation and further restoration , and for the benefit of we little one as well . but no : watering - place be so intolerably dull ; beside , he have be invite by one of he friend to spend a month or two in for the better recreation of grouse - shooting and deer - stalking , and have promise to go . ' then you will leave I again , ? ' say I . ' yes , dearest , but only to love you the better when I come back , and make up for all past offence and short - comings ; and you need not fear I this time : there be no temptation on the mountain . and during my absence you may pay a visit to , if you like : you uncle and aunt have long be want we to go there , you know ; but somehow there 's such a repulsion between the good lady and I , that I never could bring myself up to the scratch . ' about the third week in , Arthur set out for , and accompany he thither , to my private satisfaction . shortly after , I , with little and , go to , my dear old home , which , as well as my dear old friend its inhabitant , I see again with mingled feeling of pleasure and pain so intimately blend that I could scarcely distinguish the one from the other , or tell to which to attribute the various tear , and smile , and sigh awaken by those old familiar scene , and tone , and face . yoArthu do not come home till several week after my return to ; but I do not feel so anxious about he now ; to think of he engage in active sport among the wild hill of , be very different from know he to be immerse amid the corruption and temptation of . he letter now ; though neither long nor loverlike , be more regular than ever they have be before ; and when he do return , to my great joy , instead of be worse than when he go , he be more cheerful and vigorous , and better in every respect . since that time I have have little cause to complain . he still have a unfortunate predilection for the pleasure of the table , against which I have to struggle and watch ; but he have begin to notice he boy , and that be a increase source of amusement to he within - door , while he fox - hunting and coursing be a sufficient occupation for he without , when the ground be not harden by frost ; so that he be not wholly dependent on I for entertainment . but it be now January ; spring be approach ; and , I repeat , I dread the consequence of its arrival .
. that sweet season , I once so joyously welcome as the time of hope and gladness , awakend now far other anticipation by its return . 20th , 1824 . the dreaded time be come , and be gone , as I expect . this time he announce it he intention to make but a short stay in , and pass over to the continent , where he should probably stay a few week ; but I shall not expect he till after the lapse of many week : I now know that , with he , day signify week , and weenks month . 30th . - he return about three week ago , rather better in health , certainly , than before , but still worse in temper . and yet , perhaps , I be wrong : it be i that be less patient and forbear . I be ti out with he injustice , he selfishness and hopeless depravity . I wish a milder word would do ; I be no angel , and my corruption rise against it . my poor father die last week : yoArthu be vex to hear of it , because he see that I be shocked and grieve , and he fear the circumstance would mar he comfort . when I speak of order my mourning , he exclaim , - ' oh , I hate black ! but , however , I suppose you must wear it awhile , for form 's sake ; but I hope , , you will not think it you bounden duty to compose you face and manners into conformity with you funereal garb . why should you sigh and groan , and I be make uncomfortable , because a old gentleman in - shire , a perfect stranger to we both , have think proper to drink himself to death ? there , now , I declare you be cry ! well , it must be affectation . ' he would not hear of my attend the funeral , or go for a day or two , to cheer poor 's solitude . it be quite unnecessary , he say , and I be unreasonable to wish it . what be my father to I ? I have never see he but once since I be a baby , and I well know he have never care a stiver about I ; and my brother , too , be little better than a stranger . ' , dear , ' say he , embrace I with flattering fondness , 'I can not spare you for a single day . ' ' then how have you manage without I these many day ? ' say I . 'Ah ! then I be knock about the world , now I be at home , and home without you , my household deity , would be intolerable . ' ' yes , as long as I be necessary to you comfort ; but you do not say so before , when you urge I to leave you , in order that you might get away from you home without I , ' retort I ; but before the word be well out of my mouth , I regret have utter they . it seem so heavy a charge : if false , too gross a insult ; if true , too humiliate a fact to be thus openly cast in he tooth . but I might have spared myself that momentary pang of self - reproach . the accusation awoke neither shame nor indignation in he : he attempt neither denial nor excuse , but only answer with a long , low , chuckling laugh , as if he view the whole transaction as a clever , merry jest from begin to end . surely that man will make I dislike he at last ! Sine as ye braw , my maiden fair , keep mind that ye maun drink the yill . yes ; and I will drink it to the very dregs : and none but myself shall know how bitter I find it ! 20th . - we be shake down again to about we usual position . yoArthu have return to nearly he former condition and habit ; and I have find it my wisest plan to shut my eye against the past and future , as far as he , at least , be concerned , and live only for the present : to love he when I can ; to smile ( if possible ) when he smile , be cheerful when he be cheerful , and pleas when he be agreeable ; and when he be not , to try to make he so ; and if that will not answer , to bear with he , to excuse he , and forgive he as well as I can , and restrain my own evil passion from aggravate he ; and yet , while I thus yield and minister to he more harmless propensity to self - indulgence , to do all in my power to save he from the worse . but we shall not be long alone together . I shall shortly be call upon to entertain the same select body of friend as we have the autumn before last , with the addition of and , at my special request , he wife and child . I long to see , and she little girl too . the latter be now above a year old ; she will be a charming playmate for my little Arthur . 30th . - we guest have be here a week or two ; but I have have no leisure to pass any comment upon they till now . I can not get over my dislike to . it be not found on mere personal pique ; it be the
the woman herself that I dislike , because I so thoroughly disapprove of she . I always avoid she company as much as I can without violat the law of hospitality ; but when we do speak or converse together , it be with the utmost civility , even apparent cordiality on she part ; but preserve I from such cordiality ! it be like hand brier - rose and may - blossom , bright enough to the eye , and outwardly soft to the touch , but you know there be thorn beneath , and every now and then you feel they too ; and perhaps resent the injury by crush they in till you have destroy they power , though somewhat to the detriment of you own finger . of late , however , I have see nothing in she conduct towards to anger or alarm I . during the first few day I think she seem very solicitous to win he admiration . she effort be not unnotice by he : I frequently see he smile to himself at she artful manoeuvre : but , to he praise be it speak , she shaft fall powerless by he side . she must bewitch smile , she haughtiest frown be ever receive with the same immutable , careless good - humour ; till , finde he be indeed impenetrable , she suddenly remit she effort , and become , to all appearance , as perfectly indifferent as himself . have I since witness any symptom of pique on he part , or renew attempt at conquest upon hers . this be as it should be ; but never will let I be satisfied with he . I have never , for a single hour since I marry he , know what it be to realise that sweet idea , ' in quietness and confidence shall be you rest . ' those two detestable man , and , have destroy all my labour against he love of wine . they encourage he daily to overstep the bounds of moderation , and not unfrequently to disgrase himself by positive excess . I shall not soon forget the second night after they arrival . just as I have retire from the dining - room with the ladie , before the door be close upon we , yoArthu exclaim , - ' now then , my lad , what say you to a regular jollification ? ' glance at I with a half - reproachful look , as if I could hinder it ; but she countenance change when she hear 's voice , shout through door and wall , - 'I be you man ! send for more wine : here be not half enough ! ' we have scarcely enter the drawing - room before we be join by . ' what can induce you to come so soon ? ' exclaim he lady , with a most ungracious air of dissatisfaction . ' you know I never drink , , ' reply he seriously . ' well , but you might stay with they a little : it look so silly to be always dangl after the woman ; I wonder you can ! ' he reproach she with a look of mingled bitterness and surprise , and , sinke into a chair , suppress a heavy sigh , bit he pale lip , and fix he eye upon the floor . ' you do right to leave they , , ' say I . 'I trust you will always continue to honour we so early with you company . and if know the value of true wisdom , and the misery of folly and - and intemperance , she would not talk such nonsense - even in jest . ' he raise he eye while I speak , and gravely turn they upon I , with a half - surprised , half - abstract look , and then bend they on he wife . ' at least , ' say she , 'I know the value of a warm heart and a bold , manly spirit . ' ' well , , ' say he , in a deep and hollow tone , ' since my presence be disagreeable to you , I will relieve you of it . ' ' be you go back to they , then ? ' say she , carelessly . ' no , ' exclaim he , with harsh and start emphasis . 'I will not go back to they ! and I will never stay with they one moment longer than I think right , for you or any other tempter ! but you need not mind that ; I shall never trouble you again by intrud my company upon you so unseasonably . ' he leave the room : I hear the hall - door open and shut , and immediately after , on put aside the curtain , I see he pace down the park , in the comfortless gloom of the damp , cloudy twilight . ' it would serve you right , , ' say I , at length , 'if be to return to he old habit , which have so nearly effect he ruin , and which it cost he such a effort to break : you would then see cause to repent such conduct as this . ' ' not at all , my dear ! I should not mind if he lordship be to see fit to intoxicate himself every day : I should only the sooner be rid of he . ' 'Oh , ! ' cry . ' how can you say such wicked thing ! it would , indeed , be a just punishment , as far as you be concerned , if Providence should take you at you word , and make you feel what other feel , that -
- ' she pause as a sudden burst of loud talking and laughter reach we from the dining - room , in which the voice of be pre-eminently conspicuous , even to my unpractised ear . ' what you feel at this moment , I suppose ? ' say , with a malicious smile , fix she eye upon she cousin 's distress countenance . the latter offer no reply , but avert she face and brush away a tear . at that moment the door open and admit , just a little flushed , he dark eye sparkl with unwonted vivacity . ' oh , I be so glad you be come , ? ' cry he sister . ' but I wish you could have get to come too . ' ' utterly impossible , dear , ' reply he , gaily . 'I have much ado to get away myself . attempt to keep I by violence ; threaten I with the eternal loss of he friendship ; and , worse than all , endeavoure to make I asham of my virtue , by such galling sarcasm and innuendo as he know would wound I the most . so you see , lady , you ought to make I welcome when I have brave and suffer so much for the favour of you sweet society . ' he smilingly turn to I and bow as he finish the sentence . ' be not he handsome now , ! ' whisper , she sisterly pride overcom , for the moment , all other consideration . ' he would be ,' I return , ' if that brilliance of eye , and lip , and cheek be natural to he ; but look again , a few hour hence . ' here the gentleman take a seat near I at the table , and petition for a cup of coffee . 'I consider this a apt illustration of heaven take by storm , ' say he , as I hand one to he . 'I be in paradise , now ; but I have fight my way through flood and fire to win it . 's last resource be to set he back against the door , and swear I should find no passage but through he body ( a pretty substantial one too ) . happily , however , that be not the only door , and I effect my escape by the side entrance through the butler 's pantry , to the infinite amazement of , who be clean the plate . ' laugh , and so do he cousin ; but he sister and I remain silent and grave . ' pardon my levity , , ' murmure he , more seriously , as he raise he eye to my face . ' you be not use to these thing : you suffer they to affect you delicate mind too sensibly . but I think of you in the midst of those lawless roysterer ; and I endeavoure to persuade to think of you too ; but to no purpose : I fear he be fully determined to enjoy himself this night ; and it will be no use keep the coffee wait for he or he companion ; it will be much if they join we at tea . meantime , I earnestly wish I could banish the thought of they from you mind - and my own too , for I hate to think of they - yes - even of my dear friend , when I consider the power he possess over the happiness of one so immeasurably superior to himself , and the use he make of it - I positively detest the man ! ' ' you have better not say so to I , then , ' say I ; ' for , bad as he be , he be part of myself , and you can not abuse he without offend I . ' ' pardon I , then , for I would sooner die than offend you . but let we say no more of he for the present , if you please . ' at last they come ; but not till after ten , when tea , which have be delay for more than half a hour , be nearly over . much as I have longe for they come , my heart fail I at the riotous uproar of they approach ; and turn pale , and almost start from she seat , as burst into the room with a clamorous volley of oath in he mouth , which endeavoure to check by entreat he to remember the lady . 'Ah ! you do well to remind I of the ladie , you dastardly deserter , ' cry he , shak he formidable fist at he brother - in - law . ' if it be not for they , you well know , I would demolish you in the twinkling of a eye , and give you body to the fowl of heaven and the lily of the field ! ' then , plan a chair by 's side , he station himself in it , and begin to talk to she with a mixture of absurdity and impudence that see rather to amuse than to offend she ; though she affect to resent he insolence , and to keep he at bay with sally of smart and spirited repartee . seat himself by I , in the chair vacate by as they enter , and gravely state that he would thank I for a cup of tea : and place himself beside poor , confidentially push he head into she face , and draw in closer to she as she shrank away from he . he be not so noisy as , but he face be exceedingly flush : he laugh incessantly , and
and while I blush for all I see and hear of he , I be glad that he choose to talk to he companion in so low a tone that no one could hear what he say but herself . ' what fool they be ! ' draw , who have be talk away , at my elbow , with sententious gravity all the time ; but I have be too much absorbed in contemplate the deplorable state of the other two - especially - to attend to he . ' do you ever hear such nonsense as they talk , ? ' he continue . 'I be quite asham of they for my part : they can not take so much as a bottle between they without its get into they head - ' ' you be pour the cream into you saucer , . ' 'Ah ! yes , I see , but we be almost in darkness here . , snuff those candle , will you ? ' ' they be wax ; they do not require snuffing , ' say I . ' " the light of the body be the eye , " ' observ , with a sarcastic smile . ' " if thine eye be single , thy whole body shall be full of light . " ' repulse he with a solemn wave of the hand , and then turn to I , continue , with the same drawling tone and strange uncertainty of utterance and heavy gravity of aspect as before : ' but as I be say , . , they have no head at all : they can not take half a bottle without be affect some way ; whereas I - well , I have take three time as much as they have to - night , and you see I be perfectly steady . now that may strike you as very singular , but I think I can explain it : you see they brain - I mention no name , but you will understand to whom I allude - they brain be light to begin with , and the fume of the fermented liquor render they lighter still , and produce a entire light - headedness , or giddiness , result in intoxication ; whereas my brain , be compose of more solid material , will absorb a considerable quantity of this alcoholic vapour without the production of any sensible result - ' ' I think you will find a sensible result produce on that tea , ' interrupt , ' by the quantity of sugar you have put into it . instead of you usual complement of one lump , you have put in six . ' ' have I so ? ' reply the philosopher , diive with he spoon into the cup , and bring up several half - dissolve piece in confirmation of the assertion . ' Hum ! I perceive . thus , Madam , you see the evil of absence of mind - of think too much while engage in the common concern of life . now , if I have have my wit about I , like ordinary man , instead of within I like a philosopher , I should not have spoil this cup of tea , and be constrain to trouble you for another . ' ' that be the sugar - basin , . now you have spoilead the sugar too ; and I will thank you to ring for some more , for here be Lowborough at last ; and I hope he lordship will condescmend to sit down with we , such as we be , and allow I to give he some tea . ' he lordship gravely bow in answer to my appeal , but say nothing . , volunteer to ring for the sugar , while lament he mistake , and attempt to prove that it be owe to the shadow of the urn and the badness of the light . have enter a minute or two before , unobserve by a one but I , and have be stand before the door , grimly survey the company . he now step up to , who sit with she back towards he , with still beside she , though not now attend to she , be occupy in vociferously abuse and bully he host . ' well , , ' say she husband , as he lean over the back of she chair , ' which of these three " bold , manly spirit " would you have I to resemble ? ' ' by heaven and earth , you shall resemble we all ! ' cry , start up and rudely seize he by the arm . ' Hallo , ! ' he shoute - 'I have get he ! come , man , and help I ! and would -n I , if I do not make he drunk before I let he go ! he shall make up for all past delinquency as sure as I be a liive soul ! ' there follow a disgraceful contest : , in desperate earnest , and pale with anger , silently struggle to release himself from the powerful madman that be strive to drag he from the room . I attempt to urge to interfere in behalf of he outraged guest , but he could do nothing but laugh . ' , you fool , come and help I , can not you ! ' cry , himself somewhat weaken by he excess . 'I be wish you - speed , , ' cry , ' and aid you with my prayer : I can not do anything else if my life depend on it ! I be quite use up . oh - oh ! ' and lean back in he seat , he clap he hand on he side
side and groan aloud . ' Annabella , give I a candle ! ' say , whose antagonist have now get he round the waist and be endeavouring to root he from the door - post , to which he madly cling with all the energy of desperation . 'I shall take no part in you rude sport ! ' reply the lady coldly draw back . 'I wonder you can expect it . ' but I snatch up a candle and bring it to he . he take it and hold the flame to 's hand , till , roar like a wild , the latter unclasp they and let he go . he vanish , I suppose to he own apartment , for nothing more be see of he till the morning . swear and curse like a maniac , throw himself on to the ottoman beside the window . the door be now free , attempt to make she escape from the scene of she husband 's disgrace ; but he call she back , and insist upon she come to he . ' what do you want , ? ' murmure she , reluctantly approach he . 'I want to know what be the matter with you , ' say he , pull she on to he knee like a child . ' what be you cry for , ? - tell I ! ' 'I be not cry . ' ' you be , ' persist he , rudely pull she hand from she face . ' how dare you tell such a lie ! ' 'I be not cry now , ' plead she . ' but you have be , and just this minute too ; and I will know what for . come , now , you shall tell I ! ' ' do let I alone , ! remember , we be not at home . ' ' no matter : you shall answer my question ! ' exclaim she tormentor ; and he attempt to extort the confession by shak she , and remorselessly crush she slight arm in the gripe of he powerful finger . ' do not let he treat you sister in that way , ' say I to . ' come now , , I can not allow that , ' say that gentleman , step up to the ill - assort couple . ' let my sister alone , if you please . ' and he make a effort to unclasp the ruffian 's finger from she arm , but be suddenly drive backward , and nearly laid upon the floor by a violent blow on the chest , accompany with the admonition , ' take that for you insolence ! and learn to interfere between I and mine again . ' ' if you be not drink , I would have satisfaction for that ! ' gas , white and breathless as much from passion as from the immediate effect of the blow . ' go to the devil ! ' respond he brother - in - law . ' now , Milicent , tell I what you be cry for . ' 'I will tell you some other time , ' murmure she , ' when we be alone . ' ' tell I now ! ' say he , with another shake and a squeeze that make she draw in she breath and bite she lip to suppress a cry of pain . 'I will tell you , , ' say I . ' she be cry from pure shame and humiliation for you ; because she could not bear to see you conduct yourself so disgracefully . ' ' Confound you , ! ' mutter he , with a stare of stupid amazement at my ' impudence . ' ' it be not that - be it , ? ' she be silent . ' come , speak up , child ! ' 'I can not tell now , ' sob she . ' but you can say " yes " or " no " as well as " I can not tell . " - come ! ' ' yes , ' she whisper , hang she head , and blush at the awful acknowledgment . ' curse you for a impertinent hussy , then ! ' cry he , throw she from he with such violence that she fall on she side ; but she be up again before either I or she brother could come to she assistance , and make the best of she way out of the room , and , I suppose , up - stair , without loss of time . the next object of assault be , who sit opposite , and have , no doubt , richly enjoy the whole scene . ' now , , ' exclaim he irascible friend , 'I will not have you sit there and laugh like a idiot ! ' 'Oh , , ' cry he , wip he swimm eye - ' you will be the death of I . ' ' yes , I will , but not as you suppose : I will have the heart out of you body , man , if you irritate I with any more of that imbecile laughter ! - what ! be you at it yet ? - there ! see if that will settle you ! ' cry , snatch up a footstool and hurt it at the head of he host ; but he as well as miss he aim , and the latter still sit collapse and quak with feeble laughter , with tear run down he face : a deplorable spectacle indeed . try cursing and swear , but it would not do : he then take a number of book from the table beside he , and throw they , one by
by one , at the object of he wrath ; but only laugh the more ; and , finally , rush upon he in a frenzy and seize he by the shoulders , give he a violent shaking , under which he laugh and shriek alarmingly . but I see no more : I think I have witness enough of my husband 's degradation ; and leave and the rest to follow when they please , I withdraw , but not to bed . dismiss to she rest , I walk up and down my room , in a agony of misery for what have be do , and suspense , not know what might further happen , or how or when that unhappy creature would come up to bed . at last he come , slowly and stumblingly ascend the stair , support by and , who neither of they walk quite steadily themselves , but be both laugh and joke at he , and make noise enough for all the servants to hear . he himself be no longer laugh now , but sick and stupid . I will write no more about that . such disgraceful scene ( or nearly such ) have be repeat more than once . I do not say much to Arthur about it , for , if I do , it would do more harm than good ; but I let he know that I intensely dislike such exhibition ; and each time he have promise they should never again be repeat . but I fear he be lose the little self - command and self - respect he once possess : formerly , he would have be asham to act thus - at least , before any other witness than he boon companion , or such as they . he friend , with a prudence and self - government that I envy for he , never disgrace himself by take more than sufficient to render he a little ' elevate , ' and be always the first to leave the table after , who , wiser still , persevere in vacate the dining - room immediately after we : but never once , since offend he so deeply , have he enter the drawing - room before the rest ; always spend the interim in the library , which I take care to have light for he accommodation ; or , on fine moonlight night , in roam about the grounds . but I think she regret she misconduct , for she have never repeat it since , and of late she have comport herself with wonderful propriety towards he , treat he with more uniform kindness and consideration than ever I have observe she to do before . I date the time of this improvement from the period when she cease to hope and strive for 's admiration . 5th . - be get a fine girl . she be not out of the school - room yet , but she mother frequently bring she over to call in the morning when the gentleman be out , and sometimes she spend a hour or two in company with she sister and I , and the child ; and when we go to the Grove , I always contrive to see she , and talk more to she than to any one else , for I be very much attach to my little friend , and so be she to I . I wonder what she can see to like in I though , for I be no longer the happy , lively girl I use to be ; but she have no other society , save that of she uncongenial mother , and she governess ( as artificial and conventional a person as that prudent mother could procure to rectify the pupil 's natural quality ) , and , now and then , she subdue , quiet sister . I often wonder what will be she lot in life , and so do she ; but she speculation on the future be full of buoyant hope ; so be mine once . I shudder to think of she be awaken , like I , to a sense of they delusive vanity . it seem as if I should feel she disappointment , even more deeply than my own . I feel almost as if I be bear for such a fate , but she be so joyous and fresh , so light of heart and free of spirit , and so guileless and unsuspecting too . oh , it would be cruel to make she feel as I feel now , and know what I have know ! she sister tremble for she too . yesterday morning , one of 's brightest , loveliest day , and I be in the garden enjoy a brief half - hour together with we child , while be lie on the drawing - room sofa , deep in the last new novel . we have be rom with the little creature , almost as merry and wild as themselves , and now pause in the shade of the tall copper beech , to recover breath and rectify we hair , disorder by the rough play and the frolicsome breeze , while they toddle together along the broad , sunny walk ; my yoArthu support the feebler step of she little , and sagaciously point out to she the brightest beautie of the border as they pass , with semi-articulate prattle , that do as well for she as any other mode of discourse . from laugh at the pretty sight , we begin to talk of the child 's future life ; and that make we thoughtful . we both relapse into silent musing as we slowly proceed up the walk ; and I suppose , by a train of associations , be lead
lead to think of she sister . ' , ' say she , ' you often see , do not you ? ' ' not very often . ' ' but you have more frequent opportunity of meet she than I have ; and she love you , I know , and reverence you too : there be nobody be opinion she think so much of ; and she say you have more sense than mamma . ' ' that be because she be self - will , and my opinion more generally coincide with she own than you mamma 's . but what then , ? ' ' well , since you have so much influence with she , I wish you would seriously impress it upon she , never , on any account , or for anybody 's persuasion , to marry for the sake of money , or rank , or establishment , or any earthly thing , but true affection and well - grounde esteem . ' ' there be no necessity for that , ' say I , ' for we have have some discourse on that subject already , and I assure you she idea of love and matrimony be as romantic as any one could desire . ' ' but romantic notions will not do : I want she to have true notion . ' ' very right : but in my judgament , what the world stigmatise as romantic , be often more nearly allie to the truth than be commonly suppose ; for , if the generous idea of youth be too often over - cloude by the sordid view of after - life , that scarcely prove they to be false . ' ' well , but if you think she idea be what they ought to be , strengthen they , will you ? and confirm they , as far as you can ; for I have romantic notion once , and - I do not mean to say that I regret my lot , for I be quite sure I do not , but - ' 'I understand you , ' say I ; ' you be contente for yourself , but you would not have you sister to suffer the same as you . ' ' no - or worse . she might have far worse to suffer than I , for I be really contente , , though you may not think it : I speak the solemn truth in say that I would not exchange my husband for any man on earth , if I might do it by the plucking of this leaf . ' ' well , I believe you : now that you have he , you would not exchange he for another ; but then you would gladly exchange some of he qualitie for those of better man . ' ' yes : just as I would gladly exchange some of my own quality for those of better woman ; for neither he nor I be perfect , and I desire he improvement as earnestly as my own . and he will improve , do not you think so , ? he be only six - and - twenty yet . ' ' he may ,' I answer , ' he will , he will ! ' repeat she . ' excuse the faintness of my acquiescence , , I would not discourage you hope for the world , but mine have be so often disappointed , that I be become as cold and doubtful in my expectation as the flattest of octogenarian . ' ' and yet you do hope , still , even for ?' 'I do , I confess , " even " for he ; for it seem as if life and hope must cease together . and be he so much worse , Milicent , than ? ' ' well , to give you my candid opinion , I think there be no comparison between they . but you must not be offend , , for you know I always speak my mind , and you may speak yours too . I sha ' not care . ' 'I be not offend , love ; and my opinion be , that if there be a comparison make between the two , the difference , for the most part , be certainly in 's favour . ' 's own heart tell she how much it cost I to make this acknowledgment ; and , with a childlike impulse , she express she sympathy by suddenly kiss my cheek , without a word of reply , and then turn quickly away , catch up she baby , and hide she face in its frock . how odd it be that we so often weep for each other 's distress , when we she not a tear for we own ! she heart have be full enough of she own sorrow , but it overflow at the idea of mine ; and I , too , she tear at the sight of she sympathetic emotion , though I have not weep for myself for many a week . it be one rainy day last week ; most of the company be kill time in the billiard - room , but and I be with little and in the library , and between we book , we child , and each other , we expect to make out a very agreeable morning . we have not be thus seclude above two hour , however , when come in , attract , I suppose , by the voice of he child , as he be cross the hall , for he be prodigiously fond of she , and she of he . he be redolent of the stable , where he have be regal himself with the company of he fellow -
- creature the horse ever since breakfast . but that be no matter to my little nameake ; as soon as the colossal person of she father darken the door , she utter a shrill scream of delight , and , quit she mother 's side , run crow towards he , balance she course with outstretched arm , and embrace he knee , throw back she head and laugh in he face . he might well look smilingly down upon those small , fair feature , radiant with innocent mirth , those clear blue shining eye , and that soft flaxen hair cast back upon the little ivory neck and shoulders . do he not think how unworthy he be of such a possession ? I fear no such idea cross he mind . he catch she up , and there follow some minute of very rough play , during which it be difficult to say whether the father or the daughter laugh and shoute the loudest . at length , however , the boisterous pastime terminate , suddenly , as might be expect : the little one be hurt , and begin to cry ; and the ungentle play - fellow toss it into its mother 's lap , bid she ' make all straight . ' as happy to return to that gentle comforter as it have be to leave she , the child nestle in she arm , and hush its cry in a moment ; and sink it be little weary head on she bosom , soon drop asleep . strode up to the fire , and interpose he height and breadth between we and it , stand with arm akimbo , expand he chest , and gaze round he as if the house and all its appurtenance and contents be he own undisputed possession . ' Deuce bad weather this ! ' he begin . ' there will be no shooting to - day , I guess . ' then , suddenly lift up he voice , he regal we with a few bars of a rollicking song , which abruptly cease , he finish the tune with a whistle , and then continue :- 'I say , , what a fine stud you husband have ! not large , but good . I have be look at they a bit this morning ; and upon my word , , and , and that young Nimrod be the finest animal I have see for many a day ! ' then follow a particular discussion of they various merit , succeed by a sketch of the great thing he intend to do in the horse - jockey line , when he old governor think proper to quit the stage . ' not that I wish he to close he account , ' add he : ' the old Trojan be welcome to keep he book open as long as he please for I . ' 'i hope so , indeed , . ' 'Oh , yes ! it be only my way of talk . the event must come some time , and so I look to the bright side of it : that be the right plan - be not it , h.? what be you two do here ? by - the - by , where be ? ' ' in the billiard - room . ' ' what a splendid creature she be ! ' continue he , fix he eye on he wife , who change colour , and look more and more disconcerted as he proceed . ' what a noble figure she have ; and what magnificent black eye ; and what a fine spirit of she own ; and what a tongue of she own , too , when she like to use it . I perfectly adore she ! but never mind , : I would not have she for my wife , not if she would a kingdom for she dowry ! I be better satisfied with the one I have . now then ! what do you look so sulky for ? do not you believe I ? ' ' yes , I believe you , ' murmure she , in a tone of half sad , half sullen resignation , as she turn away to streak the hair of she sleep infant , that she have laid on the sofa beside she . ' well , then , what make you so cross ? come here , , and tell I why you can not be satisfied with my assurance . ' she go , and put she little hand within he arm , look up in he face , and say softly , - ' what do it amount to , ? only to this , that though you admire so much , and for qualitie that I do not possess , you would still rather have I than she for you wife , which merely prove that you do not think it necessary to love you wife ; you be satisfied if she can keep you house , and take care of you child . but I be not cross ; I be only sorry ; for , ' add she , in a low , tremulous accent , withdraw she hand from he arm , and bend she look on the rug , ' if you do not love I , you do not , and it can not be help . ' ' very true ; but who tell you I do not ? do I say I love ? ' ' you say you adore she . ' ' true , but adoration be not love . I adore , but I do not love she ; and I love thee , , but I do not adore thee . ' in proof of he affection , he clutch a
a handful of she light brown ringlet , and appear to twist they unmercifully . ' do you really , ? ' murmure she , with a faint smile beam through she tear , just put up she hand to he , in token that he pull rather too hard . 'To be sure I do , ' respond he : ' only you bother I rather , sometimes . ' 'I bother you ! ' cry she , in very natural surprise . ' yes , you - but only by you exceeding goodness . when a boy have be eat raisin and sugar- plum all day , he long for a squeeze of sour orange by way of a change . and do you never , , observe the sand on the sea -shore ; how nice and smooth they look , and how soft and easy they feel to the foot ? but if you plod along , for half a hour , over this soft , easy carpet - give way at every step , yield the more the harder you press , - you will find it rather wearisome work , and be glad enough to come to a bit of good , firm rock , that will not budge a inch whether you stand , walk , or stamp upon it ; and , though it be hard as the nether millstone , you will find it the easier footing after all . ' 'I know what you mean , , ' say she , nervously play with she watchguard and trace the figure on the rug with the point of she tiny foot - 'I know what you mean : but I think you always like to be yield to , and I can not alter now . ' 'I do like it , ' reply he , bring she to he by another tug at she hair . ' you must not mind my talk , . a man must have something to grumble about ; and if he can not complain that he wife harry he to death with she perversity and ill - humour , he must complain that she wear he out with she kindness and gentleness . ' ' but why complain at all , unless because you be tired and dissatisfied ? ' 'To excuse my own failings , to be sure . do you think I will bear all the burden of my sins on my own shoulders , as long as there be another ready to help I , with none of she own to carry ? ' ' there be no such one on earth , ' say she seriously ; and then , take he hand from she head , she kiss it with a air of genuine devotion , and tripp away to the door . ' what now ? ' say he . ' where be you go ? ' 'To tidy my hair , ' she answer , smile through she disorder lock ; ' you have make it all come down . ' ' off with you then ! - a excellent little woman ,' he remark when she be gone , ' but a think too soft - she almost melt in one 's hand . I positively think I ill - use she sometimes , when I have take too much - but I can not help it , for she never complain , either at the time or after . I suppose she do not mind it . ' 'I can enlighten you on that subject , , ' say I : ' she do mind it ; and some other thing she mind still more , which yet you may never hear she complain of . ' ' how do you know ? - do she complain to you ? ' demand he , with a sudden spark of fury ready to burst into a flame if I should answer " yes . " ' no ,' I reply ; ' but I have know she longer and study she more closely than you have do . - and I can tell you , , that love you more than you deserve , and that you have it in you power to make she very happy , instead of which you be she evil genius , and , I will venture to say , there be not a single day pass in which you do not inflict upon she some pang that you might spare she if you would . ' ' well - it be not my fault , ' say he , gaze carelessly up at the ceiling and plunge he hand into he pocket : ' if my ongoing do not suit she , she should tell I so . ' ' be she not exactly the wife you want ? do you not tell you must have one that would submit to anything without a murmur , and never blame you , whatever you do ? ' ' true , but we should not always have what we want : it spoil the best of we , do not it ? how can I help play the deuce when I see it be all one to she whether I behave like a or like a scoundrel , such as nature make I ? and how can I help tease she when she be so invitingly meek and mim , when she lie down like a spaniel at my foot and never so much as squeak to tell I that be enough ? ' ' if you be a tyrant by nature , the temptation be strong , I allow ; but no generous mind delights to oppress the weak , but rather to cherish and protect . ' 'I do not oppress she ; but it be so confound flat to be
be always cherish and protect ; and then , how can I tell that I be oppress she when she " melt away and make no sign " ? I sometimes think she have no feeling at all ; and then I go on till she cry , and that satisfy I . ' ' then you do delight to oppress she ? ' 'I do not , I tell you ! only when I be in a bad humour , or a particularly good one , and want to afflict for the pleasure of comforting ; or when she look flat and want shak up a bit . and sometimes she provoke I by cry for nothing , and will not tell I what it be for ; and then , I allow , it enrage I past bearing , especially when I be not my own man . ' ' as be no doubt generally the case on such occasion , ' say I . ' but in future , , when you see she look flat , or cry for " nothing " ( as you call it ) , ascribe it all to yourself : be assure it be something you have do amiss , or you general misconduct , that distress she . ' 'I do not believe it . if it be , she should tell I so : I do not like that way of moping and frett in silence , and say nothing : it be not honest . how can she expect I to mmend my way at that rate ? ' ' perhaps she give you credit for have more sense than you possess , and delude herself with the hope that you will one day see you own error and repair they , if leave to you own reflection . ' ' none of you sneer , . I have the sense to see that I be not always quite correct , but sometimes I think that be no great matter , as long as I injure nobody but myself - ' ' it be a great matter , ' interrupt I , ' both to yourself ( as you will hereafter find to you cost ) and to all connect with you , most especially you wife . but , indeed , it be nonsense to talk about injure no one but yourself : it be impossible to injure yourself , especially by such act as we allude to , without injure hundred , if not thousand , besides , in a greater or less , degree , either by the evil you do or the good you leave undone . ' ' and as I be say , ' continue he , 'or would have say if you have not take I up so short , I sometimes think I should do better if I be join to one that would always remind I when I be wrong , and give I a motive for do good and eschew evil , by decidedly show she approval of the one and disapproval of the other . ' ' if you have no higher motive than the approval of you fellow - mortal , it would do you little good . ' ' well , but if I have a mate that would not always be yielding , and always equally kind , but that would have the spirit to stand at bay now and then , and honestly tell I she mind at all time , such a one as yourself for instance . now , if I go on with you as I do with she when I be in , you would make the house too hot to hold I at time , I will be swear . ' ' you mistake I : I be no termagant . ' ' well , all the better for that , for I can not stand contradiction , in a general way , and I be as fond of my own will as another ; only I think too much of it do not answer for any man . ' ' well , I would never contradict you without a cause , but certainly I would always let you know what I think of you conduct ; and if you oppress I , in body , mind , or estate , you should at least have no reason to suppose " I do not mind it . "' 'I know that , my lady ; and I think if my little wife be to follow the same plan , it would be better for we both . ' 'I will tell she . ' 'no , no , let she be ; there be much to be say on both side , and , now I think upon it , often regret that you be not more like she , scoundrelly dog that he be , and you see , after all , you can not reform he : he be ten time worse than I . he be afraid of you , to be sure ; that be , he be always on he best behaviour in you presence - but - ' 'I wonder what he worst behaviour be like , then ? ' I could not forbear observe . ' why , to tell you the truth , it be very bad indeed - be not it , ? ' say he , address that gentleman , who have enter the room unperceive by I , for I be now stand near the fire , with my back to the door . ' be not , ' he continue , 'as great a reprobate as ever be would -d ? ' ' he lady will not hear he censure with impunity , ' reply , come forward ; ' but I must say , I thank
thank I be not such another . ' ' perhaps it would become you better , ' say I , 'to look at what you be , and say , " God be merciful to I a sinner . "' ' you be severe , ' return he , bow slightly and draw himself up with a proud yet injured air . Hattersley laugh , and clap he on the shoulder . move from under he hand with a gesture of insulted dignity , take himself away to the other end of the rug . ' be not it a shame , ? ' cry he brother - in - law ; 'i struck when I be drink , the second night after we come , and he be turn a cold shoulder on I ever since ; though I ask he pardon the very morning after it be done ! ' ' you manner of ask it , ' return the other , ' and the clearness with which you remember the whole transaction , show you be not too drunk to be fully conscious of what you be about , and quite responsible for the deed . ' ' you want to interfere between I and my wife , ' grumble , ' and that be enough to provoke any man . ' ' you justify it , then ? ' say he opponent , dart upon he a most vindictive glance . ' no , I tell you I would not have do it if I have not be under excitement ; and if you choose to bear malice for it after all the handsome thing I have say , do so and be would -d ! ' 'I would refrain from such language in a lady 's presence , at least , ' say , hide he anger under a mask of disgust . ' what have I say ? ' return : ' nothing but heaven 's truth . he will be damn , will not he , , if he do not forgive he brother 's trespass ? ' ' you ought to forgive he , , since he ask you , ' say I . ' do you say so ? then I will ! ' and , smile almost frankly , he step forward and offer he hand . it be immediately clasp in that of he relative , and the reconciliation be apparently cordial on both side . ' the affront , ' continue , turn to I , ' owed half its bitterness to the fact of its be offer in you presence ; and since you bid I forgive it , I will , and forget it too . ' 'I guess the best return I can make will be to take myself off , ' mutter , with a broad grin . he companion smile , and he leave the room . this put I on my guard . turn seriously to I , and earnestly begin , - ' dear , how I have longe for , yet dread , this hour ! do not be alarm ,' he add , for my face be crimson with anger : 'I be not about to offend you with any useless entreaty or complaint . I be not go to presume to trouble you with the mention of my own feeling or you perfection , but I have something to reveal to you which you ought to know , and which , yet , it pain I inexpressibly - ' ' then do not trouble yourself to reveal it ! ' ' but it be of importance - ' ' if so I shall hear it soon enough , especially if it be bad news , as you seem to consider it . at present I be go to take the child to the nursery . ' ' but can not you ring and send they ? ' ' no ; I want the exercise of a run to the top of the house . come , . ' ' but you will return ? ' ' not yet ; do not wait . ' ' then when may I see you again ? ' 'At lunch , ' say I , depart with little in one arm and lead by the hand . he turn away , mutter some sentence of impatient censure or complaint , in which ' heartless ' be the only distinguishable word . ' what nonsense be this , ? ' say I , pause in the doorway . ' what do you mean ? ' 'Oh , nothing ; I do not intend you should hear my soliloquy . but the fact be , . , I have a disclosure to make , painful for I to offer as for you to hear ; and I want you to give I a few minute of you attention in private at any time and place you like to appoint . it be from no selfish motive that I ask it , and not for any cause that could alarm you superhuman purity : therefore you need not kill I with that look of cold and pitiless disdain . I know too well the feeling with which the bearer of bad tiding be commonly regard not to - ' ' what be this wonderful piece of intelligence ? ' say I , impatiently interrupt he . ' if it be anything of real importance , speak it in three word before I go . ' ' in three word I cannot . send those child away and stay with I . ' ' no ; keep you bad tiding to yourself . I know it be something I do not want to hear , and something you would displease I by telling . ' ' you have divine too truly , I fear ; but still
still , since I know it , I feel it my duty to disclose it to you . ' 'Oh , spare we both the infliction , and I will exonerate you from the duty . you have offer to tell ; I have refuse to hear : my ignorance will not be charge on you . ' ' be it so : you shall not hear it from I . but if the blow fall too suddenly upon you when it come , remember I wish to soften it ! ' I leave he . I be determine he word should not alarm I . what could he , of all man , have to reveal that be of importance for I to hear ? it be no doubt some exaggerate tale about my unfortunate husband that he wish to make the most of to serve he own bad purpose . 6th . - he have not allude to this momentous mystery since , and I have see no reason to repent of my unwillingness to hear it . the threatened blow have not be struck yet , and I do not greatly fear it . at present I be pleased with Arthur : he have not positively disgrace himself for upward of a fortnight , and all this last week have be so very moderate in he indulgence at table that I can perceive a mark difference in he general temper and appearance . I hope this will continue ? . - yes , I will hope ! to - night I hear and grumbl together about the inhospitality of they host . they do not know I be near , for I happen to be stand behind the curtain in the bow of the window , watch the moon rise over the clump of tall dark elm - tree below the lawn , and wonder why be so sentimental as to stand without , lean against the outer pillar of the portico , apparently watch it too . ' so , I suppose we have see the last of we merry carousal in this house , ' say ; 'I think he good - fellowship would not last long . but ,' add he , laugh , 'I do not expect it would meet it be end this way . I rather think we pretty hostess would be set up she porcupine quill , and threaten to turn we out of the house if we do not mind we manners . ' ' you do not foresee this , then ? ' answer , with a guttural chuckle . ' but he will change again when he be sick of she . if we come here a year or two hence , we shall have all we own way , you will see . ' 'I do not know , ' reply the other : ' she be not the style of woman you soon tire of . but be that as it may , it be devilish provoke now that we can not be jolly , because he choose to be on he good behaviour . ' ' it be all these curse woman ! ' mutter : ' they be the very bane of the world ! they bring trouble and discomfort wherever they come , with they false , fair face and they deceitful tongue . ' at this juncture I issue from my retreat , and smile on as I pass , leave the room and go out in search of . have see he bend he course towards the shrubbery , I follow he thither , and find he just enter the shadowy walk . I be so light of heart , so overflow with affection , that I spring upon he and clasp he in my arm . this start conduct have a singular effect upon he : first , he murmure , ' bless you , darl ! ' and return my close embrace with a fervour like old time , and then he start , and , in a tone of absolute terror , exclaim , ' Helen ! what the devil be this ? ' and I see , by the faint light gleam through the overshadowing tree , that he be positively pale with the shock . how strange that the instinctive impulse of affection should come first , and then the shock of the surprise ! it show , at least , that the affection be genuine : he be not sick of I yet . 'I start you , , ' say I , laugh in my glee . ' how nervous you be ! ' ' what the deuce do you do it for ? ' cry he , quite testily , extricat himself from my arm , and wip he forehead with he handkerchief . 'Go back , - go back directly ! you will get you death of cold ! ' 'I will not , till I have tell you what I come for . they be blame you , , for you temperance and sobriety , and I be come to thank you for it . they say it be all " these curse woman , " and that we be the bane of the world ; but do not let they laugh or grumble you out of you good resolutions , or you affection for I . ' he laugh . I squeeze he in my arm again , and cry in tearful earnest , ' do , do persevere ! and I will love you better than ever I do before ! ' ' well , well , I will ! ' say he , hastily kiss I . ' there , now , go . you mad creature , how could you come out in you light evening dress this chill autumn night ? ' ' it be a
a glorious night , ' say I . ' it be a night that will give you you death , in another minute . run away , do ! ' ' do you see my death among those tree , ? ' say I , for he be gaze intently at the shrub , as if he see it come , and I be reluctant to leave he , in my new - find happiness and revival of hope and love . but he grow angry at my delay , so I kiss he and run back to the house . I be in such a good humour that night : tell I I be the life of the party , and whisper she have never see I so brilliant . certainly , I talk enough for twenty , and smile upon they all . , , , , all share my sisterly kindness . stare and wonder ; laugh and jest ( in spite of the little wine he have be suffer to imbibe ) , but still behave as well as he know how . and , from different motive and in different way , emulate I , and doubtless both surpass I , the former in he discursive versatility and eloquence , the latter in boldness and animation at least . Milicent , delighted to see she husband , she brother , and she over-estimated friend acquitt themselves so well , be lively and gay too , in she quiet way . even catch the general contagion : he dark greenish eye be lighte up beneath they moody brows ; he sombre countenance be beautify by smile ; all trace of gloom and proud or cold reserve have vanish for the time ; and he astonished we all , not only by he general cheerfulness and animation , but by the positive flash of true force and brilliance he emit from time to time . yoArthu do not talk much , but he laugh , and listen to the rest , and be in perfect good - humour , though not excit by wine . so that , altogether , we make a very merry , innocent , and entertaine party . 9th . - yesterday , when come to dress I for dinner , I see that she have be cry . I want to know the cause of it , but she seem reluctant to tell . be she unwell ? no . have she hear bad news from she friend ? no . have any of the servants vex she ? 'Oh , no , ma 'am ! ' she answer ; ' it be not for myself . ' ' what then , ? have you be read novel ? ' ' bless you , no ! ' say she , with a sorrowful shake of the head ; and then she sigh and continue : ' but to tell you the truth , ma 'am , I do not like master 's way of go on . ' ' what do you mean , ? he be go on very properly at present . ' ' well , ma 'am , if you think so , it be right . ' and she go on dress my hair , in a hurried way , quite unlike she usual calm , collect manner , murmuring , half to herself , she be sure it be beautiful hair : she ' could like to see them match it . ' when it be do , she fondly strok it , and gently pat my head . ' be that affectionate ebullition intend for my hair , or myself , nurse ? ' say I , laughingly turn round upon she ; but a tear be even now in she eye . ' what do you mean , ? ' I exclaim . ' well , ma 'am , I do not know ; but if - ' ' if what ? ' ' well , if I be you , I would not have that in the house another minute - not another minute I would not ! I be thunderstruck ; but before I could recover from the shock sufficiently to demand a explanation , enter my room , as she frequently do when she be dress before I ; and she stay with I till it be time to go down . she must have find I a very unsociable companion this time , for 's last word rang in my ear . but still I hope , I trust they have no foundation but in some idle rumour of the servants from what they have see in 's manner last month ; or perhaps from something that have pass between they master and she during she former visit . at dinner I narrowly observ both she and , and see nothing extraordinary in the conduct of either , nothing calculate to excite suspicion , except in distrustful mind , which mine be not , and therefore I would not suspect . almost immediately after dinner go out with she husband to share he moonlight ramble , for it be a splendid evening like the last . enter the drawing - room a little before the other , and challenge I to a game of chess . he do it without any of that sad but proud humility he usually assume in address I , unless he be excited with wine . I look at he face to see if that be the case now . he eye meet mine keenly , but steadily : there be something about he I do not understand , but he seem sober enough . not choose to engage with he , I refer he to . ' she play badly , ' say he , 'I want to match my skill with yours . come now
now ! you can not pretend you be reluctant to lay down you work . I know you never take it up except to pass a idle hour , when there be nothing better you can do . ' ' but chess -player be so unsociable ,' I object ; ' they be no company for any but themselves . ' ' there be no one here but , and she - ' ' oh , I shall be delighted to watch you ! ' cry we mutual friend . ' two such player - it will be quite a treat ! I wonder which will conquer . ' I consent . ' now , , ' say , as he arrange the man on the board , speak distinctly , and with a peculiar emphasis , as if he have a double meaning to all he word , ' you be a good player , but I be a better : we shall have a long game , and you will give I some trouble ; but I can be as patient as you , and in the end I shall certainly win . ' he fix he eye upon I with a glance I do not like , keen , crafty , bold , and almost impudent ; - already half triumphant in he anticipated success . 'I hope not , ! ' return I , with vehemence that must have start at least ; but he only smile and murmure , ' time will show . ' we set to work : he sufficiently interested in the game , but calm and fearless in the consciousness of superior skill : I , intensely eager to disappoind he expectation , for I consider this the type of a more serious contest , as I imagine he do , and I feel a almost superstitious dread of be beat : at all event , I could ill endure that present success should add one tittle to he conscious power ( he insolent self - confidence I ought to say ) , or encourage for a moment he dream of future conquest . he play be cautious and deep , but I struggle hard against he . for some time the combat be doubtful : at length , to my joy , the victory seem inclin to my side : I have take several of he best piece , and manifestly baffle he projects . he put he hand to he brow and pause , in evident perplexity . I rejoice in my advantage , but da not glory in it yet . at length , he lift he head , and quietly make he move , look at I and say , calmly , ' now you think you will win , do not you ? ' 'i hope so , ' reply I , take he pawn that he have push into the way of my bishop with so careless a air that I think it be a oversight , but be not generous enough , under the circumstance , to direct he attention to it , and too heedless , at the moment , to foresee the after - consequence of my move . ' it be those bishop that trouble I , ' say he ; ' but the bold knight can overleap the reverend gentleman , ' take my last bishop with he knight ; ' and now , those sacred person once remove , I shall carry all before I . ' 'Oh , , how you talk ! ' cry ; ' she have far more piece than you still . ' 'I intend to give you some trouble yet , ' say I ; ' and perhaps , sir , you will find yourself checkmate before you be aware . look to you queen . ' the combat deepen . the game be a long one , and I do give he some trouble : but he be a better player than I . ' what keen gamester you be ! ' say , who have now entered , and be watch we for some time . ' why , , you hand tremble as if you have stak you all upon it ! and , , you dog , you look as deep and cool as if you be certain of success , and as keen and cruel as if you would drain she heart 's blood ! but if I be you , I would not beat she , for very fear : she will hate you if you do - she will , by heaven ! I see it in she eye . ' ' hold you tongue , will you ? ' say I : he talk distract I , for I be drive to extremity . a few more move , and I be inextricably entangle in the snare of my antagonist . ' check , ' cry he : I seek in agony some means of escape . ' mate ! ' he add , quietly , but with evident delight . he have suspend the utterance of that last fatal syllable the better to enjoy my dismay . I be foolishly disconcert by the event . Hattersley laugh ; be trouble to see I so disturb . place he hand on mine that rest on the table , and squeeze it with a firm but gentle pressure , murmure , ' Beaten , beat ! ' and gaze into my face with a look where exultation be blend with a expression of ardour and tenderness yet more insulting . ' no , never , ! ' exclaim I , quickly withdraw my hand . ' do you deny ? ' reply he , smilingly point to the board . ' no , no ,' I answer , recollect how strange my conduct must appear : '
' you have beaten I in that game . ' ' will you try another , then ? ' ' no . ' ' you acknowledge my superiority ? ' ' yes , as a chess - player . ' I rise to resume my work . ' where be ? ' say , gravely , after glance round the room . ' go out with , ' answer I , for he look at I for a reply . ' and not yet return ! ' he say , seriously . 'I suppose not . ' ' where be ? ' look round again . ' go out with , as you know , ' say , suppresse a laugh , which break forth as he conclude the sentence . why do he laugh ? why do connect they thus together ? be it true , then ? and be this the dreadful secret he have wish to reveal to I ? I must know , and that quickly . I instantly rise and leave the room to go in search of and demand a explanation of she word ; but follow I into the anteroom , and before I could open its outer door , gently lay he hand upon the lock . ' may I tell you something , ? ' say he , in a subdu tone , with serious , downcast eye . ' if it be anything worth hearing , ' reply I , struggle to be compose , for I tremble in every limb . he quietly push a chair towards I . I merely lean my hand upon it , and bid he go on . ' do not be alarm , ' say he : ' what I wish to say be nothing in itself ; and I will leave you to draw you own inference from it . you say that be not yet return ? ' ' yes , yes - go on ! ' say I , impatiently ; for I fear my force calmness would leave I before the end of he disclosure , whatever it might be . ' and you hear , ' continue he , ' that be go out with ? ' ' well ? ' 'I hear the latter say to you husband - or the man who call himself so - ' ' go on , sir ! ' he bow submissively , and continue : 'I hear he say , - " I shall manage it , you will see ! they be go down by the water ; I shall meet they there , and tell he I want a bit of talk with he about some thing that we need not trouble the lady with ; and she will say she can be walk back to the house ; and then I shall apologise , you know , and all that , and tip she a wink to take the way of the shrubbery . I will keep he talk there , about those matters I mention , and anything else I can think of , as long as I can , and then bring he round the other way , stop to look at the tree , the field , and anything else I can find to discourse of . " ' pause , and look at I . without a word of comment or further question , I rise , and dart from the room and out of the house . the torment of suspense be not to be endure : I would not suspect my husband falsely , on this man 's accusation , and I would not trust he unworthily - I must know the truth at once . I flow to the shrubbery . Scarcely have I reach it , when a sound of voice arrest my breathless speed . ' we have linger too long ; he will be back , ' say 's . ' surely not , dearest ! ' be he reply ; ' but you can run across the lawn , and get in as quietly as you can ; I will follow in a while . ' my knee tremble under I ; my brain swam round . I be ready to faint . she must not see I thus . I shrink among the bushes , and lean against the trunk of a tree to let she pass . 'Ah , ! ' say she reproachfully , pause where I have stand with he the night before - ' it be here you kiss that woman ! ' she look back into the leafy shade . Advance thence , he answer , with a careless laugh , - ' well , dearest , I could not help it . you know I must keep straight with she as long as I can . have not I see you kiss you dolt of a husband scor of time ? - and do I ever complain ? ' ' but tell I , do not you love she still - a little ? ' say she , place she hand on he arm , look earnestly in he face - for I could see they , plainly , the moon shin full upon they from between the branch of the tree that shelter I . ' not one bit , by all that be sacr ! ' he reply , kiss she glow cheek . ' good heaven , I must be gone ! ' cry she , suddenly break from he , and away she fly . there he stand before I ; but I have not strength to confront he now : my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth ; I be well - nigh sinking to the earth , and I almost wonder he do not hear the beating of my heart above the
the low sighing of the wind and the fitful rustle of the falling leave . my sensis seem to fail I , but still I see he shadowy form pass before I , and through the rushing sound in my ear I distinctly hear he say , as he stand look up the lawn , - ' there go the fool ! , , run ! there - in with you ! ah , - he do not see ! that be right , , keep he back ! ' and even he low laugh reach I as he walk away . ' help I now ! ' I murmure , sinke on my knee among the damp weed and brushwood that surround I , and look up at the moonlit sky , through the scant foliage above . it seem all dim and quiver now to my darkened sight . my burn , burst heart strove to pour forth its agony to , but could not frame its anguish into prayer ; until a gust of wind sweep over I , which , while it scatter the dead leave , like blight hope , around , cool my forehead , and see a little to revive my sinking frame . then , while I lift up my soul in speechless , earnest supplication , some heavenly influence seem to strengthen I within : I breathe more freely ; my vision clear ; I see distinctly the pure moon shining on , and the light clouds skimm the clear , dark sky ; and then I see the eternal star twinkl down upon I ; I know they be mine , and he be strong to save and swift to hear . 'I will never leave thee , nor forsake thee , ' seem whisper from above they myriad orb . no , no ; I feel he would not leave I comfortless : in spite of earth and hell I should have strength for all my trial , and win a glorious rest at last ! Refresh , invigorate , if not compose , I rise and return to the house . much of my new - bear strength and courage forsook I , I confess , as I enter it , and shut out the fresh wind and the glorious sky : everything I see and hear seem to sicke my heart - the hall , the lamp , the staircase , the door of the different apartment , the social sound of talk and laughter from the drawing - room . how could I bear my future life ! in this house , among those people - oh , how could I endure to live ! just then enter the hall , and see I , tell I he have be send in search of I , add that he have take in the tea , and master wish to know if I be come . ' ask to be so kind as to make the tea , , ' say I . ' say I be not well to - night , and wish to be excuse . ' I retire into the large , empty dining - room , where all be silence and darkness , but for the soft sighing of the wind without , and the faint gleam of moonlight that pierce the blind and curtain ; and there I walk rapidly up and down , think of my bitter thought alone . how different be this from the evening of yesterday ! that , it seem , be the last expire flash of my life 's happiness . poor , blinded fool that I be to be so happy ! I could now see the reason of 's strange reception of I in the shrubbery ; the burst of kindness be for he paramour , the start of horror for he wife . now , too , I could better understand the conversation between and ; it be doubtless of he love for she they speak , not for I . I hear the drawing - room door open : a light quick step come out of the ant - room , cross the hall , and ascend the stair . it be Milicent , poor Milicent , go to see how I be - no one else care for I ; but she still be kind . I she no tear before , but now they come , fast and free . thus she do I good , without approach I . Disappoint in she search , I hear she come down , more slowly than she have ascend . would she come in there , and find I out ? no , she turn in the opposite direction and be - enter the drawing - room . I be glad , for I know not how to meet she , or what to say . I want no confidante in my distress . I deserve none , and I want none . I have take the burden upon myself ; let I bear it alone . as the usual hour of retirement approach I dry my eye , and try to clear my voice and calm my mind . I must see to - night , and speak to he ; but I would do it calmly : there should be no scene - nothing to complain or to boast of to he companion - nothing to laugh at with he lady - love . when the company be retire to they chamber I gently open the door , and just as he pass , beckon he in . ' what be to do with you , ? ' say he . ' why could not you come to make tea for we ? and what the deuce be you here for , in the dark ? what ail you ,
, young woman : you look like a ghost ! ' he continue , survey I by the light of he candle . ' no matter ,' I answer , 'to you ; you have no longer any regard for I it appear ; and I have no longer any for you . ' - lo ! what the devil be this ? ' he mutter . 'I would leave you to - morrow , ' continue I , ' and never again come under this roof , but for my child ' - I pause a moment to steady , my voice . ' what in the 's name be this , ? ' cry he . ' what can you be drive at ? ' ' you know perfectly well . let we waste no time in useless explanation , but tell I , will you -? ' he vehemently swore he know nothing about it , and insist upon hear what poisonous old woman have be blacken he name , and what infamous lie I have be fool enough to believe . ' spare yourself the trouble of forswear yourself and rack you brain to stifle truth with falsehood ,' I coldly reply . 'I have trust to the testimony of no third person . I be in the shrubbery this evening , and I see and hear for myself . ' this be enough . he utter a suppress exclamation of consternation and dismay , and mutter , 'I shall catch it now ! ' set down he candle on the nearest chair , and rear he back against the wall , stand confront I with fold arm . ' well , what then ? ' say he , with the calm insolence of mingl shamelessness and desperation . ' only this , ' return I ; ' will you let I take we child and what remains of my fortune , and go ? ' 'Go where ? ' 'Anywhere , where he will be safe from you contaminating influence , and I shall be deliver from you presence , and you from mine . ' ' no . ' ' will you let I have the child then , without the money ? ' ' no , nor yourself without the child . do you think I be go to be make the talk of the country for you fastidious caprice ? ' ' then I must stay here , to be hate and despise . but henceforth we be husband and wife only in the name . ' ' very good . ' 'I be you child 's mother , and you housekeeper , nothing more . so you need not trouble yourself any longer to feign the love you can not feel : I will exact no more heartless caress from you , nor offer nor endure they either . I will not be mock with the empty husk of conjugal endearment , when you have give the substance to another ! ' ' very good , if you please . we shall see who will tire first , my lady . ' ' if I tire , it will be of live in the world with you : not of live without you mockery of love . when you tire of you sinful way , and show yourself truly repentant , I will forgive you , and , perhaps , try to love you again , though that will be hard indeed . ' ' Humph ! and meantime you will go and talk I over to , and write long letter to aunt to complain of the wicked wretch you have marry ? ' 'I shall complain to no one . Hitherto I have struggle hard to hide you vice from every eye , and invest you with virtue you never possess ; but now you must look to yourself . ' I leave he mutter bad language to himself , and go up - stair . ' you be poorly , ma 'am , ' say , survey I with deep anxiety . ' it be too true , , ' say I , answer she sad look rather than she word . 'I know it , or I would not have mention such a thing . ' ' but do not you trouble yourself about it , ' say I , kiss she pale , time - waste cheek . 'I can bear it better than you imagine . ' ' yes , you be always for " bear . " but if I be you I would not bear it ; I would give way to it , and cry right hard ! and I would talk too , I just would - I would let he know what it be to - ' 'I have talk , ' say I ; 'I have say enough . ' ' then I would cry ,' persist she . 'I would not look so white and so calm , and burst my heart with keep it in . ' 'I have cry , ' say I , smile , in spite of my misery ; ' and I be calm now , really : so do not discompose I again , nurse : let we say no more about it , and do not mention it to the servants . there , you may go now . good - night ; and do not disturb you rest for I : I shall sleep well - if I can . ' Notwithstand this resolution , I find my bed so intolerable that , before two o'clock , I rise , and light my candle by the rushlight that be still burn , I get my desk and sit down in my dressing - gow to recound the event of the past evening . it be better to be so occupied than
than to be lie in bed torture my brain with recollection of the far past and anticipation of the dreadful future . I have find relief in describe the very circumstance that have destroy my peace , as well as the little trivial detail attendant upon they discovery . no sleep I could have get this night would have do so much towards compose my mind , and prepare I to meet the trial of the day . I fancy so , at least ; and yet , when I cease write , I find my head ach terribly ; and when I look into the glass , I be start at my haggard , worn appearance . have be to dress I , and say I have have a sad night of it , she can see . have just look in to ask I how i be . I tell she I be better , but to excuse my appearance admit I have have a restless night . I wish this day be over ! I shudder at the thought of go down to breakfast . how shall I encounter they all ? yet let I remember it be not I that be guilty : I have no cause to fear ; and if they scorn I as a victim of they guilt , I can pity they folly and despise they scorn . . - Breakfast pass well over : I be calm and cool throughout . I answer composedly all inquiry respect my health ; and whatever be unusual in my look or manner be generally attribute to the trifling indisposition that have occasion my early retirement last night . but how be I to get over the ten or twelve day that must yet elapse before they go ? yet why so long for they departure ? when they be go , how shall I get through the month or year of my future life in company with that man - my greatest enemy ? for none could injure I as he have do . oh ! when I think how fondly , how foolishly I have love he , how madly I have trust he , how constantly I have laboure , and study , and pray , and struggle for he advantage ; and how cruelly he have trample on my love , betraye my trust , scorn my prayer and tear , and effort for he preservation , crush my hope , destroy my youth 's best feeling , and doom I to a life of hopeless misery , as far as man can do it , it be not enough to say that I no longer love my husband - I hate he ! the word stare I in the face like a guilty confession , but it be true : I hate he - I hate he ! but have mercy on he miserable soul ! and make he see and feel he guilt - I ask no other vengeance ! if he could but fully know and truly feel my wrongs I should be well avenge , and I could freely pardon all ; but he be so lost , so hardened in he heartless depravity , that in this life I believe he never will . but it be useless dwell on this theme : let I seek once more to dissipate reflection in the minor detail of passing event . have annoye I all day long with he serious , sympathising , and ( as he think ) unobtrusive politeness . if it be more obtrusive it would trouble I less , for then I could snub he ; but , as it be , he contrive to appear so really kind and thoughtful that I can not do so without rudeness and see ingratitude . I sometimes think I ought to give he credit for the good feeling he simulate so well ; and then again , I think it be my duty to suspect he under the peculiar circumstance in which I be place . he kindness may not all be feign ; but still , let not the purest impulse of gratitude to he induce I to forget myself : let I remember the game of chess , the expression he use on the occasion , and those indescribable look of he , that so justly rouse my indignation , and I think I shall be safe enough . I have do well to record they so minutely . I think he wish to find a opportunity of speak to I alone : he have seem to be on the watch all day ; but I have take care to disappoint he - not that I fear anything he could say , but I have trouble enough without the addition of he insulting consolation , condolence , or whatever else he might attempt ; and , for 's sake , I do not wish to quarrel with he . he excuse himself from go out to shoot with the other gentleman in the morning , under the pretext of have letter to write ; and instead of retiring for that purpose into the library , he send for he desk into the morning - room , where I be seat with and . they have betake themselves to they work ; I , less to divert my mind than to deprecate conversation , have provide myself with a book . see that I wish to be quiet , and accordingly let I alone . Annabella , doubtless , see it too : but that be no reason why she should restrain she tongue , or curb she cheerful spirit : she accordingly chat away , address herself almost exclusively to I , and with the utmost assurance and familiarity , grow the more animated and friendly the colder and briefer my answer become . see
see that I could ill endure it , and , look up from he desk , he answer she question and observation for I , as far as he could , and attempt to transfer she social attention from I to himself ; but it would not do . perhaps she think I have a headache , and could not bear to talk ; at any rate , she see that she loquacious vivacity annoye I , as I could tell by the malicious pertinacity with which she persist . but I check it effectually by put into she hand the book I have be try to read , on the fly - leaf of which i have hastily scribbled , - 'I be too well acquaint with you character and conduct to feel any real friendship for you , and as I be without you talent for dissimulation , I can not assume the appearance of it . I must , therefore , beg that hereafter all familiar intercourse may cease between we ; and if I still continue to treat you with civility , as if you be a woman worthy of consideration and respect , understand that it be out of regard for you cousin 's feeling , not for yours . ' upon peruse this she turn scarlet , and bit she lip . Covertly tear away the leaf , she crumple it up and put it in the fire , and then employ herself in turn over the page of the book , and , really or apparently , peruse its contents . in a little while announce it she intention to repair to the nursery , and ask if I would accompany she . ' will excuse we , ' say she ; ' she be busy reading . ' ' no , I will not , ' cry , suddenly look up , and throw she book on the table ; 'I want to speak to Hel a minute . you may go , , and she will follow in a while . ' ( went . ) ' will you oblige I , ? ' continue she . she impudence astounde I ; but I comply , and follow she into the library . she close the door , and walk up to the fire . ' who tell you this ? ' say she . ' no one : I be not incapable of see for myself . ' 'Ah , you be suspicious ! ' cry she , smile , with a gleam of hope . there have be a kind of desperation in she hardihood ; now she be evidently relieve . ' if I be suspicious ,' I reply , 'I should have discover you infamy long before . no , , I do not find my charge upon suspicion . ' 'On what do you find it , then ? ' say she , throw herself into a arm -chair , and stretch out she foot to the fender , with a obvious effort to appear compose . 'I enjoy a moonlight ramble as well as you ,' I answer , steadily fix my eye upon she ; ' and the shrubbery happen to be one of my favourite resorts . ' she colou again excessively , and remain silent , press she finger against she tooth , and gaze into the fire . I watch she a few moment with a feeling of malevolent gratification ; then , move towards the door , I calmly ask if she have anything more to say . ' yes , yes ! ' cry she eagerly , start up from she recline posture . 'I want to know if you will tell ? ' ' suppose I do ? ' ' well , if you be dispose to publish the matter , I can not dissuade you , of course - but there will be terrible work if you do - and if you do not , I shall think you the most generous of mortal being - and if there be anything in the world I can do for you - anything short of - ' she hesitat . ' short of renounce you guilty connection with my husband , I suppose you mean ? ' say I . she pause , in evident disconcertion and perplexity , mingl with anger she da not show . 'I can not renounce what be dearer than life , ' she mutter , in a low , hurrie tone . then , suddenly raise she head and fix she gleam eye upon I , she continue earnestly : ' but , - or , or whatever you would have I call you - will you tell he ? if you be generous , here be a fitting opportunity for the exercise of you magnanimity : if you be proud , here be I - you rival - ready to acknowledge myself you debtor for a act of the most noble forbearance . ' 'I shall not tell he . ' ' you will not ! ' cry she , delightedly . 'Accept my sincere thanks , then ! ' she spring up , and offer I she hand . I draw back . ' give I no thanks ; it be not for you sake that I refrain . neither be it a act of any forbearance : I have no wish to publish you shame . I should be sorry to distress you husband with the knowledge of it . ' ' and ? will you tell she ? ' ' no : on the contrary , I shall do my utmost to conceal it from she . I would not for much that she should know the infamy and disgrace of she relation ! ' ' you use hard word , , but I can pardon you . ' '
' and now , , ' continue I , ' let I counsel you to leave this house as soon as possible . you must be aware that you continuance here be excessively disagreeable to I - not for 's sake , ' say I , observe the dawn of a malicious smile of triumph on she face - ' you be welcome to he , if you like he , as far as I be concerned - but because it be painful to be always disguise my true sentiment respect you , and strain to keep up a appearance of civility and respect towards one for whom I have not the most distant shadow of esteem ; and because , if you stay , you conduct can not possibly remain concealed much longer from the only two person in the house who do not know it already . and , for you husband 's sake , , and even for you own , I wish - I earnestly advise and entreat you to break off this unlawful connection at once , and return to you duty while you may , before the dreadful consequence - ' ' yes , yes , of course , ' say she , interrupt I with a gesture of impatience . ' but I can not go , Helen , before the time appoint for we departure . what possible pretext could I frame for such a thing ? whether I propose go back alone - which would not hear of - or take he with I , the very circumstance itself would be certain to excite suspicion - and when we visit be so nearly at a end too - little more than a week - surely you can endure my presence so long ! I will not annoy you with any more of my friendly impertinence . ' ' well , I have nothing more to say to you . ' ' have you mention this affair to ? ' ask she , as I be leave the room . ' how dare you mention he name to I ! ' be the only answer I give . no word have pass between we since , but such as outward decency or pure necessity demand . . - in proportion as find she have nothing to fear from I , and as the time of departure draw nigh , the more audacious and insolent she become . she do not scruple to speak to my husband with affectionate familiarity in my presence , when no one else be by , and be particularly fond of display she interest in he health and welfare , or in anything that concern he , as if for the purpose of contrast she kind solicitude with my cold indifference . and he reward she by such smile and glance , such whispered word , or boldly - speak insinuation , indicative of he sense of she goodness and my neglect , as make the blood rush into my face , in spite of myself - for I would be utterly regardless of it all - deaf and blind to everything that pass between they , since the more I show myself sensible of they wickedness the more she triumph in she victory , and the more he flatter himself that I love he devotedly still , in spite of my pretended indifference . on such occasion I have sometimes be start by a subtle , fiendish suggestion incite I to show he the contrary by a see encouragement of 's advance ; but such idea be banish in a moment with horror and self - abasement ; and then I hate he tenfold more than ever for have bring I to this ! - pardon I for it and all my sinful thought ! instead of be humble and purify by my affliction , I feel that they be turn my nature into gall . this must be my fault as much as theirs that wrong I . no true could cherish such bitter feeling as I do against he and she , especially the latter : he , I still feel that I could pardon - freely , gladly - on the slightest token of repentance ; but she - word can not utter my abhorrence . reason forbid , but passion urge strongly ; and I must pray and struggle long ere I subdue it . it be well that she be leave to - morrow , for I could not well endure she presence for another day . this morning she rise earlier than usual . I find she in the room alone , when I go down to breakfast . 'Oh , ! be it you ? ' say she , turn as I enter . I give a involuntary start back on see she , at which she utter a short laugh , observe , ' I think we be both disappointed . ' I come forward and busy myself with the breakfast thing . ' this be the last day I shall bure you hospitality , ' say she , as she seat herself at the table . ' ah , here come one that will not rejoice at it ! ' she murmure , half to herself , as yoArthu enter the room . he shook hand with she and wish she good - morning : then , look lovingly in she face , and still retain she hand in he , murmure pathetically , ' the last - last day ! ' ' yes , ' say she with some asperity ; ' and I rise early to make the best of it - I have be here alone this half - hour , and you - you lazy creature - ' ' well , I think I be early too , ' say he ; ' but ,
, ' drop he voice almost to a whisper , ' you see we be not alone . ' ' we never be , ' return she . but they be almost as good as alone , for I be now stand at the window , watch the cloud , and struggle to suppress my wrath . some more word pass between they , which , happily , I do not overhear ; but have the audacity to come and place herself beside I , and even to put she hand upon my shoulder and say softly , ' you need not grudge he to I , , for I love he more than ever you could do . ' this put I beside myself . I take she hand and violently dash it from I , with a expression of abhorrence and indignation that could not be suppress . Startle , almost appal , by this sudden outbreak , she recoil in silence . I would have give way to my fury and say more , but be low laugh recall I to myself . I check the half - uttere invective , and scornfully turn away , regret that I have give he so much amusement . he be still laugh when make he appearance . how much of the scene he have witness I do not know , for the door be ajar when he enter . he greet he host and he cousin both coldly , and I with a glance intend to express the deepest sympathy mingl with high admiration and esteem . ' how much allegiance do you owe to that man ? ' he ask below he breath , as he stand beside I at the window , affect to be make observation on the weather . ' none ,' I answer . and immediately return to the table , I employ myself in make the tea . he follow , and would have enter into some kind of conversation with I , but the other guest be now begin to assemble , and I take no more notice of he , except to give he he coffee . after breakfast , determine to pass as little of the day as possible in company with , I quietly steal away from the company and retire to the library . follow I thither , under pretence of come for a book ; and first , turn to the shelf , he selecte a volume , and then quietly , but by no means timidly , approach I , he stand beside I , rest he hand on the back of my chair , and say softly , ' and so you consider yourself free at last ? ' ' yes , ' say I , without move , or raise my eye from my book , ' free to do anything but offend and my conscience . ' there be a momentary pause . ' very right , ' say he , ' provide you conscience be not too morbidly tender , and you idea of not too erroneously severe ; but can you suppose it would offend that benevolent be to make the happiness of one who would die for yours ? - to raise a devoted heart from purgatorial torment to a state of heavenly bliss , when you could do it without the slightest injury to yourself or any other ? ' this be speak in a low , earnest , melte tone , as he bend over I . I now raise my head ; and steadily confront he gaze , I answer calmly , ' . , do you mean to insult I ? ' he be not prepare for this . he pause a moment to recover the shook ; then , draw himself up and remove he hand from my chair , he answer , with proud sadness , - ' that be not my intention . ' I just glance towards the door , with a slight movement of the head , and then return to my book . he immediately withdraw . this be better than if I have answer with more word , and in the passionate spirit to which my first impulse would have prompt . what a good thing it be to be able to command one 's temper ! I must labour to cultivate this inestimable quality : only know how often I shall need it in this rough , dark road that lie before I . in the course of the morning I drive over to the with the two lady , to give a opportunity for bidding farewell to she mother and sister . they persuade she to stay with they the rest of the day , . Hargrave promise to bring she back in the evening and remain till the party break up on the morrow . consequently , and I have the pleasure of return - - in the carriage together . for the first mile or two we keep silence , I look out of my window , and she lean back in she corner . but I be not go to restrict myself to any particular position for she ; when I be tired of lean forward , with the cold , raw wind in my face , and survey the russet hedge and the damp , tangle grass of they bank , I give it up and lean back too . with she usual impudence , my companion then make some attempt to get up a conversation ; but the monosyllable ' yes , ' or ' no ' or 'humph , ' be the utmost she several remark could elicit from I . at last , on she ask my opinion upon some immaterial point of discussion , I answer , - ' why do you wish to talk to I , ? you
you must know what I think of you . ' ' well , if you will be so bitter against I , ' reply she , 'I can not help it ; but I be not go to sulk for anybody . ' we short drive be now at a end . as soon as the carriage door be open , she spring out , and go down the park to meet the gentleman , who be just return from the woods . of course I do not follow . but I have not do with she impudence yet : after dinner , I retire to the drawing - room , as usual , and she accompany I , but I have the two child with I , and I give they my whole attention , and determine to keep they till the gentleman come , or till arrive with she mother . , however , be soon tired of play , and insist upon go to sleep ; and while I sit on the sofa with she on my knee , and seat beside I , gently play with she soft , flaxen hair , composedly come and place herself on the other side . ' to - morrow , , ' say she , ' you will be deliver from my presence , which , no doubt , you will be very glad of - it be natural you should ; but do you know I have render you a great service ? I tell you what it be ? ' 'I shall be glad to hear of any service you have render I , ' say I , determi to be calm , for I know by the tone of she voice she want to provoke I . ' well , ' resume she , ' have you not observe the salutary change in ? do not you see what a sober , temperate man he be become ? you see with regret the sad habit he be contract , I know : and I know you do you utmost to deliver he from they , but without success , until I come to you assistance . I tell he in few word that I could not bear to see he degray himself so , and that I should cease to - no matter what I tell he , but you see the reformation I have wrotch ; and you ought to thank I for it . ' I rise and ring for the nurse . ' but I desire no thanks , ' she continue ; ' all the return I ask be , that you will take care of he when I be go , and not , by harshness and neglect , drive he back to he old course . ' I be almost sick with passion , but be now at the door . I point to the child , for I could not trust myself to speak : she take they away , and I follow . ' will you , ? ' continue the speaker . I give she a look that blight the malicious smile on she face , or check it , at least for a moment , and depart . in the ant - room I meet . he see I be in no humour to be speak to , and suffer I to pass without a word ; but when , after a few minute 's seclusion in the library , I have regain my composure , and be return to join and , whom I have just hear come downstairs and go into the drawing - room , I find he there still linger in the dimly - lighted apartment , and evidently wait for I . ' . , ' say he as I pass , ' will you allow I one word ? ' ' what be it then ? be quick , if you please . ' 'I offend you this morning ; and I can not live under you displeasure . ' ' then go , and sin no more , ' reply I , turn away . ' no , no ! ' say he , hastily , set himself before I . ' pardon I , but I must have you forgiveness . I leave you to - morrow , and I may not have a opportunity of speak to you again . I be wrong to forget myself and you , as I do ; but let I implore you to forget and forgive my rash presumption , and think of I as if those word have never be speak ; for , believe I , I regret they deeply , and the loss of you esteem be too severe a penalty : I can not bear it . ' ' Forgetfulness be not to be purchase with a wish ; and I can not bestow my esteem on all who desire it , unless they deserve it too . ' 'I shall think my life well spend in labouring to deserve it , if you will but pardon this offence - will you ? ' 'yes . ' ' yes ! but that be coldly spoken . give I you hand and I will believe you . you will not ? then , , you do not forgive I ! ' ' yes ; here it be , and my forgiveness with it : only , Sin no More . ' he press my cold hand with sentimental fervour , but say nothing , and stand aside to let I pass into the room , where all the company be now assemble . be seat near the door : on see I enter , almost immediately follow by , he leer at I with a glance of intolerable significance , as I pass . I look he in the
the face , till he sullenly turn away , if not asham , at least confound for the moment . have seize by the arm , and be whisper something in he ear - some coarse joke , no doubt , for the latter neither laugh nor speak in answer , but , turn from he with a slight curl of the lip , disengage himself and go to he mother , who be tell Lowborough how many reason she have to be proud of she son . thank heaven , they be all go to - morrow . 20th , 1824 . - this be the third anniversary of we felicitous union . it be now two month since we guest leave we to the enjoyment of each other 's society ; and I have have nine week ' experience of this new phase of conjugal life - two person live together , as master and mistress of the house , and father and mother of a winsome , merry little child , with the mutual understanding that there be no love , friendship , or sympathy between they . as far as in I lie , I endeaavor to live peaceably with he : I treat he with unimpeachable civility , give up my convenience to he , wherever it may reasonably be do , and consult he in a business - like way on household affair , deferr to he pleasure and judgment , even when I know the latter to be inferior to my own . as for he , for the first week or two , he be peevish and low , fretting , I suppose , over he dear 's departure , and particularly ill - tempere to I : everything I do be wrong ; I be cold - hear , hard , insensate ; my sour , pale face be perfectly repulsive ; my voice make he shudder ; he know not how he could live through the winter with I ; I should kill he by inch . again I propose a separation , but it would not do : he be not go to be the talk of all the old gossip in the neighbourhood : he would not have it say that he be such a brute he wife could not live with he . no ; he must contrive to bear with I . ' I must contrive to bear with you , you mean , ' say I ; ' for so long as I discharge my function of steward and house - keeper , so conscientiously and well , without pay and without thanks , you can not afford to part with I . I shall therefore remit these duty when my bondage become intolerable . ' this threat , I think , would serve to keep he in check , if anything would . I believe he be much disappointed that I do not feel he offensive saying more acutely , for when he have say anything particularly well calculate to hurt my feeling , he would stare I searchingly in the face , and then grumble against my ' marble heart ' or my ' brutal insensibility . ' if I have bitterly wept and deplor he lost affection , he would , perhaps , have condescende to pity I , and take I into favour for a while , just to comfort he solitude and conseal he for the absence of he beloved Annabella , until he could meet she again , or some more fitting substitute . thank heaven , I be not so weak as that ! I be infatuate once with a foolish , besot affection , that clung to he in spite of he unworthiness , but it be fairly gone now - wholly crush and wither away ; and he have none but himself and he vice to thank for it . at first ( in compliance with he sweet lady 's injunction , I suppose ) , he abstain wonderfully well from seek to solace he car in wine ; but at length he begin to relax he virtuous effort , and now and then exceed a little , and still continue to do so ; nay , sometimes , not a little . when he be under the exciting influence of these excess , he sometimes fire up and attempt to play the brute ; and then I take little pain to suppress my scorn and disgust . when he be under the depressing influence of the after - consequence , he bemoan he suffering and he error , and charge they both upon I ; he know such indulgence injure he health , and do he more harm than good ; but he say I drive he to it by my unnatural , unwomanly conduct ; it will be the ruin of he in the end , but it be all my fault ; and then I be rouse to defend myself , sometimes with bitter recrimination . this be a kind of injustice I can not patiently endure . have I not laboure long and hard to save he from this very vice ? would I not labour still to deliver he from it if I could ? but could I do so by fawn upon he and caresse he when I know that he scorn I ? be it my fault that I have lose my influence with he , or that he have forfeit every claim to my regard ? and should I seek a reconciliation with he , when I feel that I abhor he , and that he despise I ? and while he continue still to correspond with , as I know he do ? no , never , never , never ! he may drink himself dead , but it be not my fault ! yet I do my
my part to save he still : I give he to understand that drinking make he eye dull , and he face red and bloate ; and that it tend to render he imbecile in body and mind ; and if be to see he as often as I do , she would speedily be disenchant ; and that she certainly will withdraw she favour from he , if he continue such course . such a mode of admonition win only coarse abuse for I - and , indeed , I almost feel as if I deserv it , for I hate to use such argument ; but they sink into he stupefied heart , and make he pause , and ponder , and abstain , more than anything else I could say . at present I be enjoy a temporary relief from he presence : he be go with to join a distant hunt , and will probably not be back before to - morrow evening . how differently I use to feel he absence ! be still at the . he and frequently meet to pursue they rural sport together : he often call upon we here , and not unfrequently ride over to he . I do not think either of these soi-disant friend be overflow with love for the other ; but such intercourse serve to get the time on , and I be very willing it should continue , as it save I some hour of discomfort in 's society , and give he some better employment than the sottish indulgence of he sensual appetite . the only objection I have to 's be in the neighbourhood , be that the fear of meet he at the prevent I from see he sister so often as I otherwise should ; for , of late , he have conduct himself towards I with such unerring propriety , that I have almost forget he former conduct . I suppose he be strive to ' win my esteem . ' if he continue to act in this way , he may win it ; but what then ? the moment he attempt to demand anything more , he will lose it again . 10th . - it be a hard , embitter thing to have one 's kind feeling and good intention cast back in one 's tooth . I be begin to relent towards my wretched partner ; to pity he forlorn , comfortless condition , unalleviated as it be by the consolation of intellectual resource and the answer of a good conscience towards ; and to think I ought to sacrifice my pride , and renew my effort once again to make he home agreeable and lead he back to the path of virtue ; not by false profession of love , and not by pretend remorse , but by mitigate my habitual coldness of manner , and commut my frigid civility into kindness wherever a opportunity occur ; and not only be I begin to think so , but I have already begin to act upon the thought - and what be the result ? no answer spark of kindness , no awakening penitence , but a unappeasable ill -humour , and a spirit of tyrannous exaction that increase with indulgence , and a lurking gleam of self - complacent triumph at every detection of relent softness in my manner , that congeal I to marble again as often as it recur ; and this morning he finish the business :- I think the petrifaction be so completely effect at last that nothing can melt I again . among he letter be one which he peruse with symptom of unusual gratification , and then throw it across the table to I , with the admonition , - ' there ! read that , and take a lesson by it ! ' it be in the free , dash hand of . I glance at the first page ; it seem full of extravagant protestation of affection ; impetuous longing for a speedy reunion - and impious defiance of 's mandate , and railing against he providence for have cast they lot asunder , and doom they both to the hateful bondage of alliance with those they could not love . he give a slight titter on see I change colour . I fold up the letter , rose , and return it to he , with no remark , but - ' thank you , I will take a lesson by it ! ' my little Arthur be stand between he knee , delightedly play with the bright , ruby ring on he finger . urge by a sudden , imperative impulse to deliver my son from that contaminate influence , I catch he up in my arm and carry he with I out of the room . not like this abrupt removal , the child begin to pout and cry . this be a new stab to my already torture heart . I would not let he go ; but , take he with I into the library , I shut the door , and , knee on the floor beside he , I embrace he , kiss he , weep over with he with passionate fondness . rather frightened than consol by this , he turn struggle from I , and cry out aloud for he papa . I release he from my arm , and never be more bitter tear than those that now conceal he from my blinded , burn eye . hear he cry , the father come to the room . I instantly turn away , lest he should see and misconstrue my emotion . he swore at I , and take the now pacify child away . it be hard that my little darling should love he more than I ; and that , when the well - being
being and culture of my son be all I have to live for , I should see my influence destroy by one whose selfish affection be more injuriious than the coldest indifference or the harshest tyranny could be . if I , for he good , deny he some trifling indulgence , he go to he father , and the latter , in spite of he selfish indolence , will even give himself some trouble to meet the child 's desire : if I attempt to curb he will , or look gravely on he for some act of childish disobedience , he know he other parent will smile and take he part against I . thus , not only have I the father 's spirit in the son to contend against , the germ of he evil tendency to search out and eradicate , and he corrupt intercourse and example in after - life to counteract , but already he counteract my arduous labour for the child 's advantage , destroy my influence over he tender mind , and rob I of he very love ; I have no earthly hope but this , and he seem to take a diabolical delight in tear it away . but it be wrong to despair ; I will remember the counsel of the inspire writer to he ' that feareth the and obeyeth the voice of he servant , that sitteth in darkness and hath no light ; let he trust in the name of the , and stay upon he ! ' 20th , 1825 . - another year be past ; and I be weary of this life . and yet I can not wish to leave it : whatever affliction assail I here , I can not wish to go and leave my darling in this dark and wick world alone , without a friend to guide he through its weary maze , to warn he of its thousand snare , and guard he from the peril that beset he on every hand . I be not well fitte to be he only companion , I know ; but there be no other to supply my place . I be too grave to minister to he amusement and enter into he infantile sport as a nurse or a mother ought to do , and often he burst of gleeful merriment trouble and alarm I ; I see in they he father 's spirit and temperament , and I tremble for the consequence ; and too often damp the innocent mirth I ought to share . that father , on the contrary , have no weight of sadness on he mind ; be trouble with no fear , no scruple concern he son 's future welfare ; and at evening especially , the time when the child see he the most and the oftenest , he be always particularly jocund and open - hear : ready to laugh and to jest with anything or anybody but I , and I be particularly silent and sad : therefore , of course , the child dote upon he seemingly joyous amusing , ever - indulgent papa , and will at any time gladly exchange my company for he . this disturb I greatly ; not so much for the sake of my son 's affection ( though I do prize that highly , and though I feel it be my right , and know I have do much to earn it ) as for that influence over he which , for he own advantage , I would strive to purchase and retain , and which for very spite he father delights to rob I of , and , from motives of mere idle egotism , be pleased to win to himself ; make no use of it but to torment I and ruin the child . my only consolation be , that he spend comparatively little of he time at home , and , during the month he pass in or elsewhere , I have a chance of recovere the ground I have lost , and overcome with good the evil he have wrotch by he wilful mismanagement . but then it be a bitter trial to behold he , on he return , do he utmost to subvert my labour and transform my innocent , affectionate , tractable darling into a selfish , disobedient , and mischievous boy ; thereby prepare the soil for those vice he have so successfully cultivate in he own pervert nature . happily , there be none of 's ' friend ' invite to last autumn : he take himself off to visit some of they instead . I wish he would always do so , and I wish he friend be numerous and love enough to keep he amongst they all the year round . , considerably to my annoyance , do not go with he ; but I think I have do with that gentleman at last . for seven or eight month he behave so remarkably well , and manage so skilfully too , that I be almost completely off my guard , and be really begin to look upon he as a friend , and even to treat he as such , with certain prudent restriction ( which I deem scarcely necessary ) ; when , presum upon my unsuspecting kindness , he think he might venture to overstep the bounds of decent moderation and propriety that have so long restrain he . it be on a pleasant evening at the close of : I be wander in the park , and he , on see I there as he ride past , make bold to enter and approach I , dismount and leave he horse at the gate . this be the first time he have venture to come within its inclosure since I have be leave alone , without the
the sanction of he mother 's or sister 's company , or at least the excuse of a message from they . but he manage to appear so calm and easy , so respectful and self - possess in he friendliness , that , though a little surprised , I be neither alarme nor offend at the unusual liberty , and he walk with I under the ash -tree and by the water - side , and talk , with considerable animation , good taste , and intelligence , on many subject , before I begin to think about get rid of he . then , after a pause , during which we both stood gaze on the calm , blue water - I revolve in my mind the best means of politely dismiss my companion , he , no doubt , ponder other matter equally alien to the sweet sight and sound that alone be present to he sense , - he suddenly electrify I by begin , in a peculiar tone , low , soft , but perfectly distinct , to pour forth the most unequivocal expression of earnest and passionate love ; plead he cause with all the bold yet artful eloquence he could summon to he aid . but I cut short he appeal , and repulse he so determinately , so decidedly , and with such a mixture of scornful indignation , tempere with cool , dispassionate sorrow and pity for he benighted mind , that he withdraw , astonished , mortify , and discomfort ; and , a few day after , I hear that he have depart for . he return , however , in eight or nine week , and do not entirely keep aloon from I , but comport himself in so remarkable a manner that he quick - sighted sister could not fail to notice the change . ' what have you do to , ? ' say she one morning , when I have call at the , and he have just leave the room after exchange a few word of the coldest civility . ' he have be so extremely ceremonious and stately of late , I can not imagine what it be all about , unless you have desperately offend he . tell I what it be , that I may be you mediator , and make you friend again . ' 'I have do nothing willingly to offend he , ' say I . ' if he be offend , he can best tell you himself what it be about . ' 'I will ask he , ' cry the giddy girl , spring up and put she head out of the window : 'he be only in the - ! ' 'no , no , ! you will seriously displease I if you do ; and I shall leave you immediately , and not come again for month - perhaps year . ' ' do you call , ? ' say she brother , approach the window from without . ' yes ; I want to ask you - ' ' good - morning , , ' say I , talk she hand and give it a severe squeeze . 'to ask you , ' continue she , 'too get I a rose for . ' he depart . ' . , ' she exclaim , turn to I and still hold I fast by the hand , 'I be quite shocked at you - you be just as angry , and distant , and cold as he be : and I be determine you shall be as good friend as ever before you go . ' ' Esther , how can you be so rude ! ' cry , who be seat gravely knitt in she easy - chair . ' surely , you never will learn to conduct yourself like a lady ! ' ' well , mamma , you say yourself - ' but the young lady be silence by the uplifted finger of she mamma , accompany with a very stern shake of the head . ' be not she cross ? ' whisper she to I ; but , before I could add my share of reproof , reappear at the window with a beautiful moss - rise in he hand . ' Here , Esther , I have bring you the rose , ' say he , extend it towards she . ' give it she yourself , you blockhead ! ' cry she , recoil with a spring from between we . ' . would rather receive it from you , ' reply he , in a very serious tone , but lower he voice that he mother might not hear . he sister take the rose and give it to I . ' my brother 's compliment , , and he hope you and he will come to a better understanding by - and - by . will that do , ? ' add the saucy girl , turn to he and put she arm round he neck , as he stand lean upon the sill of the window - 'or should I have say that you be sorry you be so touchy ? or that you hope she will pardon you offence ? ' ' you silly girl ! you do not know what you be talk about , ' reply he gravely . ' indeed I do not : for I be quite in the dark ! ' ' now , , ' interpose , who , if equally benight on the subject of we estrangement , see at least that she daughter be behave very improperly , ' I must insist upon you leave the room ! ' ' pray do not , , for I be go to leave it myself , ' say I , and immediately make my adieux . about a
a week after bring he sister to see I . he conduct himself , at first , with he usual cold , distant , half - stately , half - melancholy , altogether injure air ; but make no remark upon it this time : she have evidently be school into better manners . she talk to I , and laugh and rom with little , she love and love playmate . he , somewhat to my discomfort , entice she from the room to have a run in the hall , and thence into the garden . I get up to stir the fire . ask if I feel cold , and shut the door - a very unseasonable piece of officiousness , for I have meditate follow the noisy playfellow if they do not speedily return . he then take the liberty of walk up to the fire himself , and ask I if I be aware that be now at the seat of , and likely to continue there some time . ' no ; but it be no matter ,' I answer carelessly ; and if my cheek glow like fire , it be rather at the question than the information it convey . ' you do not object to it ? ' he say . ' not at all , if like he company . ' ' you have no love left for he , then ? ' ' not the least . ' 'I know that - I know you be too high - minded and pure in you own nature to continue to regard one so utterly false and pollute with any feeling but those of indignation and scornful abhorrence ! ' ' be he not you friend ? ' say I , turn my eye from the fire to he face , with perhaps a slight touch of those feeling he assign to another . ' he be , ' reply he , with the same calm gravity as before ; ' but do not wrong I by suppose that I could continue my friendship and esteem to a man who could so infamously , so impiously forsake and injure one so transcendently - well , I will not speak of it . but tell I , do you never think of revenge ? ' ' revenge ! no - what good would that do ? - it would make he no better , and I no happier . ' 'I do not know how to talk to you , , ' say he , smile ; ' you be only half a woman - you nature must be half human , half angelic . such goodness overawe I ; I do not know what to make of it . ' ' then , sir , I fear you must be very much worse than you should be , if I , a mere ordinary mortal , am , by you own confession , so vastly you superior ; and since there exist so little sympathy between we , I think we have better each look out for some more congenial companion . ' and forthwill move to the window , I begin to look out for my little son and he gay young friend . ' no , I be the ordinary mortal , I maintain , ' reply . 'I will not allow myself to be worse than my fellows ; but you , Madam - I equally maintain there be nobody like you . but be you happy ? ' he ask in a serious tone . 'as happy as some other , I suppose . ' ' be you as happy as you desire to be ? ' ' no one be so blest as that come to on this side eternity . ' ' one thing I know , ' return he , with a deep sad sigh ; ' you be immeasurably happier than I be . ' 'I be very sorry for you , then ,' I could not help reply . ' be you , indeed ? no , for if you be you would be glad to relieve I . ' ' and so I should if I could do so without injure myself or any other . ' ' and can you suppose that I should wish you to injure yourself ? no : on the contrary , it be you own happiness I long for more than mine . you be miserable now , , ' continue he , look I boldly in the face . ' you do not complain , but I see - and feel - and know that you be miserable - and must remain so as long as you keep those wall of impenetrable ice about you still warm and palpitat heart ; and I be miserable , too . Deign to smile on I and I be happy : trust I , and you shall be happy also , for if you be a woman I can make you so - and I will do it in spite of yourself ! ' he mutter between he tooth ; ' and as for other , the question be between ourselves alone : you can not injure you husband , you know , and no one else have any concern in the matter . ' 'I have a son , , and you have a mother , ' say I , retire from the window , whither he have follow I . ' they need not know ,' he begin ; but before anything more could be say on either side , and re-enter the room . the former glance at 's flushed , excited countenance , and then at mine - a little flushed and excit too , I daresay , though from far different cause . she must have think we have be quarrell desperately ,
, and be evidently perplex and disturb at the circumstance ; but she be too polite or too much afraid of she brother 's anger to refer to it . she seat herself on the sofa , and put back she bright , golden ringlet , that be scatter in wild profusion over she face , she immediately begin to talk about the garden and she little playfellow , and continue to chatter away in she usual strain till she brother summon she to depart . ' if I have speak too warmly , forgive I ,' he murmure on take he leave , 'or I shall never forgive myself . ' smile and glance at I : I merely bow , and she countenance fell . she think it a poor return for 's generous concession , and be disappointed in she friend . poor child , she little know the world she live in ! have not a opportunity of meet I again in private for several week after this ; but when he do meet I there be less of pride and more of touching melancholy in he manner than before . oh , how he annoye I ! I be oblige at last almost entirely to remit my visit to the , at the expense of deeply offend and seriously afflict poor , who really value my society for want of better , and who ought not to suffer for the fault of she brother . but that indefatigable foe be not yet vanquish : he seem to be always on the watch . I frequently see he ride lingeringly past the premise , look searchingly round he as he go - or , if I do not , do . that sharp - sight woman soon guess how matter stand between we , and descry the enemy 's movement from she elevation at the nursery - window , she would give I a quiet intimation if she see I prepare for a walk when she have reason to believe he be about , or to think it likely that he would meet or overtake I in the way I mean to traverse . I would then defer my ramble , or confine myself for that day to the park and garden , or , if the propose excursion be a matter of importance , such as a visit to the sick or afflict , I would take with I , and then I be never molest . but one mild , sunshiny day , early in , I have venture forth alone to visit the village school and a few of the poor tenant , and on my return I be alarme at the clatter of a horse 's foot behind I , approach at a rapid , steady trot . there be no stile or gap at hand by which I could escape into the field , so I walk quietly on , say to myself , ' it may not be he after all ; and if it be , and if he do annoy I , it shall be for the last time , I be determined , if there be power in word and look against cool impudence and mawkish sentimentality so inexhaustible as he . ' the horse soon overtake I , and be rein up close beside I . it be . he greet I with a smile intend to be soft and melancholy , but he triumphant satisfaction at have catch I at last so shone through that it be quite a failure . after briefly answer he salutation and inquire after the ladie at the , I turn away and walk on ; but he follow and keep he horse at my side : it be evident he intend to be my companion all the way . ' well ! I do not much care . if you want another rebuff , take it - and welcome , ' be my inward remark . ' now , sir , what next ? ' this question , though unspoken , be not long unanswered ; after a few passing observation upon indifferent subject , he begin in solemn tone the follow appeal to my humanity :- ' it will be four year next since I first see you , - you may have forget the circumstance , but I never can . I admire you then most deeply , but I da not love you . in the follow autumn I see so much of you perfection that I could not fail to love you , though I da not show it . for upward of three year I have endure a perfect martyrdom . from the anguish of suppress emotions , intense and fruitless longing , silent sorrow , crush hope , and trample affections , I have suffer more than I can tell , or you imagine - and you be the cause of it , and not altogether the innocent cause . my youth be waste away ; my prospect be darken ; my life be a desolate blank ; I have no rest day or night : I be become a burden to myself and other , and you might save I by a word - a glance , and will not do it - be this right ? ' ' in the first place , I do not believe you , ' answer I ; 'in the second , if you will be such a fool , I can not hinder it . ' ' if you affect , ' reply he , earnestly , 'to regard as folly the best , the strongest , the most godlike impulse of we nature , I do not believe you . I know you be not the heartless , icy be you pretend to be - you have a heart once , and give it to
to you husband . when you find he utterly unworthy of the treasure , you reclaim it ; and you will not pretend that you love that sensual , earthly - minded profligate so deeply , so devotedly , that you can never love another ? I know that there be feeling in you nature that have never yet be call forth ; I know , too , that in you present neglect lonely state you be and must be miserable . you have it in you power to raise two human being from a state of actual suffering to such unspeakable beatitude as only generous , noble , self - forget love can give ( for you can love I if you will ) ; you may tell I that you scorn and detest I , but , since you have set I the example of plain speak , I will answer that I do not believe you . but you will not do it ! you choose rather to leave we miserable ; and you coolly tell I it be the will of that we should remain so . you may call this religion , but I call it wild fanaticism ! ' ' there be another life both for you and for I , ' say I . ' if it be the will of that we should sow in tear now , it be only that we may reap in joy hereafter . it be he will that we should not injure other by the gratification of we own earthly passion ; and you have a mother , and sister , and friend who would be seriously injure by you disgrace ; and I , too , have friend , whose peace of mind shall never be sacrificed to my enjoyment , or yours either , with my consent ; and if I be alone in the world , I have still my and my religion , and I would sooner die than disgrace my call and break my faith with heaven to obtain a few brief year of false and fleeting happiness - happiness sure to end in misery even here - for myself or any other ! ' ' there need be no disgrace , no misery or sacrifice in any quarter , ' persist he . 'I do not ask you to leave you home or defy the world 's opinion . ' but I need not repeat all he argument . I refut they to the best of my power ; but that power be provokingly small , at the moment , for I be too much flurry with indignation - and even shame - that he should thus dare to address I , to retain sufficient command of thought and language to enable I adequately to contend against he powerful sophistry . find , however , that he could not be silence by reason , and even covertly exult in he see advantage , and venture to deride those assertion I have not the coolness to prove , I change my course and try another plan . ' do you really love I ? ' say I , seriously , pause and look he calmly in the face . ' do I love you ! ' cry he . ' truly ? ' I demand . he countenance brighten ; he think he triumph be at hand . he commence a passionate protestation of the truth and fervour of he attachment , which I cut short by another question :- ' but be it not a selfish love ? have you enough disinterest affection to enable you to sacrifice you own pleasure to mine ? ' 'I would give my life to serve you . ' 'I do not want you life ; but have you enough real sympathy for my affliction to induce you to make a effort to relieve they , at the risk of a little discomfort to yourself ? ' ' try I , and see . ' ' if you have , never mention this subject again . you can not recur to it in any way without double the weight of those suffering you so feelingly deplore . I have nothing leave I but the solace of a good conscience and a hopeful trust in heaven , and you labour continually to rob I of these . if you persist , I must regard you as my deadliest foe . ' ' but hear I a moment - ' ' no , sir ! you say you would give you life to serve I ; I only ask you silence on one particular point . I have speak plainly ; and what I say I mean . if you torment I in this way any more , I must conclude that you protestation be entirely false , and that you hate I in you heart as fervently as you profess to love I ! ' he bit he lip , and bend he eye upon the ground in silence for a while . ' then I must leave you , ' say he at length , look steadily upon I , as if with the last hope of detect some token of irrepressible anguish or dismay awaken by those solemn word . ' I must leave you . I can not live here , and be for ever silent on the all - absorb subject of my thought and wish . ' ' Formerly , I believe , you spend but little of you time at home ,' I answer ; ' it will do you no harm to absent yourself again , for a while - if that be really necessary . ' ' if that be really possible ,' he mutter ; ' and can you bid I go so coolly ? do you really wish it ? ' ' most certainly I do
do . if you can not see I without torment I as you have lately do , I would gladly say farewell and never see you more . ' he make no answer , but , bend from he horse , hold out he hand towards I . I look up at he face , and see therein such a look of genuine agony of soul , that , whether bitter disappointment , or wounded pride , or linger love , or burn wrath be uppermost , I could not hesitate to put my hand in he as frankly as if I bay a friend farewell . he grasp it very hard , and immediately put spur to he horse and gallop away . very soon after , I learn that he be go to , where he still be ; and the longer he stay there the better for I . I thank for this deliverance ! 20th , 1826 . - the fifth anniversary of my wedding - day , and , I trust , the last I shall spend under this roof . my resolution be form , my plan concoct , and already partly put in execution . my conscience do not blame I , but while the purpose ripen let I beguile a few of these long winter evening in state the case for my own satisfaction : a dreary amusement enough , but have the air of a useful occupation , and be pursue as a task , it will suit I better than a lighter one . in , be again alive with a party of lady and gentleman ( so call ) , consiste of the same individual as those invite the year before last , with the addition of two or three other , among whom be and she younger daughter . the gentleman and be invite for the pleasure and convenience of the host ; the other lady , I suppose , for the sake of appearance , and to keep I in check , and make I discreet and civil in my demeanour . but the lady stay only three week ; the gentleman , with two exception , above two month : for they hospitable entertainer be loth to part with they and be leave alone with he bright intellect , he stainless conscience , and he love and love wife . on the day of 's arrival , I follow she into she chamber , and plainly tell she that , if I find reason to believe that she still continue she criminal connection with , I should think it my absolute duty to inform she husband of the circumstance - or awake he suspicions at least - however painful it might be , or however dreadful the consequence . she be start at first by the declaration , so unexpected , and so determinately yet calmly deliver ; but rally in a moment , she coolly reply that , if I see anything at all reprehensible or suspicious in she conduct , she would freely give I leave to tell he lordship all about it . will to be satisfied with this , I leave she ; and certainly I see nothing thenceforth particularly reprehensible or suspicious in she demeanour towards she host ; but then I have the other guest to attend to , and I do not watch they narrowly - for , to confess the truth , I fear to see anything between they . I no longer regard it as any concern of mine , and if it be my duty to enlighten , it be a painful duty , and I dread to be call to perform it . but my fear be brotch to a end in a manner I have not anticipat . one evening , about a fortnight after the visitor 's arrival , I have retire into the library to snatch a few minute ' respite from force cheerfulness and wearisome discourse , for after so long a period of seclusion , dreary indeed as I have often find it , I could not always bear to be do violence to my feeling , and goad my power to talk , and smile and listen , and play the attentive hostess , or even the cheerful friend : I have just ensconce myself within the bow of the window , and be look out upon the west , where the darkening hill rose sharply define against the clear amber light of evening , that gradually blend and fad away into the pure , pale blue of the upper sky , where one bright star be shine through , as if to promise - ' when that die light be go , the world will not be leave in darkness , and they who trust in , whose mind be unbecloude by the mist of unbelief and sin , be never wholly comfortless , ' - when I hear a hurried step approach , and enter . this room be still he favourite resort . he fling the door to with unusual violence , and cast he hat aside regardless where it fall . what could be the matter with he ? he face be ghastly pale ; he eye be fix upon the ground ; he tooth clench : he forehead glisten with the dew of agony . it be plain he know he wrongs at last ! Unconscious of my presence , he begin to pace the room in a state of fearful agitation , violently wringe he hand and uttere low groan or incoherent ejaculation . I make a movement to let he know that he be not alone ; but he be too preoccupied to notice it . perhaps , while he back be towards I , I might cross the room and slip away unobserved . I rise to make the attempt , but
but then he perceive I . he start and stand still a moment ; then wip he streaming forehead , and , advanc towards I , with a kind of unnatural composure , say in a deep , almost sepulchral tone , - ' . , I must leave you to -morrow . ' 'to - morrow ! ' I repeat . 'I do not ask the cause . ' ' you know it then , and you can be so calm ! ' say he , survey I with profound astonishment , not unmingle with a kind of resentful bitterness , as it appear to I . 'I have so long be aware of - ' I pause in time , and add , 'on my husband 's character , that nothing shock I . ' ' but this - how long have you be aware of this ? ' demand he , lay he clench hand on the table beside he , and look I keenly and fixedly in the face . I feel like a criminal . ' not long ,' I answer . ' you know it ! ' cry he , with bitter vehemence - ' and you do not tell I ! you help to deceive I ! ' 'My lord , I do not help to deceive you . ' ' then why do you not tell I ? ' ' because I know it would be painful to you . I hope she would return to she duty , and then there would be no need to harrow you feeling with such - ' 'O ! how long have this be go on ? how long have it be , ? - tell I - I must know ! ' exclaim , with intense and fearful eagerness . ' two year , I believe . ' ' great heaven ! and she have du I all this time ! ' he turn away with a suppress groan of agony , and pace the room again in a paroxysm of renew agitation . my heart smote I ; but I would try to conseal he , though I know not how to attempt it . ' she be a wicked woman ,' I say . ' she have basely deceive and betray you . she be as little worthy of you regret as she be of you affection . let she injure you no further ; abstract yourself from she , and stand alone . ' ' and you , , ' say he sternly , arrest himself , and turn round upon I , ' you have injure I too by this ungenerous concealment ! ' there be a sudden revulsion in my feeling . something rise within I , and urge I to resent this harsh return for my heartfelt sympathy , and defend myself with answering severity . happily , I do not yield to the impulse . I see he anguish as , suddenly smit he forehead , he turn abruptly to the window , and , look upward at the placid sky , murmure passionately , , that I might die ! ' - and feel that to add one drop of bitterness to that already overflowe cup would be ungenerous indeed . and yet I fear there be more coldness than gentleness in the quiet tone of my reply :- 'I might offer many excuse that some would admit to be valid , but I will not attempt to enumerate they - ' 'I know they , ' say he hastily : ' you would say that it be no business of yours : that I ink to have take care of myself ; that if my own blindness have lead I into this pit of hell , I have no right to blame another for give I credit for a larger amount of sagacity than I possess - ' 'i confess I be wrong , ' continue I , without regard this bitter interruption ; ' but whether want of courage or mistaken kindness be the cause of my error , I think you blame I too severely . I tell two week ago , the very hour she come , that I should certainly think it my duty to inform you if she continue to deceive you : she give I full liberty to do so if I should see anything reprehensible or suspicious in she conduct ; I have see nothing ; and I trust she have alte she course . ' he continue gaze from the window while I speak , and do not answer , but , sting by the recollection my word awaken , stampe he foot upon the floor , ground he tooth , and corrugate he brow , like one under the influence of acute physical pain . ' it be wrong , it be wrong ! ' he mutter at length . ' nothing can excuse it ; nothing can ato for it , - for nothing can recall those year of curse credulity ; nothing obliterate they ! - nothing , nothing ! ' he repeat in a whisper , whose despair bitterness preclude all resentment . ' when I put the case to myself , I own it be wrong ,' I answer ; ' but I can only now regret that I do not see it in this light before , and that , as you say , nothing can recall the past . ' something in my voice or in the spirit of this answer seem to alter he mood . turn towards I , and attentively survey my face by the dim light , he say , in a milder tone than he have yet employ , - ' you , too , have suffer , I suppose . ' 'I suffer much , at first . ' ' when be that ? '
' ' two year ago ; and two year hence you will be as calm as I be now , and far , far happier , I trust , for you be a man , and free to act as you please . ' something like a smile , but a very bitter one , cross he face for a moment . ' you have not be happy , lately ? ' he say , with a kind of effort to regain composure , and a determination to waive the further discussion of he own calamity . ' happy ? ' I repeat , almost provoke at such a question . ' could I be so , with such a husband ? ' 'I have notice a change in you appearance since the first year of you marriage , ' pursue he : 'I observe it to - to that infernal demon ,' he mutter between he tooth ; ' and he say it be you own sour temper that be eat away you bloom : it be make you old and ugly before you time , and have already make he fireside as comfortless as a convent cell . you smile , ; nothing move you . I wish my nature be as calm as yours . ' ' my nature be not originally calm , ' say I . 'I have learn to appear so by dint of hard lesson and many repeat effort . ' at this juncture burst into the room . ' Hallo , ! ' he begin - 'Oh ! I beg you pardon ,' he exclaim on see I . 'I do not know it be a Tete- - . Cheer up , man ,' he continue , give a thump on the back , which cause the latter to recoil from he with look of ineffable disgust and irritation . ' come , I want to speak with you a bit . ' ' , then . ' ' but I be not sure it would be quite agreeable to the lady what I have to say . ' ' then it would not be agreeable to I , ' say he lordship , turn to leave the room . ' yes , it would , ' cry the other , follow he into the hall . ' if you have the heart of a man , it would be the very ticket for you . it be just this , my lad ,' he continue , rather lower he voice , but not enough to prevent I from hear every word he say , though the half - close door stood between we . 'I think you be a ill - use man - nay , now , do not flare up ; I do not want to offend you : it be only my rough way of talk . I must speak right out , you know , or else not at all ; and I be come - stop now ! let I explain - I be come to offer you my service , for though be my friend , he be a devilish scamp , as we all know , and I will be you friend for the nonce . I know what it be you want , to make matter straight : it be just to exchange a shot with he , and then you will feel yourself all right again ; and if a accident happen - why , that will be all right too , I daresay , to a desperate fellow like you . come now , give I you hand , and do not look so black upon it . name time and place , and I will manage the rest . ' ' that , ' answer the more low , deliberate voice of , 'is just the remedy my own heart , or the devil within it , suggest - to meet he , and not to part without blood . whether I or he should fall , or both , it would be a inexpressible relief to I , if - ' ' just so ! well then , - ' ' no ! ' exclaim he lordship , with deep , determined emphasis . ' though I hate he from my heart , and should rejoice at any calamity that could befall he , I will leave he to ; and though I abhor my own life , I will leave that , too , to that give it . ' ' but you see , in this case , ' plead - 'I will not hear you ! ' exclaim he companion , hastily turn away . ' not another word ! I have enough to do against the fiend within I . ' ' then you be a white - livere fool , and I wash my hand of you , ' grumble the tempter , as he swing himself round and depart . ' right , right , , ' cry I , dart out and clasp he burn hand , as he be move away to the stair . 'I begin to think the world be not worthy of you ! ' not understand this sudden ebullition , he turn upon I with a stare of gloomy , bewilder amazement , that make I asham of the impulse to which i have yield ; but soon a more humanised expression dawn upon he countenance , and before I could withdraw my hand , he press it kindly , while a gleam of genuine feeling flash from he eyes as he murmure , ' help we both ! ' 'Amen ! ' respond I ; and we part . I return to the drawing - room , where , doubtless , my presence would be expect by most , desire by one or two . in the
the ant - room be , rail against 's poltroonery before a select audience , viz . , who be lounge against the table , exult in he own treacherous villainy , and laugh he victim to scorn , and , stand by , quietly rubb he hand and chuckl with fiendish satisfaction . in the drawing - room I find , evidently in no very enviable state of mind , and struggle hard to conceal she discomposure by a overstrained affectation of unusual cheerfulness and vivacity , very uncalled - for under the circumstance , for she have herself give the company to understand that she husband have receive unpleasant intelligence from home , which necessitate he immediate departure , and that he have suffer it so to bother he mind that it have bring on a bilious headache , owe to which , and the preparations he judge necessary to hasten he departure , she believe they would not have the pleasure of see he to - night . however , she assert , it be only a business concern , and so she do not intend it should trouble she . she be just say this as I enter , and she dart upon I such a glance of hardihood and defiance as at once astonished and revolt I . ' but I be troublead , ' continue she , ' and vex too , for I think it my duty to accompany he lordship , and of course I be very sorry to part with all my kind friend so unexpectedly and so soon . ' ' and yet , , ' say , who be sit beside she , never see you in better spirit in my life . ' ' precisely so , my love : because i wish to make the best of you society , since it appear this be to be the last night I be to enjoy it till heaven know when ; and I wish to leave a good impression on you all , ' - she glance round , and see she aunt 's eye fix upon she , rather too scrutinizingly , as she probably think , she start up and continue : 'to which end I will give you a song - shall I , aunt ? shall I , ? shall I lady and gentlemen all ? very well . I will do my best to amuse you . ' she and occupy the apartment next to mine . I know not how she pass the night , but I lay awake the greater part of it listen to he heavy step pace monotonously up and down he dressing - room , which be nearest my chamber . once I hear he pause and throw something out of the window with a passionate ejaculation ; and in the morning , after they be go , a keen - blad clasp - knife be find on the grass - plot below ; a razor , likewise , be snap in two and thrust deep into the cinder of the grate , but partially corrod by the decaying ember . so strong have be the temptation to end he miserable life , so determine he resolution to resist it . my heart b for he as I lay listen to that ceaseless tread . Hitherto I have think too much of myself , too little of he : now I forget my own affliction , and think only of he ; of the ardent affection so miserably waste , the fond faith so cruelly betrayed , the - no , I will not attempt to enumerate he wrongs - but I hate he wife and my husband more intensely than ever , and not for my sake , but for he . they depart early in the morning , before any one else be down , except myself , and just as I be leave my room be descende to take he place in the carriage , where he lady be already ensconce ; and ( or , as I prefer call he , for the other be my child 's name ) have the gratuitous insolence to come out in he dressing - gow to bid he ' friend ' good - by . ' what , go already , ! ' say he . ' well , good - morning . ' he smilingly offer he hand . I think the other would have knock he down , have he not instinctively start back before that bony fist quiver with rage and clench till the knuckle gleam white and glisten through the skin . look upon he with a countenance livid with furious hate , mutter between he close teeth a deadly execration he would not have utter have he be calm enough to choose he word , and depart . 'I call that a unchristian spirit now , ' say the villain . ' but I would never give up a old friend for the sake of a wife . you may have mine if you like , and I call that handsome ; I can do no more than offer restitution , can I ? ' but have gain the bottom of the stair , and be now cross the hall ; and , lean over the banister , call out , ' give my love to ! and I wish you both a happy journey , ' and withdraw , laugh , to he chamber . he subsequently express himself rather glad she be gone . ' she be so deuce imperious and exact , ' say he . ' now I shall be my own man again , and feel rather more at my ease . ' my greatest source of uneasiness , in this time of trial , be my son , whom he father and he father 's friend delighte
delighte to encourage in all the embryo vice a little child can show , and to instruct in all the evil habit he could acquire - in a word , to ' make a man of he ' be one of they staple amusement ; and I need say no more to justify my alarm on he account , and my determination to deliver he at any hazard from the hand of such instructor . I first attempt to keep he always with I , or in the nursery , and give particular injunction never to let he come down to dessert as long as these ' gentleman ' stay ; but it be no use : these order be immediately countermand and overrule by he father ; he be not go to have the little fellow mo to death between a old nurse and a curse fool of a mother . so the little fellow come down every evening in spite of he cross mamma , and learn to tipple wine like papa , to swear like , and to have he own way like a man , and send mamma to the when she try to prevent he . to see such thing do with the roguish naivete of that pretty little child , and hear such thing speak by that small infantile voice , be as peculiarly piquant and irresistibly droll to they as it be inexpressibly distressing and painful to I ; and when he have set the table in a roar he would look round delightedly upon they all , and add he shrill laugh to theirs . but if that beam blue eye rest on I , it be light would vanish for a moment , and he would say , in some concern , ' , why do not you laugh ? make she laugh , papa - she never will . ' hence be I oblige to stay among these human brute , watch a opportunity to get my child away from they instead of leave they immediately after the removal of the cloth , as I should always otherwise have do . he be never willing to go , and I frequently have to carry he away by force , for which he think I very cruel and unjust ; and sometimes he father would insist upon my let he remain ; and then I would leave he to he kind friend , and retire to indulge my bitterness and despair alone , or to rack my brain for a remedy to this great evil . but here again I must do the justice to acknowledge that I never see he laugh at the child 's misdemeanour , nor hear he utter a word of encouragement to he aspiration after manly accomplishment . but when anything very extraordinary be say or do by the infant profligate , I notice , at time , a peculiar expression in he face that I could neither interpret nor define : a slight twitching about the muscle of the mouth ; a sudden flash in the eye , as he dart a sudden glance at the child and then at I : and then I could fancy there arise a gleam of hard , keen , sombre satisfaction in he countenance at the look of impotent wrath and anguish he be too certain to behold in mine . but on one occasion , when yoArthu have be behave particularly ill , and and he guest have be particularly provoke and insult to I in they encouragement of he , and I particularly anxious to get he out of the room , and on the very point of demean myself by a burst of uncontrollable passion - suddenly rise from he seat with a aspect of stern determination , lifte the child from he father 's knee , where he be sit half - tipsy , cock he head and laugh at I , and execrat I with word he little know the meaning of , hand he out of the room , and , set he down in the hall , hold the door open for I , gravely bow as I withdraw , and close it after I . I hear high word exchange between he and he already half - inebriate host as I depart , lead away my bewilder and disconcert boy . but this should not continue : my child must not be abandon to this corruption : better far that he should live in poverty and obscurity , with a fugitive mother , that in luxury and affluence with such a father . these guest might not be with we long , but they would return again : and he , the most injurious of the whole , he child 's worst enemy , would still remain . I could endure it for myself , but for my son it must be borne no longer : the world 's opinion and the feeling of my friend must be alike unheeded here , at least - alike unable to deter I from my duty . but where should I find a asylum , and how obtain subsistence for we both ? oh , I would take my precious charge at early dawn , take the coach to m -, flee to the port of -, cross the , and seek a quiet , humble home in , where I would support myself and he by the labour of my hand . the palette and the easel , my darling playmate once , must be my sober toil - fellow now . but be I sufficientely skilful as a artist to obtain my livelihood in a strange land , without friend and without recommendation ? no ; I must wait a little ; I must labour hard to improve my talent , and to produce something worth while as a specimen of my
my power , something to speak favourably for I , whether as a actual painter or a teacher . Brilliant success , of course , I do not look for , but some degree of security from positive failure be indispensable : I must not take my son to starve . and then I must have money for the journey , the passage , and some little to support we in we retreat in case I should be unsuccessful at first : and not too little either : for who could tell how long I might have to struggle with the indifference or neglect of other , or my own inexperience or inability to suit they taste ? what should I do then ? apply to my brother and explain my circumstance and my resolve to he ? no , no : even if I tell he all my grievance , which I should be very reluctant to do , he would be certain to disapprove of the step : it would seem like madness to he , as it would to my uncle and aunt , or to . no ; I must have patience and gather a hoard of my own . should be my only confidante - I think I could persuade she into the scheme ; and she should help I , first , to find out a picture - dealer in some distant town ; then , through she mean , I would privately sell what picture I have on hand that would do for such a purpose , and some of those I should thereafter paint . besides this , I would contrive to dispose of my jewel , not the family jewel , but the few I bring with I from home , and those my uncle give I on my marriage . a few month ' arduous toil might well be borne by I with such a end in view ; and in the interim my son could not be much more injured than he be already . have form this resolution , I immediately set to work to accomplish it , I might possibly have be induce to wax cool upon it afterwards , or perhaps to keep weigh the pro and con in my mind till the latter overbalance the former , and I be drive to relinquish the project altogether , or delay the execution of it to a indefinite period , have not something occur to confirm I in that determination , to which I still adhere , which I still think I do well to form , and shall do better to execute . since 's departure I have regard the library as entirely my own , a secure retreat at all hour of the day . none of we gentleman have the smallest pretension to a literary taste , except ; and he , at present , be quite contented with the newspaper and periodical of the day . and if , by any chance , he should look in here , I feel assure he would soon depart on see I , for , instead of become less cool and distant towards I , he have become decidedly more so since the departure of he mother and sister , which be just what I wish . here , then , I set up my easel , and here I work at my canva from daylight till dusk , with very little intermission , save when pure necessity , or my duty to little , call I away : for I still think proper to devote some portion of every day exclusively to he instruction and amusement . but , contrary to my expectation , on the third morning , while I be thus employ , do look in , and do not immediately withdraw on see I . he apologize for he intrusion , and say he be only come for a book ; but when he have get it , he condescende to cast a glance over my picture . be a man of taste , he have something to say on this subject as well as another , and have modestly comment on it , without much encouragement from I , he proceed to expatiate on the art in general . receive no encouragement in that either , he drop it , but do not depart . ' you do not give we much of you company , , ' observe he , after a brief pause , during which I go on coolly mix and tempere my colour ; ' and I can not wonder at it , for you must be heartily sick of we all . I myself be so thoroughly asham of my companion , and so weary of they irrational conversation and pursuit - now that there be no one to humanize they and keep they in check , since you have justly abandon we to we own device - that I think I shall presently withdraw from amongst they , probably within this week ; and I can not suppose you will regret my departure . ' he pause . I do not answer . ' probably ,' he add , with a smile , ' you only regret on the subject will be that I do not take all my companion along with I . I flatter myself , at time , that though among they I be not of they ; but it be natural that you should be glad to get rid of I . I may regret this , but I can not blame you for it . ' 'I shall not rejoice at you departure , for you can conduct yourself like a gentleman , ' say I , think it but right to make some acknowledgment for he good behaviour ; ' but I must confess I shall rejoice to bid adieu.
adieu. to the rest , inhospitable as it may appear . ' ' no one can blame you for such a avowal , ' reply he gravely : ' not even the gentleman themselves , I imagine . I will just tell you ,' he continue , as if actuate by a sudden resolution , ' what be say last night in the dining - room , after you leave we : perhaps you will not mind it , as you be so very philosophical on certain point ,' he add with a slight sneer . ' they be talk about and he delectable lady , the cause of whose sudden departure be no secret amongst they ; and she character be so well know to they all , that , nearly related to I as she be , I could not attempt to defend it . curse I ! ' he mutter , par parenthese , ' if I do not have vengeance for this ! if the villain must disgrace the family , must he blazon it abroad to every low - breed knave of he acquaintance ? I beg you pardon , . well , they be talk of these thing , and some of they remark that , as she be separate from she husband , he might see she again when he please . ' ' " thank you , " say he ; " I have have enough of she for the present : I will not trouble to see she , unless she come to I . " ' " then what do you mean to do , , when we be gone ? " say . " do you mean to turn from the error of you way , and be a good husband , a good father , and so forth ; as I do , when I get shut of you and all these rollicking devils you call you friend ? I think it be time ; and you wife be fifty time too good for you , you know - " ' and he add some praise of you , which you would not thank I for repeat , nor he for uttering ; proclaim it aloud , as he do , without delicacy or discrimination , in a audience where it seem profanation to utter you name : himself utterly incapable of understanding or apprecia you real excellence . , meanwhile , sit quietly drink he wine , - or look smilingly into he glass and offer no interruption or reply , till shoute out , - " do you hear I , man ? " ' " yes , go on , " say he . ' " Nay , I have do , " reply the other : " I only want to know if you intend to take my advice . " ' " what advice ? " ' " to turn over a new leaf , you double - dyed scoundrel , " shoute , " and beg you wife 's pardon , and be a good boy for the future . " ' " my wife ! what wife ? I have no wife , " reply , look innocently up from he glass , " or if I have , look you , gentlemen : I value she so highly that any one among you , that can fancy she , may have she and welcome : you may , by , and my bless into the bargain ! " 'i - hem - someone ask if he really mean what he say ; upon which he solemnly swore he do , and no mistake . what do you think of that , ? ' ask , after a short pause , during which i have felt he be keenly examine my half - avert face . 'I say , ' reply I , calmly , ' that what he prize so lightly will not be long in he possession . ' ' you can not mean that you will break you heart and die for the detestable conduct of a infamous villain like that ! ' ' by no means : my heart be too thoroughly dry to be break in a hurry , and I mean to live as long as I can . ' ' will you leave he then ? ' 'yes . ' ' when : and how ? ' ask he , eagerly . ' when I be ready , and how I can manage it most effectually . ' ' but you child ? ' 'my child go with I . ' ' he will not allow it . ' 'I shall not ask he . ' 'Ah , then , it be a secret flight you meditate ! but with whom , ? ' ' with my son : and possibly , he nurse . ' ' - and unprotected ! but where can you go ? what can you do ? he will follow you and bring you back . ' 'I have lay my plan too well for that . let I once get clear of , and I shall consider myself safe . ' advance one step towards I , look I in the face , and draw in he breath to speak ; but that look , that heighten colour , that sudden sparkle of the eye , make my blood rise in wrath : I abruptly turn away , and , snatch up my brush , begin to dash away at my canva with rather too much energy for the good of the picture . ' . , ' say he with bitter solemnity , ' you be cruel - cruel to I - cruel to yourself . ' ' , remember you promise . ' 'I must speak : my heart will burst if I do not ! I
I have be silent long enough , and you must hear I ! ' cry he , boldly intercept my retreat to the door . ' you tell I you owe no allegiance to you husband ; he openly declare himself weary of you , and calmly give you up to anybody that will take you ; you be about to leave he ; no one will believe that you go alone ; all the world will say , " she have leave he at last , and who can wonder at it ? can blame she , fewer still can pity he ; but who be the companion of she flight ? " thus you will have no credit for you virtue ( if you call it such ) : even you best friend will not believe in it ; because it be monstrous , and not to be credit but by those who suffer , from the effect of it , such cruel torment that they know it to be indeed reality . but what can you do in the cold , rough world alone ? you , a young and inexperienced woman , delicately nurture , and utterly - ' ' in a word , you would advise I to stay where I be , ' interrupt I . 'Well , I will see about it . ' ' by all mean , leave he ! ' cry he earnestly ; ' but not alone ! ! let I protect you ! ' ' never ! while heaven spare my reason , ' reply I , snatch away the hand he have presume to seize and press between he own . but he be in for it now ; he have fairly break the barrier : he be completely roused , and determi to hazard all for victory . 'I must not be deny ! ' exclaim he , vehemently ; and seize both my hand , he hold they very tight , but drop upon he knee , and look up in my face with a half - imploring , half - imperious gaze . ' you have no reason now : you be fly in the face of heaven 's decree . have desig I to be you comfort and protector - I feel it , I know it as certainly as if a voice from heaven declare , " ye twain shall be one flesh " - and you spurn I from you - ' ' let I go , ! ' say I , sternly . but he only tighten he grasp . ' let I go ! ' I repeat , quiver with indignation . he face be almost opposite the window as he knelt . with a slight start , I see he glance towards it ; and then a gleam of malicious triumph light up he countenance . look over my shoulder , I beheld a shadow just retire round the corner . ' that be , ' say he deliberately . ' he will report what he have see to and all the rest , with such embellishment as he think proper . he have no love for you , - no reverence for you sex , no belief in virtue , no admiration for its image . he will give such a version of this story as will leave no doubt at all about you character , in the mind of those who hear it . you fair fame be gone ; and nothing that I or you can say can ever retrieve it . but give I the power to protect you , and show I the villain that dare to insult ! ' ' no one have ever da to insult I as you be do now ! ' say I , at length release my hand , and recoil from he . 'I do not insult you , ' cry he : ' I worship you . you be my angel , my divinity ! I lay my power at you foot , and you must and shall accept they ! ' he exclaim , impetuously start to he foot . 'I will be you consoler and defender ! and if you conscience upbraid you for it , say I overcame you , and you could not choose but yield ! ' I never see a man go terribly excited . he precipitate himself towards I . I snatch up my palette - knife and hold it against he . this start he : he stand and gaze at I in astonishment ; I daresay I look as fierce and resolute as he . I move to the bell , and put my hand upon the cord . this tame he still more . with a half - authoritative , half - deprecat wave of the hand , he seek to deter I from ringing . ' stand off , then ! ' say I ; he step back . 'And listen to I . I do not like you ,' I continue , as deliberately and emphatically as I could , to give the greater efficacy to my word ; ' and if I be divorce from my husband , or if he be dead , I would not marry you . there now ! I hope you be satisfied . ' he face grow blanch with anger . 'I be satisfied , ' he reply , with bitter emphasis , ' that you be the most cold - hear , unnatural , ungrateful woman I ever yet beheld ! ' ' Ungrateful , sir ? ' ' Ungrateful . ' 'no , , I be not . for all the good you ever do I , or ever wish to do , I most sincerely thank you : for all the evil you have do I , and all you would have do ,
, I pray to pardon you , and make you of a better mind . ' here the door be thrown open , and . and appear without . the latter remain in the hall , busy with he ramrod and he gun ; the former walk in , and stand with he back to the fire , survey and I , particularly the former , with a smile of insupportable meaning , accompany as it be by the impudence of he brazen brow , and the sly , malicious , twinkle of he eye . ' well , sir ? ' say , interrogatively , and with the air of one prepare to stand on the defensive . ' well , sir , ' return he host . ' we want to know if you be at liberty to join we in a go at the pheasant , , ' interpose from without . ' come ! there shall be nothing shoot besides , except a puss or two ; I will vouch for that . ' do not answer , but walk to the window to collect he faculty . yoArthu utter a low whistle , and follow he with he eye . a slight flush of anger rise to 's cheek ; but in a moment he turn calmly round , and say carelessly : 'I come here to bid farewell to , and tell she I must go to - morrow . ' ' Humph ! you be mighty sudden in you resolution . what take you off so soon , may I ask ? ' ' business , ' return he , repell the other 's incredulous sneer with a glance of scornful defiance . ' very good , ' be the reply ; and walk away . Thereupon , gather he coat - lap under he arm , and set he shoulder against the mantel - piece , turn to I , and , address I in a low voice , scarcely above he breath , pour forth a volley of the vilest and grossest abuse it be possible for the imagination to conceive or the tongue to utter . I do not attempt to interrupt he ; but my spirit kindle within I , and when he have do , I reply , ' if you accusation be true , , how dare you blame I ? ' ' she have hit it , by ! ' cry , rear he gun against the wall ; and , step into the room , he take he precious friend by the arm , and attempt to drag he away . ' come , my lad ,' he mutter ; ' true or false , you 've no right to blame she , you know , nor he either ; after what you say last night . so come along . ' there be something implied here that I could not endure . ' dare you suspect I , ? ' say I , almost beside myself with fury . ' Nay , nay , I suspect nobody . it be all right , it be all right . so come along , , you blackguard . ' ' she can not deny it ! ' cry the gentleman thus address , grinn in mingled rage and triumph . ' she can not deny it if she life depend on it ! ' and mutter some more abusive language , he walk into the hall , and take up he hat and gun from the table . 'i scorn to justify myself to you ! ' say I . ' but you , ' turn to , ' if you presume to have any doubt on the subject , ask . ' at this they simultaneously burst into a rude laugh that make my whole frame tingle to the finger 's end . ' where be he ? I will ask he myself ! ' say I , advanc towards they . Suppresse a new burst of merriment , point to the outer door . it be half open . he brother - in - law be stand on the front without . ' , will you please to step this way ? ' say I . he turn and look at I in grave surprise . ' step this way , if you please ! ' I repeat , in so determine a manner that he could not , or do not choose to resist its authority . somewhat reluctantly he ascend the step and advance a pace or two into the hall . ' and tell those gentleman ,' I continue - ' these man , whether or not I yield to you solicitation . ' 'I do not understand you , . ' ' you do understand I , sir ; and I charge you , upon you honour as a gentleman ( if you have any ) , to answer truly . do I , or do I not ? ' ' no , ' mutter he , turn away . ' speak up , sir ; they can not hear you . do I grant you request ? ' you do not . ' ' no , I will be swear she do not , ' say , 'or he would never look so black . ' 'I be willing to grant you the satisfaction of a gentleman , , ' say , calmly address he host , but with a bitter sneer upon he countenance . ' go to the deuce ! ' reply the latter , with a impatient jerk of the head . withdraw with a look of cold disdain , say , - ' you know where to find I , should you feel disposed to send a friend . ' Mutter oath and curse be all the answer this intimation obtain . ' now , ,
, you see ! ' say . ' clear as the day . ' 'I do not care what he see , ' say I , 'or what he imagine ; but you , , when you hear my name bely and slander , will you defend it ? ' 'I will . ' I instantly depart and shut myself into the library . what could possess I to make such a request of such a man I can not tell ; but drown man catch at straw : they have drive I desperate between they ; I hardly know what I say . there be no other to preserve my name from be blacken and asperse among this nest of boon companion , and through they , perhaps , into the world ; and beside my abandoned wretch of a husband , the base , malignant , and the false villain , this boorish ruffian , coarse and brutal as he be , shine like a glow - worm in the dark , among its fellow worm . what a scene be this ! could I ever have imagine that I should be doom to bear such insult under my own roof - to hear such thing speak in my presence ; nay , speak to I and of I ; and by those who arrogate to themselve the name of gentleman ? and could I have imagine that I should have be able to endure it as calmly , and to repel they insult as firmly and as boldly as I have do ? a hardness such as this be teach by rough experience and despair alone . such thought as these chase one another through my mind , as I pace to and for the room , and long - oh , how I longe - to take my child and leave they now , without a hour 's delay ! but it could not be ; there be work before I : hard work , that must be do . ' then let I do it , ' say I , ' and lose not a moment in vain repining and idle chafing against my fate , and those who influence it . ' and conquer my agitation with a powerful effort , I immediately resume my task , and laboure hard all day . do depart on the morrow ; and I have never see he since . the other stay on for two or three week longer ; but I keep aloon from they as much as possible , and still continue my labour , and have continue it , with almost unabated ardour , to the present day . I soon acquaint with my design , confid all my motives and intention to she ear , and , much to my agreeable surprise , find little difficulty in persuade she to enter into my view . she be a sober , cautious woman , but she so hate she master , and so love she mistress and she nursling , that after several ejaculation , a few faint objection , and many tear and lamentation that I should be bring to such a pass , she applaude my resolution and consent to aid I with all she might : on one condition only : that she might share my exile : otherwise , she be utterly inexorable , regard it as perfect madness for I and to go alone . with touching generosity , she modestly offer to aid I with she little hoard of savings , hope I would 's excuse she for the liberty , but really , if I would do she the favour to accept it as a loan , she would be very happy . ' of course I could not think of such a thing ; but now , thank heaven , I have gather a little hoard of my own , and my preparation be so far advanced that I be look forward to a speedy emancipation . only let the stormy severity of this winter weather be somewhat abate , and then , some morning , will come down to a solitary breakfast - table , and perhaps be clamour through the house for he invisible wife and child , when they be some fifty mile on they way to the western world , or it may be more : for we shall leave he hour before the dawn , and it be not probable he will discover the loss of both until the day be far advanced . I be fully alive to the evil that may and must result upon the step I be about to take ; but I never waver in my resolution , because I never forget my son . it be only this morning , while I pursue my usual employment , he be sit at my foot , quietly play with the shred of canva I have throw upon the carpet ; but he mind be otherwise occupi , for , in a while , he look up wistfully in my face , and gravely ask , - ' , why be you wick ? ' ' who tell you I be wick , love ? ' ' . ' ' no , , never say so , I be certain . ' ' well , then , it be papa , ' reply he , thoughtfully . then , after a reflective pause , he add , ' at least , I will tell you how it be I get to know : when I be with papa , if I say mamma want I , or mamma say I be not to do something that he tell I to do , he always say , " be damned , " and say it be only wicked people that be damned . so , mamma , that be
be why I think you must be wick : and I wish you would not . ' ' my dear child , I be not . those be bad word , and wick people often say they of other better than themselves . those word can not make people be damne , nor show that they deserve it . will judge we by we own thought and deed , not by what other say about we . and when you hear such word speak , , remember never to repeat they : it be wicked to say such thing of other , not to have they say against you . ' ' then it be papa that be wicked , ' say he , ruefully . ' be wrong to say such thing , and you will be very wrong to imitate he now that you know better . ' ' what be imitate ? ' 'To do as he do . ' ' do he know better ? ' ' perhaps he do ; but that be nothing to you . ' ' if he do not , you ought to tell he , mamma. ' 'I have tell he . ' the little moralist pause and ponder . I try in vain to divert he mind from the subject . 'I be sorry papa 's wick , ' say he mournfully , at length , ' for I do not want he to go to hell . ' and so say he burst into tear . I consol he with the hope that perhaps he papa would alter and become good before he die -; but be it not time to deliver he from such a parent ? 10th , 1827 . - while write the above , yesterday evening , I sit in the drawing - room . be present , but , as I think , asleep on the sofa behind I . he have risen , however , unknown to I , and , actuate by some base spirit of curiosity , be look over my shoulder for I know not how long ; for when I have laid aside my pen , and be about to close the book , he suddenly place he hand upon it , and say , - ' with you leave , my dear , I will have a look at this , ' forcibly wrest it from I , and , draw a chair to the table , composedly sit down to examine it : turn back leaf after leaf to find a explanation of what he have read . Unluckily for I , he be more sober that night than he usually be at such a hour . of course I do not leave he to pursue this occupation in quiet : I make several attempt to snatch the book from he hand , but he hold it too firmly for that ; I upbraide he in bitterness and scorn for he mean and dishonourable conduct , but that have no effect upon he ; and , finally , I extinguish both the candle , but he only wheel round to the fire , and raise a blaze sufficient for he purpose , calmly continue the investigation . I have serious thought of get a pitcher of water and extinguish that light too ; but it be evident he curiosity be too keenly excit to be quench by that , and the more I manifest my anxiety to baffle he scrutiny , the greater would be he determination to persist in it besides it be too late . ' it seem very interesting , love , ' say he , lift he head and turn to where I stand , wringe my hand in silent rage and anguish ; ' but it be rather long ; I will look at it some other time ; and meanwhile I will trouble you for you key , my dear . ' ' what key ? ' ' the key of you cabinet , desk , drawer , and whatever else you possess , ' say he , rise and hold out he hand . 'I have not get they ,' I reply . the key of my desk , in fact , be at that moment in the lock , and the other be attach to it . ' then you must send for they , ' say he ; ' and if that old , , do not immediately deliver they up , she tramp bag and baggage tomorrow . ' ' she do not know where they be ,' I answer , quietly place my hand upon they , and take they from the desk , as I think , unobserve . 'I know , but I shall not give they up without a reason . ' ' and I know , too , ' say he , suddenly seize my close hand and rudely abstract they from it . he then take up one of the candle and relight it by thrust it into the fire . ' now , then ,' sneer he , 'we must have a confiscation of property . but , first , let we take a peep into the studio . ' and put the key into he pocket , he walk into the library . I follow , whether with the dim idea of prevent mischief , or only to know the worst , I can hardly tell . my painting material be lay together on the corner table , ready for to - morrow 's use , and only cover with a cloth . he soon spy they out , and put down the candle , deliberately proceed to cast they into the fire : palette , paint , bladder , pencil , brush , varnish : I see they all consum : the palette - knife snap in two
two , the oil and turpentine send hissing and roar up the chimney . he then ring the bell . ' , take those thing away , ' say he , point to the easel , canva , and stretcher ; ' and tell the housemaid she may kindle the fire with they : you mistress will not want they any more . ' pause aghast and look at I . ' take they away , , ' say I ; and he master mutter a oath . ' and this and all , sir ? ' say the astonished servant , refer to the half - finish picture . ' that and all , ' reply the master ; and the thing be clear away . then go up - stair . I do not attempt to follow he , but remain seat in the arm -chair , speechless , tearless , and almost motionless , till he return about half - a - hour after , and walk up to I , hold the candle in my face and pee into my eye with look and laughter too insult to be borne . with a sudden stroke of my hand I dash the candle to the floor . 'Hal - lo ! ' mutter he , start back ; ' she be the very devil for spite . do ever any mortal see such eye ? - they shine in the dark like a cat 's . oh , you be a sweet one ! ' so say , he gather up the candle and the candlestick . the former be break as well as extinguished , he ring for another . ' , you mistress have break the candle ; bring another . ' ' you expose yourself finely , ' observe I , as the man depart . 'I do not say I would break it , do I ? ' return he . he then throw my key into my lap , say , - ' there ! you will find nothing go but you money , and the jewel , and a few little trifle I think it advisable to take into my own possession , lest you mercantile spirit should be temp to turn they into gold . I have leave you a few sovereign in you purse , which I expect to last you through the month ; at all event , when you want more you will be so good as to give I a account of how that be spend . I shall put you upon a small monthly allowance , in future , for you own private expense ; and you need not trouble yourself any more about my concern ; I shall look out for a steward , my dear - I will not expose you to the temptation . and as for the household matter , . Greaves must be very particular in keep she account ; we must go upon a entirely new plan - ' ' what great discovery have you make now , ? have I attempt to defraud you ? ' ' not in money matter , exactly , it seem ; but it be best to keep out of the way of temptation . ' here enter with the candle , and there follow a brief interval of silence ; I sit still in my chair , and he stand with he back to the fire , silently triumph in my despair . ' and so , ' say he at length , ' you think to disgrase I , do you , by run away and turn artist , and support yourself by the labour of you hand , forsooth ? and you think to rob I of my son , too , and bring he up to be a dirty Yankee tradesman , or a low , beggarly painter ? ' ' yes , to obviate he become such a gentleman as he father . ' ' it be well you could not keep you own secret - ha , ha ! it be well these woman must be blabb . if they have not a friend to talk to , they must whisper they secret to the fish , or write they on the sand , or something ; and it be well , too , I be not over full to - night , now I think of it , or I might have snooze away and never dreamt of look what my sweet lady be about ; or I might have lack the sense or the power to carry my point like a man , as I have do . ' leave he to he self - congratulation , I rise to secure my manuscript , for I now remember it have be leave upon the drawing - room table , and I determine , if possible , to save myself the humiliation of see it in he hand again . I could not bear the idea of he amuse himself over my secret thought and recollection ; though , to be sure , he would find little good of himself therein indit , except in the former part ; and oh , I would sooner burn it all than he should read what I have write when I be such a fool as to love he ! ' and by - the - by , ' cry he , as I be leave the room , ' you would better tell that - old sneak of a nurse to keep out of my way for a day or two ; I would pay she she wage and send she pack to - morrow , but I know she would do more mischief out of the house than in it . ' and as I depart , he go on cursing and abuse my faithful friend and servant
servant with epithet I will not defile this paper with repeating . I go to she as soon as I have put away my book , and tell she how we project be defeat . she be as much distress and horrify as I be - and more so than I be that night , for I be partly stun by the blow , and partly excit and support against it by the bitterness of my wrath . but in the morning , when I wake without that cheer hope that have be my secret comfort and support so long , and all this day , when I have wander about restless and objectless , shunn my husband , shrink even from my child , know that I be unfit to be he teacher or companion , hope nothing for he future life , and fervently wish he have never be bear , - I feel the full extent of my calamity , and I feel it now . I know that day after day such feeling will return upon I . I be a slave - a prisoner - but that be nothing ; if it be myself alone I would not complain , but I be forbidden to rescue my son from ruin , and what be once my only consolation be become the crowning source of my despair . have I no faith in ? I try to look to and raise my heart to heave , but it will cleave to the dust . I can only say , ' he hath hedge I about , that I can not get out : he hath make my chain heavy . he hath fill I with bitterness - he hath make I drunke with wormwood . ' I forget to add , ' but though he cause grief , yet will he have compassion accord to the multitude of he mercy . for he doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the child of man . ' I ought to think of this ; and if there be nothing but sorrow for I in this world , what be the longest life of misery to a whole eternity of peace ? and for my little Arthur - have he no friend but I ? who be it say , ' it be not the will of you father which be in heaven that one of these little one should perish ? ' 20th . - have now get rid of for a season , my spirit begin to revive . he leave I early in ; and the moment he be go , I breathe again , and feel my vital energy return ; not with the hope of escape - he have take care to leave I no visible chance of that - but with a determination to make the best of exist circumstance . here be leave to I at last ; and rouse from my despondent apathy , I exert all my power to eradicate the weed that have be foster in he infant mind , and sow again the good seed they have render unproductive . thank heaven , it be not a barren or a stony soil ; if weed spring fast there , so do better plant . he apprehension be more quick , he heart more overflow with affection than ever he father 's could have be , and it be no hopeless task to bend he to obedience and win he to love and know he own true friend , as long as there be no one to counteract my effort . I have much trouble at first in break he of those evil habit he father have teach he to acquire , but already that difficulty be nearly vanquished now : bad language seldom defile he mouth , and I have succeed in give he a absolute disgust for all intoxicating liquor , which I hope not even he father or he father 's friend will be able to overcome . he be inordinately fond of they for so young a creature , and , remembere my unfortunate father as well as he , I dread the consequence of such a taste . but if I have stint he , in he usual quantity of wine , or forbide he to taste it altogether , that would only have increase he partiality for it , and make he regard it as a greater treat than ever . I therefore give he quite as much as he father be accustom to allow he ; as much , indeed , as he desire to have - but into every glass I surreptitiously introduce a small quantity of tartar-emetic , just enough to produce inevitable nausea and depression without positive sickness . find such disagreeable consequence invariably to result from this indulgence , he soon grow weary of it , but the more he shrank from the daily treat the more I press it upon he , till he reluctance be strengthen to perfect abhorrence . when he be thoroughly disgusted with every kind of wine , I allow he , at he own request , to try brandy - and - water , and then gin - and - water , for the little toper be familiar with they all , and I be determine that all should be equally hateful to he . this I have now effect ; and since he declare that the taste , the smell , the sight of any one of they be sufficient to make he sick , I have give up tease he about they , except now and then as object of terror in casis of misbehaviou . ' Arthur , if you be not a good boy I shall give you a glass of wine , ' or ' now , , if you say that again you shall have some brandy
brandy - and - water , ' be as good as any other threat ; and once or twice , when he be sick , I have oblige the poor child to swallow a little wine - and - water without the tartar-emetic , by way of medicine ; and this practice I intend to continue for some time to come ; not that I think it of any real service in a physical sense , but because I be determined to enlist all the power of association in my service ; I wish this aversion to be so deeply grounde in he nature that nothing in after - life may be able to overcome it . thus , I flatter myself , I shall secure he from this one vice ; and for the rest , if on he father 's return I find reason to apprehend that my good lesson will be all destroy - if commence again the game of teach the child to hate and despise he mother , and emulate he father 's wickedness - I will yet deliver my son from he hand . I have devise another scheme that might be resort to in such a case ; and if I could but obtain my brother 's consent and assistance , I should not doubt of its success . the old hall where he and I be bear , and where we mother di , be not now inhabit , nor yet quite sunk into decay , as I believe . now , if I could persuade he to have one or two room make habitable , and to let they to I as a stranger , I might live there , with my child , under a assume name , and still support myself by my favourite art . he should lend I the money to begin with , and I would pay he back , and live in lowly independence and strict seclusion , for the house stand in a lonely place , and the neighbourhood be thinly inhabit , and he himself should negotiate the sale of my picture for I . I have arrange the whole plan in my head : and all I want be to persuade to be of the same mind as myself . he be come to see I soon , and then I will make the proposal to he , have first enlighten he upon my circumstance sufficiently to excuse the project . already , I believe , he know much more of my situation than I have tell he . I can tell this by the air of tender sadness pervad he letter ; and by the fact of he so seldom mention my husband , and generally evince a kind of covert bitterness when he do refer to he ; as well as by the circumstance of he never come to see I when be at home . but he have never openly express any disapprobation of he or sympathy for I ; he have never ask any question , or say anything to invite my confidence . have he do so , I should probably have have but few concealment from he . perhaps he feel hurt at my reserve . he be a strange being ; I wish we know each other better . he use to spend a month at every year , before I be marry ; but , since we father 's death , I have only see he once , when he come for a few day while be away . he shall stay many day this time , and there shall be more candour and cordiality between we than ever there be before , since we early childhood . my heart cling to he more than ever ; and my soul be sick of solitude . . - he be come and go . he would not stay above a fortnight . the time pass quickly , but very , very happily , and it have do I good . I must have a bad disposition , for my misfortune have sour and embitter I exceedingly : I be begin insensibly to cherish very unamiable feeling against my fellow - mortal , the male part of they especially ; but it be a comfort to see there be at least one among they worthy to be truste and esteem ; and doubtless there be more , though I have never know they , unless I except poor , and he be bad enough in he day . but what would have be , if he have live in the world , and mingl from he childhood with such man as these of my acquaintance ? and what will Arthur be , with all he natural sweetness of disposition , if I do not save he from that world and those companion ? I mention my fear to , and introduce the subject of my plan of rescue on the evening after he arrival , when I present my little son to he uncle . ' he be like you , , ' say I , 'in some of he mood : I sometimes think he resemble you more than he father ; and I be glad of it . ' ' you flatter I , Helen , ' reply he , strok the child 's soft , wavy lock . ' no , you will think it no compliment when I tell you I would rather have he to resemble than he father . ' he slightly elevate he eyebrow , but say nothing . ' do you know what sort of man be ? ' say I . 'I think I have a idea . ' ' have you so clear a idea that you can hear , without surprise or disapproval , that I meditate escape with that child to some secret asylum ,
, where we can live in peace , and never see he again ? ' ' be it really so ? ' ' if you have not , ' continue I , ' I will tell you something more about he ' ; and I give a sketch of he general conduct , and a more particular account of he behaviour with regard to he child , and explain my apprehension on the latter 's account , and my determination to deliver he from he father 's influence . be exceedingly indignant against , and very much grieve for I ; but still he look upon my project as wild and impracticable . he deem my fear for disproportion to the circumstance , and oppose so many objection to my plan , and devise so many milder method for ameliorat my condition , that I be oblige to enter into further detail to convince he that my husband be utterly incorrigible , and that nothing could persuade he to give up he son , whatever became of I , he be as fully determine the child should not leave he , as I be not to leave the child ; and that , in fact , nothing would answer but this , unless I fle the country , as I have intend before . to obviate that , he at length consent to have one wing of the old hall put into a habitable condition , as a place of refuge against a time of need ; but hope I would not take advantage of it unless circumstance should render it really necessary , which I be ready enough to promise : for though , for my own sake , such a hermitage appear like paradise itself , compare with my present situation , yet for my friend ' sakes , for and , my sister in heart and affection , for the poor tenant of , and , above all , for my aunt , I will stay if I possibly can . 29th . - and she daughter be come back from . be full of she first season in town ; but she be still heart - whole and unengaged . she mother seek out a excellent match for she , and even bring the gentleman to lay he heart and fortune at she foot ; but have the audacity to refuse the noble gift . he be a man of good family and large possession , but the naughty girl maintain he be old as , ugly as sin , and hateful as - one who shall be nameless . ' but , indeed , I have a hard time of it , ' say she : 'mamma be very greatly disappoint at the failure of she darling project , and very , very angry at my obstinate resistance to she will , and be so still ; but I can not help it . and , too , be so seriously displease at my perversity and absurd caprice , as he call it , that I fear he will never forgive I - I do not think he could be so unkind as he have lately show himself . but beg I not to yield , and I be sure , . , if you have see the man they want to palm upon I , you would have advise I not to take he too . ' 'I should have do so whether I have see he or not , ' say I ; ' it be enough that you dislike he . ' 'I know you would say so ; though mamma affir you would be quite shocked at my undutiful conduct . you can not imagine how she lecture I : I be disobedient and ungrateful ; I be thwart she wish , wrong my brother , and make myself a burden on she hand . I sometimes fear she will overcome I after all . I have a strong will , but so have she , and when she say such bitter thing , it provoke I to such a pass that I feel inclined to do as she bid I , and then break my heart and say , " there , mamma , it be all you fault ! " ' ' pray do not ! ' say I . ' obedience from such a motive would be positive wickedness , and certain to bring the punishment it deserve . firm , and you mamma will soon relinquish she persecution ; and the gentleman himself will cease to pester you with he addresses if he find they steadily reject . ' 'Oh , no ! mamma will weary all about she before she tire herself with she exertion ; and as for , she have give he to understand that I have refuse he offer , not from any dislike of he person , but merely because I be giddy and young , and can not at present reconcile myself to the thought of marriage under any circumstance : but by next season , she have no doubt , I shall have more sense , and hope my girlish fancie will be wear away . so she have bring I home , to school I into a proper sense of my duty , against the time come round again . indeed , I believe she will not put herself to the expense of take I up to again , unless I surrender : she can not afford to take I to town for pleasure and nonsense , she say , and it be not every rich gentleman that will consent to take I without a fortune , whatever exalted idea I may have of my own attraction . ' ' well , , I pity you ; but still , I repeat , stand firm . you might as well
well sell yourself to slavery at once , as marry a man you dislike . if you mother and brother be unkind to you , you may leave they , but remember you be bound to you husband for life . ' ' but I can not leave they unless I get married , and I can not get marry if nobody see I . I see one or two gentleman in that I might have like , but they be younger son , and would not let I get to know they - one especially , who I believe rather like I - but she throw every possible obstacle in the way of we better acquaintance . be not it provoke ? ' 'I have no doubt you would feel it so , but it be possible that if you marry he , you might have more reason to regret it hereafter than if you marry . when I tell you not to marry without love , I do not advise you to marry for love alone : there be many , many other thing to be consider . keep both heart and hand in you own possession , till you see good reason to part with they ; and if such a occasion should never present itself , comfort you mind with this reflection , that though in single life you joy may not be very many , you sorrow , at least , will not be more than you can bear . marriage may change you circumstance for the better , but , in my private opinion , it be far more likely to produce a contrary result . ' think ; but allow I to say I think otherwise . if I think myself doom to old - maidenhood , I should cease to value my life . the thought of live on , year after year , at the - a hanger - on upon and , a mere cumberer of the ground ( now that I know in what light they would regard it ) , be perfectly intolerable ; I would rather run away with the butler . ' ' you circumstance be peculiar , I allow ; but have patience , love ; do nothing rashly . remember you be not yet nineteen , and many year be yet to pass before any one can set you down as a old maid : you can not tell what Providence may have in store for you . and meantime , remember you have a right to the protection and support of you mother and brother , however they may seem to grudge it . ' ' you be so grave , , ' say , after a pause . ' when utter the same discouraging sentiment concern marriage , I ask if she be happy : she say she be ; but I only half believe she ; and now I must put the same question to you . ' ' it be a very impertinent question , ' laugh I , ' from a young girl to a married woman so many year she senior , and I shall not answer it . ' ' pardon I , dear madam , ' say she , laughingly throw herself into my arm , and kiss I with playful affection ; but I feel a tear on my neck , as she drop she head on my bosom and continue , with a odd mixture of sadness and levity , timidity and audacity , - 'I know you be not so happy as I mean to be , for you spend half you life alone at , while go about enjoy himself where and how he please . I shall expect my husband to have no pleasure but what he share with I ; and if he greatest pleasure of all be not the enjoyment of my company , why , it will be the worse for he , that be all . ' ' if such be you expectation of matrimony , , you must , indeed , be careful whom you marry - or rather , you must avoid it altogether . ' 1st . - no yet . perhaps he will stay among he friend till ; and then , next spring , he will be off again . if he continue this plan , I shall be able to stay at well enough - that be , I shall be able to stay , and that be enough ; even a occasional bevy of friend at the shooting season may be borne , if yoArthu get so firmly attach to I , so well establish in good sense and principle before they come that I shall be able , by reason and affection , to keep he pure from they contamination . hope , I fear ! but still , till such a time of trial come I will forbear to think of my quiet asylum in the beloved old hall . and have be stay at the a fortnight : and as be still absent , and the weather be remarkably fine , I never pass a day without see my two friend , and , either there or here . on one occasion , when have drive they over to in the phaeton , with little and , and we be all enjoy ourselves in the garden - I have a few minute ' conversation with that gentleman , while the lady be amuse themselves with the child . ' do you want to hear anything of you husband , ? ' say he . ' no , unless you can tell I when to expect he home . ' 'I can not . - you do not want he , do you ? ' say he , with a broad grin . ' no . ' ' well
well , I think you be better without he , sure enough - for my part , I be downright weary of he . I tell he I would leave he if he do not mmend he manners , and he would not ; so I leave he . you see , I be a better man than you think I ; and , what be more , I have serious thought of wash my hand of he entirely , and the whole set of th'ey , and comport myself from this day forward with all decency and sobriety , as a and the father of a family should do . what do you think of that ? ' ' it be a resolution you ought to have form long ago . ' ' well , I be not thirty yet ; it be not too late , be it ? ' ' no ; it be never too late to reform , as long as you have the sense to desire it , and the strength to execute you purpose . ' ' well , to tell you the truth , I have think of it often and often before ; but he be such devilish good company , be , after all . you can not imagine what a jovial good fellow he be when he be not fairly drink , only just prim or half - seas - over . we all have a bit of a liking for he at the bottom of we heart , though we can not respect he . ' ' but should you wish yourself to be like he ? ' ' no , I would rather be like myself , bad as I be . ' ' you can not continue as bad as you be without get worse and more brutalise every day , and therefore more like he . ' I could not help smile at the comical , half - angry , half - confound look he put on at this rather unusual mode of address . ' never mind my plain speak , ' say I ; ' it be from the best of motive . but tell I , should you wish you son to be like - or even like yourself ? ' ' hang it ! no . ' ' should you wish you daughter to despise you - or , at least , to feel no vestige of respect for you , and no affection but what be mingl with the bitterest regret ? ' 'Oh , no ! I could not stand that . ' ' and , finally , should you wish you wife to be ready to sink into the earth when she hear you mention ; and to loathe the very sound of you voice , and shudder at you approach ? ' ' she never will ; she like I all the same , whatever I do . ' ' impossible , ! you mistake she quiet submission for affection . ' ' Fire and fury - ' ' now do not burst into a tempest at that . I do not mean to say she do not love you - she do , I know , a great deal better than you deserve ; but I be quite sure , that if you behave better , she will love you more , and if you behave worse , she will love you less and less , till all be lose in fear , aversion , and bitterness of soul , if not in secret hatred and contempt . but , drop the subject of affection , should you wish to be the tyrant of she life - to take away all the sunshine from she existence , and make she thoroughly miserable ? ' ' of course not ; and I do not , and I be not go to . ' ' you have do more towards it than you suppose . ' ' Pooh , pooh ! she be not the susceptible , anxious , worrit creature you imagine : she be a little meek , peaceable , affectionate body ; apt to be rather sulky at time , but quiet and cool in the main , and ready to take thing as they come . ' ' think off what she be five year ago , when you marry she , and what she be now . ' 'I know she be a little plump lassie then , with a pretty pink and white face : now she be a poor little bit of a creature , fad and melt away like a snow - wreath . but hang it ! - that be not my fault . ' ' what be the cause of it then ? not year , for she be only five - and - twenty . ' ' it be she own delicate health , and confound it , madam ! what would you make of I ? - and the child , to be sure , that worry she to death between they . ' ' no , , the child give she more pleasure than pain : they be fine , well - disposition child - ' 'I know they be - bless they ! ' ' then why lay the blame on they ? - I will tell you what it be : it be silent fretting and constant anxiety on you account , mingl , I suspect , with something of bodily fear on she own . when you behave well , she can only rejoice with trembling ; she have no security , no confidence in you judgment or principle ; but be continually dread the close of such short - liv felicity ; when you behave ill , she cause of terror and misery be more than any one can tell but herself
herself . in patient endurance of evil , she forget it be we duty to admonish we neighbour of they transgression . since you will mistake she silence for indifference , come with I , and I will show you one or two of she letter - no breach of confidence , I hope , since you be she other half . ' he follow I into the library . I seek out and put into he hand two of 's letter : one date from , and write during one of he wildest season of reckless dissipation ; the other in the country , during a lucid interval . the former be full of trouble and anguish ; not accuse he , but deeply regret he connection with he profligate companion , abuse and other , insinuat bitter thing against , and most ingeniously throw the blame of she husband 's misconduct on to other man 's shoulders . the latter be full of hope and joy , yet with a trembl consciousness that this happiness would not last ; praise he goodness to the sky , but with a evident , though but half - express wish , that it be base on a surer foundation than the natural impulse of the heart , and a half - prophetic dread of the fall of that house so found on the sand , - which fall have shortly after taken place , as Hattersley must have be conscious while he read . almost at the commencement of the first letter I have the unexpected pleasure of see he blush ; but he immediately turn he back to I , and finish the perusal at the window . at the second , I see he , once or twice , raise he hand , and hurriedly pass it across he face . could it be to dash away a tear ? when he have do , there be a interval spent in clear he throat and stare out of the window , and then , after whistl a few bars of a favourite air , he turn round , give I back the letter , and silently shook I by the hand . 'I have be a curse rascal , know , ' say he , as he give it a hearty squeeze , ' but you see if I do not make amend for it - - and I if I do not ! ' ' do not curse yourself , ; if have hear half you invocation of that kind , you would have be in hell long before now - and you can not make amend for the past by do you duty for the future , inasmuch as you duty be only what you owe to you maker , and you can not do more than fulfil it : another must make amend for you past delinquency . if you intend to reform , invoke 's blessing , he mercy , and he aid ; not he curse . ' ' help I , then - for I be sure I need it . where be Milicent ? ' ' she be there , just come in with she sister . ' he step out at the glass door , and go to meet they . I follow at a little distance . somewhat to he wife 's astonishment , he lift she off from the ground , and salute she with a hearty kiss and a strong embrace ; then place he two hand on she shoulders , he give she , I suppose , a sketch of the great thing he mean to do , for she suddenly throw she arm round he , and burst into tear , exclaim , - ' , , - we shall be so happy ! how very , very good you be ! ' ' Nay , not I , ' say he , turn she round , and push she towards I . ' thank she ; it be she do . ' Milicent flew to thank I , overflow with gratitude . I disclaim all title to it , tell she she husband be predispose to amendment before I add my mite of exhortation and encouragement , and that I have only do what she might , and ought to have do herself . 'Oh , no ! ' cry she ; 'I could not have influence he , I be sure , by anything that I could have say . I should only have bother he by my clumsy effort at persuasion , if I have make the attempt . ' ' you never try I , , ' say he . shortly after they take they leave . they be now go on a visit to 's father . after that they will repair to they country home . I hope he good resolution will not fall through , and poor Milicent will not be again disappoint . she last letter be full of present bliss , and pleasing anticipation for the future ; but no particular temptation have yet occur to put he virtue to the test . Henceforth , however , she will doubtless be somewhat less timid and reserve , and he more kind and thoughtful . - surely , then , she hope be not unfounded ; and I have one bright spot , at least , whereon to rest my thought . 10th . - return about three week ago . he appearance , he demeanour and conversation , and my feeling with regard to he , I shall not trouble myself to describe . the day after he arrival , however , he surprise I by the announcement of a intention to procure a governess for little Arthur : I tell he it be quite unnecessary , not to say ridiculous , at the present season : I
I think I be fully competent to the task of teach he myself - for some year to come , at least : the child 's education be the only pleasure and business of my life ; and since he have deprive I of every other occupation , he might surely leave I then . he say I be not fit to teach child , or to be with they : I have already reduce the boy to little better than a automaton ; I have break he fine spirit with my rigid severity ; and I should freeze all the sunshine out of he heart , and make he as gloomy a ascetic as myself , if I have the handling of he much longer . and poor , too , come in for she share of abuse , as usual ; he can not endure , because he know she have a proper appreciation of he . I calmly defend we several qualification as nurse and governess , and still resist the propose addition to we family ; but he cut I short by say it be no use bothere about the matter , for he have engage a governess already , and she be come next week ; so that all I have to do be to get thing ready for she reception . this be a rather start piece of intelligence . I venture to inquire she name and address , by whom she have be recommend , or how he have be lead to make choice of she . ' she be a very estimable , pious young person , ' say he ; ' you need not be afraid . she name be , I believe ; and she be recommend to I by a respectable old dowager : a lady of high repute in the religious world . I have not see she myself , and therefore can not give you a particular account of she person and conversation , and so forth ; but , if the old lady 's eulogy be correct , you will find she to possess all desirable qualification for she position : a inordinate love of child among the rest . ' all this be gravely and quietly speak , but there be a laugh demon in he half - avert eye that bod no good , I imagine . however , I think of my asylum in - shire , and make no further objection . when arrive , I be not prepare to give she a very cordial reception . she appearance be not particularly calculate to produce a favourable impression at first sight , nor do she manners and subsequent conduct , in any degree , remove the prejudice I have already conceive against she . she attainment be limit , she intellect noways above mediocrity . she have a fine voice , and could s like a nightingale , and accompany herself sufficiently well on the piano ; but these be she only accomplishment . there be a look of guile and subtlety in she face , a sound of it in she voice . she seem afraid of I , and would start if I suddenly approach she . in she behaviour she be respectful and complaisant , even to servility : she attempt to flatter and fawn upon I at first , but I soon check that . she fondness for she little pupil be overstrain , and I be oblige to remonstrate with she on the subject of over-indulgence and injudicious praise ; but she could not gain he heart . she piety consist in a occasional heaving of sigh , and uplift of eye to the ceiling , and the utterance of a few cant phrase . she tell I she be a clergyman 's daughter , and have be leave a orphan from she childhood , but have have the good fortune to obtain a situation in a very pious family ; and then she speak so gratefully of the kindness she have experience from its different member , that I reproach myself for my uncharitable thought and unfriendly conduct , and relent for a time , but not for long : my cause of dislike be too rational , my suspicion too well foun for that ; and I know it be my duty to watch and scrutinize till those suspicion be either satisfactorily remove or confirm . I ask the name and residence of the kind and pious family . she mention a common name , and a unknown and distant place of abode , but tell I they be now on the continent , and they present address be unknown to she . I never see she speak much to ; but he would frequently look into the school - room to see how little get on with he new companion , when I be not there . in the evening , she sit with we in the drawing - room , and would s and play to amuse he or we , as she pretend , and be very attentive to he want , and watchful to anticipate they , though she only talk to I ; indeed , he be seldom in a condition to be talk to . have she be other than she be , I should have feel she presence a great relief to come between we thus , except , indeed , that I should have be thoroughly asham for any decent person to see he as he often be . I do not mention my suspicions to ; but she , have sojourn for half a century in this land of sin and sorrow , have learn to be suspicious herself . she tell I from the first she be ' down of that new governess , ' and I soon find she watch she quite as narrowly as
as I do ; and I be glad of it , for I longe to know the truth : the atmosphere of seem to stifle I , and I could only live by thinking of . at last , one morning , she enter my chamber with such intelligence that my resolution be take before she have cease to speak . while she dress I I explain to she my intention and what assistance I should require from she , and tell she which of my thing she be to pack up , and what she be to leave behind for herself , as I have no other means of recompense she for this sudden dismissal after she long and faithful service : a circumstance I most deeply regret , but could not avoid . ' and what will you do , ? ' say I ; ' will you go home , or seek another place ? ' 'I have no home , ma 'am , but with you , ' she reply ; ' and if I leave you I will never go into place again as long as I live . ' ' but I can not afford to live like a lady now , ' return I : ' I must be my own maid and my child 's nurse . ' ' what signify ! ' reply she , in some excitement . ' you will want somebody to clean and wash , and cook , will not you ? I can do all that ; and never mind the wage : I have my bit of ' savings yet , and if you would not take I I should have to find my own board and lod out of 'em somewhere , or else work among strangers : and it be what I be not use to : so you can please yourself , ma'am . ' she voice quaver as she speak , and the tear stood in she eye . 'I should like it above all thing , , and I would give you such wage as I could afford : such as I should give to any servant - of - all - work I might employ : but do not you see I should be drag you down with I when you have do nothing to deserve it ? ' 'Oh , fiddle ! ' ejaculate she . ' and , beside , my future way of living will be so widly different to the past : so different to all you have be accustom to - ' ' do you think , ma 'am , I can not bear what my missis can ? surely I be not so proud and so dainty as that come to ; and my little master , too , bless he ! ' ' but I be young , ; I sha ' not mind it ; and be young too : it will be nothing to he . ' ' nor I either : I be not so old but what I can stand hard fare and hard work , if it be only to help and comfort they as I have love like my own bairn : for all I be too old to bide the thought of ' leave th'ey in trouble and danger , and go amongst strangers myself . ' ' then you sha ' not , ! ' cry I , embrace my faithful friend . ' we will all go together , and you shall see how the new life suits you . ' ' bless you , honey ! ' cry she , affectionately return my embrace . ' only let we get shut of this wicked house , and we will do right enough , you will see . ' 'So think I , ' be my answer ; and so that point be settled . by that morning 's post I despatch a few hasty line to , beseech he to prepare my asylum for my immediate reception : for I should probably come to claim it within a day after the receipt of that note : and tell he , in few word , the cause of my sudden resolution . I then write three letter of adieu : the first to , in which I tell she that I find it impossible to stay any longer at , or to leave my son under he father 's protection ; and , as it be of the last importance that we future abode should be unknown to he and he acquaintance , I should disclose it to no one but my brother , through the medium of whom I hope still to correspond with my friend . I then give she he address , exhort she to write frequently , reiterat some of my former admonition regard she own concern , and bade she a fond farewell . the second be to ; much to the same effect , but a little more confidential , as befit we longer intimacy , and she greater experience and better acquaintance with my circumstance . the third be to my aunt : at much more difficult and painful undertake , and therefore I have leave it to the last ; but I must give she some explanation of that extraordinary step I have take : and that quickly , for she and my uncle would no doubt hear of it within a day or two after my disappearance , as it be probable that would speedily apply to they to know what be become of I . at last , however , I tell she I be sensible of my error : I do not complain of its punishment , and I be sorry to trouble my friend with its consequence ; but in duty to my son I must submit no longer ; it be
be absolutely necessary that he should be deliver from he father 's corrupting influence . I should not disclose my place of refuge even to she , in order that she and my uncle might be able , with truth , to deny all knowledge concern it ; but any communication address to I under cover to my brother would be certain to reach I . I hope she and my uncle would pardon the step I have take , for if they know all , I be sure they would not blame I ; and I trust they would not afflict themselves on my account , for if I could only reach my retreat in safety and keep it unmolested , I should be very happy , but for the thought of they ; and should be quite contented to spend my life in obscurity , devote myself to the training up of my child , and teach he to avoid the error of both he parent . these thing be done yesterday : I have give two whole day to the preparation for we departure , that may have more time to prepare the room , and to pack up the thing : for the latter task must be do with the utmost caution and secrecy , and there be no one but I to assist she . I can help to get the article together , but I do not understand the art of stow they into the box , so as to take up the smallest possible space ; and there be she own thing to do , as well as mine and 's . I can ill afford to leave anything behind , since I have no money , except a few guinea in my purse ; and beside , as observe , whatever I leave would most likely become the property of , and I should not relish that . but what trouble I have have throughout these two day , struggle to appear calm and collect , to meet he and she as usual , when I be obliged to meet they , and force myself to leave my little Arthur in she hand for hour together ! but I trust these trial be over now : I have lay he in my bed for better security , and never more , I trust , shall he innocent lip be defile by they contaminating kiss , or he young ears pollute by they word . but shall we escape in safety ? oh , that the morning be come , and we be on we way at least ! this evening , when I have give all the assistance I could , and have nothing leave I but to wait , and wish and tremble , I become so greatly agitate that I know not what to do . I go down to dinner , but I could not force myself to eat . remark the circumstance . ' what be to do with you now ? ' say he , when the removal of the second course give he time to look about he . 'I be not well , ' I reply : 'I think I must lie down a little ; you will not miss I much ? ' ' not the least : if you leave you chair , it will do just as well - better , a trifle , ' he mutter , as I leave the room , ' for I can fancy somebody else fill it . ' ' somebody else may fill it to - morrow ,' I think , but do not say . ' there ! I have see the last of you , I hope ,' I mutter , as I close the door upon he . urge I to seek repose at once , to recruit my strength for to - morrow 's journey , as we must be go before the dawn ; but in my present state of nervous excitement that be entirely out of the question . it be equally out of the question to sit , or wander about my room , count the hour and the minute between I and the appointed time of action , strain my ear and trembl at every sound , lest someone should discover and betray we after all . I take up a book and try to read : my eye wander over the page , but it be impossible to bind my thought to they contents . why not have recourse to the old expedient , and add this last event to my chronicle ? I open its page once more , and write the above account - with difficulty , at first , but gradually my mind become more calm and steady . thus several hour have pass away : the time be draw near ; and now my eye feel heavy and my frame exhaust . I will commend my cause to , and then lie down and gain a hour or two of sleep ; and then ! - sleep soundly . all the house be still : there can be no one watch . the box be all cord by , and quietly convey down the back stair after dusk , and send away in a cart to the m - coach - office . the name upon the card be , which appellation I mean henceforth to adopt . my mother 's maiden name be , and therefore I fancy I have some claim to it , and prefer it to any other , except my own , which I dare not resume . 24th . - thank heaven , I be free and safe at last . early we rise , swiftly and quietly dress , slowly and stealthily descende to the hall , where stand ready with a light , to open
open the door and fasten it after we . we be oblige to let one man into we secret on account of the box , &c . all the servant be but too well acquaint with they master 's conduct , and either or would have be willing to serve I ; but as the former be more staid and elderly , and a crony of 's beside , I of course direct she to make choice of he as she assistant and confidant on the occasion , as far as necessity demand , I only hope he may not be bring into trouble thereby , and only wish I could reward he for the perilous service he be so ready to undertake . I slip two guinea into he hand , by way of remembrance , as he stand in the doorway , hold the candle to light we departure , with a tear in he honest grey eye , and a host of good wish depict on he solemn countenance . ! I could offer no more : I have barely sufficient remaining for the probable expense of the journey . what trembl joy it be when the little wicket close behind we , as we issue from the park ! then , for one moment , I pause , to inhale one dratch of that cool , brace air , and venture one look back upon the house . all be dark and still : no light glimmer in the window , no wreath of smoke obscure the stars that sparkle above it in the frosty sky . as I bay farewell for ever to that place , the scene of so much guilt and misery , I feel glad that I have not leave it before , for now there be no doubt about the propriety of such a step - no shadow of remorse for he i leave behind . there be nothing to disturb my joy but the fear of detection ; and every step remove we further from the chance of that . we have leave many mile behind we before the round red sun arose to welcome we deliverance ; and if any inhabitant of its vicinity have chance to see we then , as we bowle along on the top of the coach , I scarcely think they would have suspect we identity . as I intend to be take for a widow , I think it advisable to enter my new abode in mourning : I be , therefore , attire in a plain black silk dress and mantle , a black veil ( which I keep carefully over my face for the first twenty or thirty mile of the journey ) , and a black silk bonnet , which I have be constrain to borrow of , for want of such a article myself . it be not in the newest fashion , of course ; but no the worse for that , under present circumstance . yoArthu be clad in he plainest clothes , and wrap in a coarse woollen shawl ; and be muff in a grey cloak and hood that have see better day , and give she more the appearance of a ordinary though decent old woman , than of a lady 's - maid . oh , what delight it be to be thus seate aloft , rumbl along the broad , sunshiny road , with the fresh morning breeze in my face , surround by a unknown country , all smile - cheerfully , gloriously smile in the yellow lustre of those early beam ; with my darling child in my arm , almost as happy as myself , and my faithful friend beside I : a prison and despair behind I , reced further , further back at every clatter of the horse ' foot ; and liberty and hope before ! I could hardly refrain from praise aloud for my deliverance , or astonish my fellow - passenger by some surprising outburst of hilarity . but the journey be a very long one , and we be all weary enough before the close of it . it be far into the night when we reach the town of -, and still we be seven mile from we journey 's end ; and there be no more coach , nor any conveyance to be have , except a common cart , and that with the greatest difficulty , for half the town be in bed . and a dreary ride we have of it , that last stage of the journey , cold and weary as we be ; sit on we box , with nothing to cling to , nothing to lean against , slowly drag and cruelly shake over the rough , hilly roads . but be asleep in 's lap , and between we we manage pretty well to shield he from the cold night air . at last we begin to ascend a terribly steep and stony lane , which , in spite of the darkness , say she remember well : she have often walk there with I in she arm , and little thought to come again so many year after , under such circumstance as the present . yoArthu be now awaken by the jolting and the stoppage , we all get out and walk . we have not far to go ; but what if should not have receive my letter ? or if he should not have have time to prepare the room for we reception , and we should find they all dark , damp , and comfortless , destitute of food , fire , and furniture , after all we toil ? at length the grim , dark pile appear before we . the lane conduct we round by the back way . we enter the desolate court , and in breathless
breathless anxiety surveye the ruinous mass . be it all blackness and desolation ? no ; one faint red glimmer cheer we from a window where the lattice be in good repair . the door be fasten , but after due knock and wait , and some parleying with a voice from a upper window , we be admit by a old woman who have be commission to air and keep the house till we arrival , into a tolerably snug little apartment , formerly the scullery of the mansion , which have now fitte up as a kitchen . here she procure we a light , rouse the fire to a cheerful blaze , and soon prepare a simple repast for we refreshment ; while we disencumber ourselves of we travelling - gear , and take a hasty survey of we new abode . besides the kitchen , there be two bedroom , a good - size parlour , and another smaller one , which I destin for my studio , all well air and seemingly in good repair , but only partly furnish with a few old article , chiefly of ponderous black oak , the veritable one that have be there before , and which have be keep as antiquarian relic in my brother 's present residence , and now , in all haste , transport back again . the old woman bring my supper and be into the parlour , and tell I , with all due formality , that ' the master desire he compliment to , and he have prepare the room as well as he could upon so short a notice ; but he would do himself the pleasure of call upon she to - morrow , to receive she further command . ' I be glad to ascend the stern - look stone staircase , and lie down in the gloomy , old - fashioned bed , beside my little Arthur . he be asleep in a minute ; but , weary as I be , my excited feeling and restless cogitation keep I awake till dawn begin to struggle with the darkness ; but sleep be sweet and refresh when it come , and the waking be delightful beyond expression . it be little Arthur that rouse I , with he gentle kiss . he be here , then , safely clasp in my arm , and many leagu away from he unworthy father ! daylight illumin the apartment , for the sun be high in heaven , though obscure by roll mass of autumnal vapour . the scene , indeed , be not remarkably cheerful in itself , either within or without . the large bare room , with its grim old furniture , the narrow , latticed window , reveal the dull , grey sky above and the desolate wilderness below , where the dark stone wall and iron gate , the rank growth of grass and weed , and the hardy evergreens of preternatural form , alone remain to tell that there have be once a garden , - and the bleak and barren field beyond might have strike I as gloomy enough at another time ; but now , each separate object seem to echo back my own exhilarat sense of hope and freedom : indefinite dream of the far past and bright anticipation of the future seem to greet I at every turn . I should rejoice with more security , to be sure , have the broad sea roll between my present and my former home ; but surely in this lonely spot I might remain unknown ; and then I have my brother here to cheer my solitude with he occasional visit . he come that morning ; and I have have several interview with he since ; but he be oblige to be very cautious when and how he come ; not even he servants or he best friend must know of he visit to - except on such occasion as a landlord might be expect to call upon a stranger tenant - lest suspicion should be accit against I , whether of the truth or of some slanderous falsehood . I have now be here nearly a fortnight , and , but for one disturbing care , the haunt dread of discovery , I be comfortably settle in my new home : have supply I with all requisite furniture and painting material : have sell most of my clothes for I , in a distant town , and procure I a wardrobe more suitable to my present position : I have a second - hand piano , and a tolerably well - stock bookcase in my parlour ; and my other room have assume quite a professional , business - like appearance already . I be work hard to repay my brother for all he expense on my account ; not that there be the slightest necessity for anything of the kind , but it please I to do so : I shall have so much more pleasure in my labour , my earning , my frugal fare , and household economy , when I know that I be pay my way honestly , and that what little I possess be legitimately all my own ; and that no one suffer for my folly - in a pecuniary way at least . I shall make he take the last penny I owe he , if I can possibly effect it without offend he too deeply . I have a few picture already do , for I tell to pack up all I have ; and she execute she commission but too well - for among the rest , she put up a portrait of that I have pain in the first year of my marriage . it struck I with dismay , at the moment , when I take it from the box
box and beheld those eye fix upon I in they mocking mirth , as if exult still in he power to control my fate , and derid my effort to escape . how widly different have be my feeling in paint that portrait to what they now be in look upon it ! how I have study and toil to produce something , as I think , worthy of the original ! what mingle pleasure and dissatisfaction I have have in the result of my labour ! - pleasure for the likeness I have catch ; dissatisfaction , because I have not make it handsome enough . now , I see no beauty in it - nothing pleas in any part of its expression ; and yet it be far handsomer and far more agreeable - far less repulsive I should rather say - than he be now : for these six year have wrotch almost as great a change upon himself as on my feeling regard he . the frame , however , be handsome enough ; it will serve for another painting . the picture itself I have not destroy , as I have first intend ; I have put it aside ; not , I think , from any lurking tenderness for the memory of past affection , nor yet to remind I of my former folly , but chiefly that I may compare my son 's feature and countenance with this , as he grow up , and thus be enable to judge how much or how little he resemble he father - if I may be allow to keep he with I still , and never to behold that father 's face again - a blessing I hardly dare reckon upon . it seem be make every exertion to discover the place of my retreat . he have be in person to , seek redress for he grievance - expect to hear of he victim , if not to find they there - and have tell so many lie , and with such unblushing coolness , that my uncle more than half believe he , and strongly advocate my go back to he and be friend again . but my aunt know better : she be too cool and cautious , and too well acquaint with both my husband 's character and my own to be impos upon by any specious falsehood the former could invent . but he do not want I back ; he want my child ; and give my friend to understand that if I prefer live apart from he , he will indulge the whim and let I do so unmolested , and even settle a reasonable allowance on I , provide I will immediately deliver up he son . but heaven help I ! I be not go to sell my child for gold , though it be to save both he and I from starve : it would be better that he should die with I than that he should live with he father . show I a letter he have receive from that gentleman , full of cool impudence such as would astonish any one who do not know he , but such as , I be convinced , none would know better how to answer than my brother . he give I no account of he reply , except to tell I that he have not acknowledge he acquaintance with my place of refuge , but rather leave it to be infer that it be quite unknown to he , by say it be useless to apply to he , or any other of my relation , for information on the subject , as it appear I have be drive to such extremity that I have conceal my retreat even from my best friend ; but that if he have know it , or should at any time be make aware of it , most certainly would be the last person to whom he should communicate the intelligence ; and that he need not trouble himself to bargain for the child , for he ( ) fancie he know enough of he sister to enable he to declare , that wherever she might be , or however situate , no consideration would induce she to deliver he up. 30th . - ! my kind neighbour will not let I alone . by some means they have ferret I out , and I have have to sustain visit from three different family , all more or less bent upon discover who and what I be , whence I come , and why I have choose such a home as this . they society be unnecessary to I , to say the least , and they curiosity annoy and alarm I : if I gratify it , it may lead to the ruin of my son , and if I be too mysterious it will only excite they suspicions , invite conjecture , and rouse they to greater exertion - and perhaps be the means of spread my fame from parish to parish , till it reach the ear of some one who will carry it to the of . I shall be expect to return they call , but if , upon inquiry , I find that any of they live too far away for to accompany I , they must expect in vain for a while , for I can not bear to leave he , unless it be to go to church , and I have not attempt that yet : for - it may be foolish weakness , but I be under such constant dread of he be snatch away , that I be never easy when he be not by my side ; and I fear these nervous terror would so entirely disturb my devotion , that I should obtain no benefit from the
the attendance . I mean , however , to make the experiment next , and oblige myself to leave he in charge of for a few hour . it will be a hard task , but surely no imprudence ; and the vicar have be to scold I for my neglect of the ordinance of religion . I have no sufficient excuse to offer , and I promise , if all were well , he should see I in my pew next ; for I do not wish to be set down as a infidel ; and , besides , I know I should derive great comfort and benefit from a occasional attendance at public worship , if I could only have faith and fortitude to compose my thought in conformity with the solemn occasion , and forbid they to be for ever dwell on my absent child , and on the dreadful possibility of find he go when I return ; and surely in he mercy will preserve I from so severe a trial : for my child 's own sake , if not for mine , he will not suffer he to be tear away . 3rd . - I have make some further acquaintance with my neighbour . the fine gentleman and beau of the parish and its vicinity ( in he own estimation , at least ) be a young . . . . * * * * * here it end . the rest be tear away . how cruel , just when she be go to mention I ! for I could not doubt it be you humble servant she be about to mention , though not very favourably , of course . I could tell that , as well by those few word as by the recollection of she whole aspect and demeanour towards I in the commencement of we acquaintance . well ! I could readily forgive she prejudice against I , and she hard thought of we sex in general , when I see to what brilliant specimen she experience have be limit . respecte I , however , she have long since see she error , and perhaps fall into another in the opposite extreme : for if , at first , she opinion of I have be lower than I deserv , I be convinced that now my desert be lower than she opinion ; and if the former part of this continuation have be tear away to avoid wounde my feeling , perhaps the latter portion have be remove for fear of ministering too much to my self - conceit . at any rate , I would have give much to have see it all - to have witness the gradual change , and watch the progress of she esteem and friendship for I , and whatever warmer feeling she might have ; to have see how much of love there be in she regard , and how it have grow upon she in spite of she virtuous resolution and strenuous exertion to - but no , I have no right to see it : all this be too sacred for any eye but she own , and she have do well to keep it from I . well , , what do you think of all this ? and while you read it , do you ever picture to yourself what my feeling would probably be during its perusal ? most likely not ; but I be not go to descant upon they now : I will only make this acknowledgment , little honourable as it may be to human nature , and especially to myself , - that the former half of the narrative be , to I , more painful than the latter , not that I be at all insensible to 's wrongs or unmove by she suffering , but , I must confess , I feel a kind of selfish gratification in watch she husband 's gradual decline in she good graces , and see how completely he extinguish all she affection at last . the effect of the whole , however , in spite of all my sympathy for she , and my fury against he , be to relieve my mind of a intolerable burden , and fill my heart with joy , as if some friend have rouse I from a dreadful nightmare . it be now near eight o'clock in the morning , for my candle have expire in the midst of my perusal , leave I no alternative but to get another , at the expense of alarme the house , or to go to bed , and wait the return of daylight . on my mother 's account , I choose the latter ; but how willingly I seek my pillow , and how much sleep it bring I , I leave you to imagine . at the first appearance of dawn , I rise , and bring the manuscript to the window , but it be impossible to read it yet . I devote half a hour to dress , and then return to it again . now , with a little difficulty , I could manage ; and with intense and eager interest , I devoure the remainder of its contents . when it be end , and my transient regret at its abrupt conclusion be over , I open the window and put out my head to catch the cooling breeze , and imbibe deep draught of the pure morning air . a splendid morning it be ; the half - freeze dew lay thick on the grass , the swallow be twitter round I , the rook caw , and cow low in the distance ; and early frost and summer sunshine mingl they sweetness in the air . but I do not think of that : a confusion of countless thought and varied
varied emotion crowd upon I while I gaze abstractedly on the lovely face of nature . , however , this chaos of thoughts and passion clear away , give place to two distinct emotion : joy unspeakable that my adore be all I wish to think she - that through the noisome vapour of the world 's aspersion and my own fancied conviction , she character shone bright , and clear , and stainless as that sin I could not bear to look on ; and shame and deep remorse for my own conduct . immediately after breakfast I hurry over to . have risen many degree in my estimation since yesterday . I be ready to greet she quite as a old friend ; but every kindly impulse be check by the look of cold distrust she cast upon I on open the door . the old virgin have constitute herself the guardian of she lady 's honour , I suppose , and doubtless she see in I another , only the more dangerous in be more esteem and trust by she mistress . ' Missis can not see any one to - day , sir - she be poorly , ' say she , in answer to my inquiry for . ' but I must see she , , ' say I , place my hand on the door to prevent it be be shut against I . ' indeed , sir , you can not , ' reply she , settle she countenance in still more iron frigidity than before . ' be so good as to announce I . ' ' it be no manner of use , ; she be poorly , I tell you . ' just in time to prevent I from commit the impropriety of take the citadel by storm , and push forward unannounced , a inner door open , and little appear with he frolicsome playfellow , the dog . he seize my hand between both he , and smilingly draw I forward . ' say you be to come in , , ' say he , ' and I be to go out and play with . ' retir with a sigh , and I step into the parlour and shut the door . there , before the fire - place , stand the tall , graceful figure , waste with many sorrow . I cast the manuscript on the table , and look in she face . anxious and pale , it be turn towards I ; she clear , dark eye be fix on mine with a gaze so intensely earnest that they bound I like a spell . ' have you look it over ? ' she murmure . the spell be broken . 'I have read it through , ' say I , advanc into the room , - ' and I want to know if you will forgive I - if you can forgive I ? ' she do not answer , but she eye glisten , and a faint red mantle on she lip and cheek . as I approach , she abruptly turn away , and go to the window . it be not in anger , I be well assu , but only to conceal or control she emotion . I therefore venture to follow and stand beside she there , - but not to speak . she give I she hand , without turn she head , and murmure in a voice she strove in vain to steady , - ' can you forgive I ? ' it might be deem a breach of trust , I think , to convey that lily hand to my lip , so I only gently presse it between my own , and smilingly reply , - ' I hardly can . you should have tell I this before . it show a want of confidence - ' 'Oh , no ,' cry she , eagerly interrupt I ; 'it be not that . it be no want of confidence in you ; but if I have tell you anything of my history , I must have tell you all , in order to excuse my conduct ; and I might well shrink from such a disclosure , till necessity oblige I to make it . but you forgive I ? - I have do very , very wrong , I know ; but , as usual , I have reap the bitter fruit of my own error , - and must reap they to the end . ' bitter , indeed , be the tone of anguish , repress by resolute firmness , in which this be speak . now , I raise she hand to my lip , and fervently kiss it again and again ; for tear prevent any other reply . she suffer these wild caress without resistance or resentment ; then , suddenly turn from I , she pace twice or thrice through the room . I know by the contraction of she brow , the tight compression of she lip , and wringe of she hand , that meantime a violent conflict between reason and passion be silently pass within . at length she pause before the empty fire - place , and turn to I , say calmly - if that might be call calmness which be so evidently the result of a violent effort , - ' now , , you must leave I - not this moment , but soon - and you must never come again . ' ' never again , ? just when I love you more than ever . ' ' for that very reason , if it be so , we should not meet again . I think this interview be necessary - at least , I persuade myself it be so - that we might severally ask and receive each
each other 's pardon for the past ; but there can be no excuse for another . I shall leave this place , as soon as I have mean to seek another asylum ; but we intercourse must end here . ' ' end here ! ' echo I ; and approach the high , carve chimney - piece , I lean my hand against it be heavy moulding , and drop my forehead upon it in silent , sullen despondency . ' you must not come again , ' continue she . there be a slight tremor in she voice , but I think she whole manner be provokingly compose , consider the dreadful sentence she pronounce . ' you must know why I tell you so , ' she resume ; ' and you must see that it be better to part at once : - if it be hard to say adieu for ever , you ought to help I . ' she pause . I do not answer . ' will you promise not to come ? - if you will not , and if you do come here again , you will drive I away before I know where to find another place of refuge - or how to seek it . ' ' , ' say I , turn impatiently towards she , 'I can not discuss the matter of eternal separation calmly and dispassionately as you can do . it be no question of mere expedience with I ; it be a question of life and death ! ' she be silent . she pale lip quiver , and she finger tremble with agitation , as she nervously entwin they in the hair - chain to which be append she small gold watch - the only thing of value she have permit herself to keep . I have say a unjust and cruel thing ; but I must need follow it up with something worse . ' but , ! ' I begin in a soft , low tone , not da to raise my eye to she face , ' that man be not you husband : in the sight of heaven he have forfeit all claim to - ' she seize my arm with a grasp of startling energy . ' , do not ! ' she cry , in a tone that would have pierce a heart of adamant . ' for 's sake , do not you attempt these argument ! no fiend could torture I like this ! ' 'I will not , I will not ! ' say I , gently lay my hand on hers ; almost as much alarme at she vehemence as asham of my own misconduct . ' instead of act like a true friend , ' continue she , break from I , and throw herself into the old arm -chair , ' and help I with all you might - or rather take you own part in the struggle of right against passion - you leave all the burden to I ; - and not satisfied with that , you do you utmost to fight against I - when you know that ! - ' she pause , and hide she face in she handkerchief . ' forgive I , Helen ! ' plead I . 'I will never utter another word on the subject . but may we not still meet as friend ? ' ' it will not do , ' she reply , mournfully shak she head ; and then she raise she eye to mine , with a mildly reproachful look that seem to say , ' you must know that as well as I .' ' then what must we do ? ' cry I , passionately . but immediately I add in a quieter tone - ' I will do whatever you desire ; only do not say that this meeting be to be we last . ' ' and why not ? do not you know that every time we meet the thought of the final parting will become more painful ? do not you feel that every interview make we dearer to each other than the last ? ' the utterance of this last question be hurry and low , and the downcast eye and burn blush too plainly show that she , at least , have feel it . it be scarcely prudent to make such a admission , or to add - as she presently do - 'I have power to bid you go , now : another time it might be different , ' - but I be not base enough to attempt to take advantage of she candour . ' but we may write ,' I timidly suggest . ' you will not deny I that consolation ? ' ' we can hear of each other through my brother . ' ' you brother ! ' a pang of remorse and shame shot through I . she have not hear of the injury he have sustain at my hand ; and I have not the courage to tell she . ' you brother will not help we ,' I say : ' he would have all communion between we to be entirely at a end . ' ' and he would be right , I suppose . as a friend of both , he would wish we both well ; and every friend would tell we it be we interest , as well as we duty , to forget each other , though we might not see it ourselves . but do not be afraid , , ' she add , smile sadly at my manifest discomposure ; ' there be little chance of my forgett you . but I do not mean that should be the means of transmit message between we - only that each might know ,
, through he , of the other 's welfare ; - and more than this ought not to be : for you be yoing , , and you ought to marry - and will some time , though you may think it impossible now : and though I hardly can say I wish you to forget I , I know it be right that you should , both for you own happiness , and that of you future wife ; - and therefore I must and will wish it , ' she add resolutely . ' and you be young too , ,' I boldly reply ; ' and when that profligate scoundrel have run through he career , you will give you hand to I - I will wait till then . ' but she would not leave I this support . independently of the moral evil of base we hope upon the death of another , who , if unfit for this world , be at least no less so for the next , and whose amelioration would thus become we bane and he greatest transgression we greatest benefit , - she maintain it to be madness : many man of 's habit have live to a ripe though miserable old age . ' and if I , ' say she , 'be yoing in year , I be old in sorrow ; but even if trouble should fail to kill I before vice destroy he , think , if he reach but fifty year or so , would you wait twenty or fifteen - in vague uncertainty and suspense - through all the prime of youth and manhood - and marry at last a woman fad and wear as I shall be - without ever have see I from this day to that ? - you would not , ' she continue , interrupt my earnest protestation of unfailing constancy , - 'or if you would , you should not . trust I , ; in this matter I know better than you . you think I cold and stony - hear , and you may , but - ' 'I do not , . ' ' well , never mind : you might if you would : but I have not spend my solitude in utter idleness , and I be not speak now from the impulse of the moment , as you do . I have think of all these matter again and again ; I have argue these question with myself , and ponder well we past , and present , and future career ; and , believe I , I have come to the right conclusion at last . trust my word rather than you own feeling now , and in a few year you will see that I be right - though at present I hardly can see it myself , ' she murmure with a sigh as she rest she head on she hand . ' and do not argue against I any more : all you can say have be already say by my own heart and refute by my reason . it be hard enough to combat those suggestion as they be whisper within I ; in you mouth they be ten time worse , and if you know how much they pain I you would cease at once , I know . if you know my present feeling , you would even try to relieve they at the expense of you own . ' 'I will go - in a minute , if that can relieve you - and never return ! ' say I , with bitter emphasis . ' but , if we may never meet , and never hope to meet again , be it a crime to exchange we thought by letter ? may not kind spirit meet , and mingle in communion , whatever be the fate and circumstance of they earthly tenement ? ' ' they may , they may ! ' cry she , with a momentary burst of glad enthusiasm . 'i thought of that too , , but I fear to mention it , because I fear you would not understand my view upon the subject . I fear it even now - I fear any kind friend would tell we we be both delude ourselves with the idea of keep up a spiritual intercourse without hope or prospect of anything further - without foster vain regret and hurtful aspiration , and feed thought that should be sternly and pitilessly leave to perish of inanition . ' ' never mind we kind friend : if they can part we body , it be enough ; in 's name , let they not sunder we soul ! ' cry I , in terror lest she should deem it she duty to deny we this last remain consolation . ' but no letter can pass between we here , ' say she , ' without give fresh food for scandal ; and when I depart , I have intend that my new abode should be unknown to you as to the rest of the world ; not that I should doubt you word if you promise not to visit I , but I think you would be more tranquil in you own mind if you know you could not do it , and likely to find less difficulty in abstract yourself from I if you could not picture my situation to you mind . but listen , ' say she , smilingly put up she finger to check my impatient reply : 'in six month you shall hear from precisely where I be ; and if you still retain you wish to write to I , and think you can maintain a correspondence all think , all spirit - such as disembodied soul or unimpassioned friend , at least , might hold
hold , - write , and I will answer you . ' ' six months ! ' ' yes , to give you present ardour time to cool , and try the truth and constancy of you soul 's love for mine . and now , enough have be say between we . why can not we part at once ? ' exclaim she , almost wildly , after a moment 's pause , as she suddenly rise from she chair , with she hand resolutely clasp together . I think it be my duty to go without delay ; and I approached and half extend my hand as if to take leave - she grasp it in silence . but this thought of final separation be too intolerable : it seem to squeeze the blood out of my heart ; and my foot be glue to the floor . ' and must we never meet again ? ' I murmure , in the anguish of my soul . ' we shall meet in heaven . let we think of that , ' say she in a tone of desperate calmness ; but she eye glitter wildly , and she face be deadly pale . ' but not as we be now ,' I could not help reply . ' it give I little consolation to think I shall next behold you as a disembody spirit , or a altered being , with a frame perfect and glorious , but not like this ! - and a heart , perhaps , entirely estrange from I . ' ' no , , there be perfect love in heaven ! ' 'So perfect , I suppose , that it soar above distinction , and you will have no closer sympathy with I than with any one of the ten thousand thousand angels and the innumerable multitude of happy spirits round we . ' ' whatever I be , you will be the same , and , therefore , can not possibly regret it ; and whatever that change may be we know it must be for the better . ' ' but if I be to be so change that I shall cease to adore you with my whole heart and soul , and love you beyond every other creature , I shall not be myself ; and though , if ever I win heaven at all , I must , I know , be infinitely better and happier than I be now , my earthly nature can not rejoice in the anticipation of such beatitude , from which itself and its chief joy must be exclude . ' ' be you love all earthly , then ? ' ' no , but I be suppose we shall have no more intimate communion with each other than with the rest . ' ' if so , it will be because we love they more , and not each other less . increase of love bring increase of happiness , when it be mutual , and pure as that will be . ' ' but can you , , contemplate with delight this prospect of lose I in a sea of glory ? ' 'I own I can not ; but we know not that it will be so ; - and I do know that to regret the exchange of earthly pleasur for the joy of heaven , be as if the grovelling caterpillar should lament that it must one day quit the nibbled leaf to soar aloft and flutter through the air , rove at will from flower to flower , sipp sweet honey from they cup , or bask in they sunny petal . if these little creature know how great a change await they , no doubt they would regret it ; but would not all such sorrow be misplace ? and if that illustration will not move you , here be another :- we be child now ; we feel as child , and we understand as child ; and when we be tell that man and woman do not play with toy , and that we companion will one day weary of the trivial sport and occupations that interest they and we so deeply now , we can not help be sadden at the thought of such a alteration , because we can not conceive that as we grow up we own mind will become so enlarged and elevate that we ourselves shall then regard as trifl those object and pursuit we now so fondly cherish , and that , though we companion will no longer join we in those childish pastime , they will drink with we at other fountain of delight , and mingle they soul with ours in higher aim and nobler occupation beyond we present comprehension , but not less deeply relished or less truly good for that , while yet both we and they remain essentially the same individual as before . but , , can you really derive no consolation from the thought that we may meet together where there be no more pain and sorrow , no more strive against sin , and struggle of the spirit against the flesh ; where both will behold the same glorious truth , and drink exalt and supreme felicity from the same fountain of light and goodness - that be whom both will worship with the same intensity of holy ardour - and where pure and happy creature both will love with the same divine affection ? if you cannot , never write to I ! ' ' Helen , I can ! if faith would never fail . ' ' now , then ,' exclaim she , ' while this hope be strong within we - ' ' we will part ,' I cry . ' you shall not have the pain of another effort to dismiss I . I will go at
at once ; but - ' I do not put my request in word : she understand it instinctively , and this time she yield too - or rather , there be nothing so deliberate as request or yield in the matter : there be a sudden impulse that neither could resist . one moment I stand and look into she face , the next I hold she to my heart , and we seem to grow together in a close embrace from which no physical or mental force could rmend we . a whisper ' bless you ! ' and ' go - go ! ' be all she say ; but while she speak she hold I so fast that , without violence , I could not have obey she . at length , however , by some heroic effort , we tore ourselves apart , and I rush from the house . I have a confused remembrance of see little Arthur run up the garden - walk to meet I , and of bolting over the wall to avoid he - and subsequently run down the steep field , clear the stone fence and hedge as they come in my way , till I get completely out of sight of the old hall and down to the bottom of the hill ; and then of long hour spend in bitter tear and lamentation , and melancholy musing in the lonely valley , with the eternal music in my ear , of the west wind rush through the overshadowing tree , and the brook babbling and gurgl along its stony bed ; my eye , for the most part , vacantly fix on the deep , cheque shade restlessly play over the bright sunny grass at my foot , where now and then a withered leaf or two would come dancing to share the revelry ; but my heart be away up the hill in that dark room where she be weepe desolate and alone - she whom I be not to comfort , not to see again , till year or suffering have overcome we both , and tear we spirits from they perishing abode of clay . there be little business do that day , you may be sure . the farm be abandon to the labourer , and the labourer be leave to they own device . but one duty must be attend to ; I have not forget my assault upon ; and I must see he to apologise for the unhappy deed . I would fain have put it off till the morrow ; but what if he should denounce I to he sister in the meantime ? no , no ! I must ask he pardon to - day , and entreat he to be lenient in he accusation , if the revelation must be make . I defer it , however , till the evening , when my spirit be more composed , and when - oh , wonderful perversity of human nature ! - some faint germ of indefinite hope be begin to rise in my mind ; not that I intend to cherish they , after all that have be say on the subject , but there they must lie for a while , uncrushed though not encourage , till I have learn to live without they . arrive at , the young squire 's abode , I find no little difficulty in obtain admission to he presence . the servant that open the door tell I he master be very ill , and seem to think it doubtful whether he would be able to see I . I be not go to be baulk , however . I wait calmly in the hall to be announce , but inwardly determined to take no denial . the message be such as I expect - a polite intimation that could see no one ; he be feverish , and must not be disturb . 'I shall not disturb he long , ' say I ; ' but I must see he for a moment : it be on business of importance that I wish to speak to he . ' 'I will tell he , sir , ' say the man . and I advance further into the hall and follow he nearly to the door of the apartment where he master be - for it see he be not in bed . the answer return be that hope I would be so good as to leave a message or a note with the servant , as he could attend to no business at present . 'he may as well see I as you , ' say I ; and , step past the astonished footman , I boldly rap at the door , enter , and close it behind I . the room be spacious and handsomely furnish - very comfortably , too , for a bachelor . a clear , red fire be burn in the polished grate : a superannuate greyhound , give up to idleness and good living , lay basking before it on the thick , soft rug , on one corner of which , beside the sofa , sit a smart young springer , look wistfully up in its master 's face - perhaps ask permission to share he couch , or , it might be , only solicite a caress from he hand or a kind word from he lip . the invalid himself look very interesting as he lay recline there , in he elegant dressing - gown , with a silk handkerchief bound across he temple . he usually pale face be flushed and feverish ; he eye be half close , until he become sensible of my presence - and then he open they wide enough : one hand be throw listlessly over the back of the sofa , and hold
hold a small volume , with which , apparently , he have be vainly attempt to beguile the weary hour . he drop it , however , in he start of indignant surprise as I advanc into the room and stand before he on the rug . he raise himself on he pillow , and gaze upon I with equal degree of nervous horror , anger , and amazement depict on he countenance . ' , I scarcely expect this ! ' he say ; and the blood leave he cheek as he speak . 'I know you do not , ' answer I ; ' but be quiet a minute , and I will tell you what I come for . ' Unthinkingly , I advance a step or two nearer . he wince at my approach , with a expression of aversion and instinctive physical fear anything but conciliatory to my feeling . I step back , however . ' make you story a short one , ' say he , put he hand on the small silver bell that stand on the table beside he , 'or I shall be obliged to call for assistance . I be in no state to bear you brutality now , or you presence either . ' and in truth the moisture start from he pore and stand on he pale forehead like dew . such a reception be hardly calculate to diminish the difficulty of my unenviable task . it must be perform however , in some fashion ; and so I plunge into it at once , and flounder through it as I could . ' the truth be , , ' say I , 'I have not ac quite correctly towards you of late - especially on this last occasion ; and I be come to - in short , to express my regret for what have be do , and to beg you pardon . if you do not choose to grant it ,' I add hastily , not like the aspect of he face , ' it be no matter ; only I have do my duty - that be all . ' ' it be easily do , ' reply he , with a faint smile border on a sneer : 'to abuse you friend and knock he on the head without any assignable cause , and then tell he the deed be not quite correct , but it be no matter whether he pardon it or not . ' 'I forget to tell you that it be in consequence of a mistake , ' - mutter I . 'I should have make a very handsome apology , but you provoke I so confoundedly with you - . well , I suppose it be my fault . the fact be , I do not know that you be 's brother , and I see and hear some thing respect you conduct towards she which be calculate to awake unpleasant suspicions , that , allow I to say , a little candour and confidence on you part might have remove ; and , at last , I chance to overhear a part of a conversation between you and she that make I think I have a right to hate you . ' ' and how come you to know that I be she brother ? ' ask he , in some anxiety . ' she tell I herself . she tell I all . she know I might be trust . but you need not disturb yourself about that , , for I have see the last of she ! ' ' the last ! be she go , then ? ' ' no ; but she have bid adieu to I , and I have promise never to go near that house again while she inhabit it . ' I could have groane aloud at the bitter thought awaken by this turn in the discourse . but I only clench my hand and stamp my foot upon the rug . my companion , however , be evidently relieved . ' you have do right ,' he say , in a tone of unqualified approbation , while he face brighten into almost a sunny expression . ' and as for the mistake , I be sorry for both we sake that it should have occur . perhaps you can forgive my want of candour , and remember , as some partial mitigation of the offence , how little encouragement to friendly confidence you have give I of late . ' ' yes , yes - I remember it all : nobody can blame I more than I blame myself in my own heart ; at any rate , nobody can regret more sincerely than I do the result of my brutality , as you rightly term it . ' ' never mind that , ' say he , faintly smile ; ' let we forget all unpleasant word on both side , as well as deeds , and consign to oblivion everything that we have cause to regret . have you any objection to take my hand , or you would rather not ? ' it tremble through weakness as he hold it out , and drop before I have time to catch it and give it a hearty squeeze , which he have not the strength to return . ' how dry and burn you hand be , , ' say I . ' you be really ill , and I have make you worse by all this talk . ' 'Oh , it be nothing ; only a cold get by the rain . ' ' my do , too . ' ' never mind that . but tell I , do you mention this affair to my sister ? ' 'To confess the truth , I have not the courage to do so ;
; but when you tell she , will you just say that I deeply regret it , and - ? ' 'Oh , never fear ! I shall say nothing against you , as long as you keep you good resolution of remaine aloon from she . she have not hear of my illness , then , that you be aware of ? ' 'I think not . ' 'I be glad of that , for I have be all this time torment myself with the fear that somebody would tell she I be die , or desperately ill , and she would be either distresse herself on account of she inability to hear from I or do I any good , or perhaps commit the madness of come to see I . I must contrive to let she know something about it , if I can , ' continue he , reflectively , 'or she will be hear some such story . many would be glad to tell she such news , just to see how she would take it ; and then she might expose herself to fresh scandal . ' 'i wish I have tell she , ' say I . ' if it be not for my promise , I would tell she now . ' ' by no means ! I be not dream of that ; - but if I be to write a short note , now , not mention you , , but just give a slight account of my illness , by way of excuse for my not come to see she , and to put she on she guard against any exaggerated report she may hear , - and address it in a disguise hand - would you do I the favour to slip it into the post-office as you pass ? for I dare not trust any of the servants in such a case . ' most willingly I consent , and immediately bring he he desk . there be little need to disguise he hand , for the poor fellow seem to have considerable difficulty in writing at all , so as to be legible . when the note be done , I think it time to retire , and take leave , after ask if there be anything in the world I could do for he , little or great , in the way of alleviat he suffering , and repair the injury I have do . ' no , ' say he ; ' you have already do much towards it ; you have do more for I than the most skilful physician could do : for you have relieve my mind of two great burden - anxiety on my sister 's account , and deep regret upon you own : for I do believe these two source of torment have have more effect in work I up into a fever than anything else ; and I be persuade I shall soon recover now . there be one more thing you can do for I , and that be , come and see I now and then - for you see I be very lonely here , and I promise you entrance shall not be dispute again . ' I engage to do so , and depart with a cordial pressure of the hand . I post the letter on my way home , most manfully resist the temptation of dropping in a word from myself at the same time . I feel strongly tempted , at time , to enlighten my mother and sister on the real character and circumstance of the persecute tenant of , and at first I greatly regret have omit to ask that lady 's permission to do so ; but , on due reflection , I consider that if it be know to they , it could not long remain a secret to the Millwards and Wilsons , and such be my present appreciation of 's disposition , that , if once she get a clue to the story , I should fear she would soon find means to enlighten upon the place of he wife 's retreat . I would therefore wait patiently till these weary six month were over , and then , when the fugitive have find another home , and I be permit to write to she , I would beg to be allow to clear she name from these vile calumny : at present I must contend myself with simply assert that I know they to be false , and would prove it some day , to the shame of those who slander she . I do not think anybody believe I , but everybody soon learn to avoid insinuat a word against she , or even mention she name in my presence . they think I be so madly infatuate by the seduction of that unhappy lady that I be determined to support she in the very face of reason ; and meantime I grow insupportably morose and misanthropical from the idea that every one I meet be harbour unworthy thought of the suppose , and would express they if he da . my poor mother be quite distressed about I ; but I could not help it - at least I think I could not , though sometimes I feel a pang of remorse for my undutiful conduct to she , and make a effort to amend , attend with some partial success ; and indeed I be generally more humanised in my demeanour to she than to any one else , accept . and usually shunn my presence ; and it be well they do , for I be not fit company for they , nor they for I , under the present circumstance . do not leave till above two month after we farewell interview . during that time she never appear
appear at church , and I never go near the house : I only know she be still there by she brother 's brief answer to my many and varied inquiry respect she . I be a very constant and attentive visitor to he throughout the whole period of he illness and convalescence ; not only from the interest I take in he recovery , and my desire to cheer he up and make the utmost possible amend for my former ' brutality , ' but from my grow attachment to himself , and the increase pleasure I find in he society - partly from he increase cordiality to I , but chiefly on account of he close connection , both in blood and in affection , with my adored . I love he for it better than I like to express : and I take a secret delight in press those slender white finger , so marvellously like she own , consider he be not a woman , and in watch the passing change in he fair , pale feature , and observe the intonation of he voice , detect resemblances which I wonder have never strike I before . he provoke I at time , indeed , by he evident reluctance to talk to I about he sister , though I do not question the friendliness of he motives in wishing to discourage my remembrance of she . he recovery be not quite so rapid as he have expect it to be ; he be not able to mount he pony till a fortnight after the date of we reconciliation ; and the first use he make of he returning strength be to ride over by night to , to see he sister . it be a hazardous enterprise both for he and for she , but he think it necessary to consult with she on the subject of she project departure , if not to calm she apprehension respect he health , and the worst result be a slight relapse of he illness , for no one know of the visit but the inmate of the old , except myself ; and I believe it have not be he intention to mention it to I , for when I come to see he the next day , and observe he be not so well as he ought to have been , he merely say he have catch cold by be out too late in the evening . ' you will never be able to see you sister , if you do not take care of yourself , ' say I , a little provoke at the circumstance on she account , instead of commiserat he . 'I have see she already , ' say he , quietly . ' you have see she ! ' cry I , in astonishment . ' yes . ' and then he tell I what consideration have impell he to make the venture , and with what precaution he have make it . ' and how be she ? ' I eagerly ask . 'as usual , ' be the brief though sad reply . 'as usual - that be , far from happy and far from strong . ' ' she be not positively ill , ' return he ; ' and she will recover she spirits in a while , I have no doubt - but so many trial have be almost too much for she . how threaten those cloud look , ' continue he , turn towards the window . ' we shall have thunder - shower before night , I imagine , and they be just in the midst of stack my corn . have you get yours all in yet ? ' ' no . and , , do she - do you sister mention I ? ' ' she ask if I have see you lately . ' ' and what else do she say ? ' 'I can not tell you all she say , ' reply he , with a slight smile ; ' for we talk a good deal , though my stay be but short ; but we conversation be chiefly on the subject of she intend departure , which I beg she to delay till I be better able to assist she in she search after another home . ' ' but do she say no more about I ? ' ' she do not say much about you , . I should not have encourage she to do so , have she be inclin ; but happily she be not : she only ask a few question concern you , and seem satisfied with my brief answer , wherein she show herself wiser than she friend ; and I may tell you , too , that she seem to be far more anxious lest you should think too much of she , than lest you should forget she . ' ' she be right . ' ' but I fear you anxiety be quite the other way respect she . ' ' no , it be not : I wish she to be happy ; but I do not wish she to forget I altogether . she know it be impossible that I should forget she ; and she be right to wish I not to remember she too well . I should not desire she to regret I too deeply ; but I can scarcely imagine she will make herself very unhappy about I , because I know I be not worthy of it , except in my appreciation of she . ' ' you be neither of you worthy of a broken heart , - nor of all the sigh , and tear , and sorrowful thought that have be , and I fear will be , waste upon you both ; but , at present ,
, each have a more exalted opinion of the other than , I fear , he or she deserfe ; and my sister 's feeling be naturally full as keen as yours , and I believe more constant ; but she have the good sense and fortitude to strive against they in this particular ; and I trust she will not rest till she have entirely wean she thought - ' he hesitate . ' from I , ' say I . ' and I wish you would make the like exertion , ' continue he . ' do she tell you that that be she intention ? ' ' no ; the question be not broach between we : there be no necessity for it , for I have no doubt that such be she determination . ' 'To forget I ? ' ' yes , ! why not ? ' 'Oh , well ! ' be my only audible reply ; but I internally answer , - ' no , Lawrence , you be wrong there : she be not determined to forget I . it would be wrong to forget one so deeply and fondly devote to she , who can so thoroughly appreciate she excellency , and sympathise with all she thought , as I can do , and it would be wrong in I to forget so excellent and divine a piece of 's creation as she , when I have once so truly love and know she . ' but I say no more to he on that subject . I instantly start a new topic of conversation , and soon take leave of my companion , with a feeling of less cordiality towards he than usual . perhaps I have no right to be annoyed at he , but I be so nevertheless . in little more than a week after this I meet he return from a visit to the ' ; and I now resolve to do he a good turn , though at the expense of he feeling , and perhaps at the risk of incurr that displeasure which be so commonly the reward of those who give disagreeable information , or tender they advice unasked . in this , believe I , I be actuate by no motives of revenge for the occasional annoyance I have lately sustain from he , - nor yet by any feeling of malevolent enmity towards , but purely by the fact that I could not endure that such a woman should be 's sister , and that , as well for he own sake as for hers , I could not bear to think of he be deceive into a union with one so unworthy of he , and so utterly unfit to be the partner of he quiet home , and the companion of he life . he have have uncomfortable suspicions on that head himself , I imagine ; but such be he inexperience , and such be the lady 's power of attraction , and she skill in bring they to bear upon he young imagination , that they have not disturb he long ; and I believe the only effectual cause of the vacillating indecision that have preserve he hithertoo from make a actual declaration of love , be the consideration of she connection , and especially of she mother , whom he could not abide . have they live at a distance , he might have surmount the objection , but within two or three mile of it be really no light matter . ' you have be to call on the Wilsons , Lawrence , ' say I , as I walk beside he pony . ' yes , ' reply he , slightly avert he face : 'I think it but civil to take the first opportunity of return they kind attention , since they have be so very particular and constant in they inquirie throughout the whole course of my illness . ' ' it be all 's do . ' ' and if it be , ' return he , with a very perceptible blush , ' be that any reason why I should not make a suitable acknowledgment ? ' ' it be a reason why you should not make the acknowledgment she look for . ' ' let we drop that subject if you please , ' say he , in evident displeasure . 'no , , with you leave we will continue it a while longer ; and I will tell you something , now we be about it , which you may believe or not as you choose - only please to remember that it be not my custom to speak falsely , and that in this case I can have no motive for misrepresent the truth - ' ' well , , what now ? ' ' hate you sister . it may be natural enough that , in she ignorance of the relationship , she should feel some degree of enmity against she , but no good or amiable woman would be capable of evincing that bitter , cold - blooded , design malice towards a fancied rival that I have observe in she . ' ' ! ' ' yes - and it be my belief that and she , if not the very originator of the slanderous report that have be propagate , be designedly the encourager and chief disseminator of they . she be not desirous to mix up you name in the matter , of course , but she delight be , and still be , to blacke you sister 's character to the utmost of she power , without risk too greatly the exposure of she own malevolence ! ' 'I can not believe it , ' interrupt my companion , he face burn with indignation . ' well , as I can not
not prove it , I must content myself with asserting that it be so to the best of my belief ; but as you would not willingly marry if it be so , you will do well to be cautious , till you have prove it to be otherwise . ' 'I never tell you , , that I intend to marry , ' say he , proudly . ' no , but whether you do or not , she intend to marry you . ' ' do she tell you so ? ' 'no , but - ' ' then you have no right to make such a assertion respect she . ' he slightly quicken he pony pace , but I lay my hand on its mane , determine he should not leave I yet . ' wait a moment , Lawrence , and let I explain myself ; and do not be so very - I do not know what to call it - inaccessible as you be . - I know what you think of ; and I believe I know how far you be mistaken in you opinion : you think she be singularly charming , elegant , sensible , and refin : you be not aware that she be selfish , cold - hear , ambitious , artful , shallow - minded - ' ' enough , - enough ! ' ' no ; let I finish :- you do not know that , if you marry she , you home would be rayless and comfortless ; and it would break you heart at last to find yourself to one so wholly incapable of share you taste , feeling , and idea - so utterly destitute of sensibility , good feeling , and true nobility of soul . ' ' have you do ? ' ask my companion quietly . ' yes ; - I know you hate I for my impertinence , but I do not care if it only conduce to preserve you from that fatal mistake . ' ' well ! ' return he , with a rather wintry smile - 'I be glad you have overcome or forgote you own affliction so far as to be able to study so deeply the affair of other , and trouble you head so unnecessarily about the fancied or possible calamity of they future life . ' we part - somewhat coldly again : but still we do not cease to be friend ; and my well - mean warning , though it might have be more judiciously deliver , as well as more thankfully receive , be not wholly unproductive of the desire effect : he visit to the be not repeat , and though , in we subsequent interview , he never mention she name to I , nor I to he , - I have reason to believe he ponder my word in he mind , eagerly though covertly seek information respect the fair lady from other quarter , secretly compare my character of she with what he have himself observe and what he hear from other , and finally come to the conclusion that , all thing consider , she have much better remain of than be transmute into of . I believe , too , that he soon learn to contemplate with secret amazement he former predilection , and to congratulate himself on the lucky escape he have make ; but he never confess it to I , or hint one word of acknowledgment for the part I have have in he deliverance , but this be not surprising to any one that know he as I do . as for , she , of course , be disappoint and embitter by the sudden cold neglect and ultimate desertion of she former admirer . have I do wrong to blight she cherish hope ? I think not ; and certainly my conscience have never accuse I , from that day to this , of any evil design in the matter . one morning , about the beginning of , while I be indit some business letter , shortly after breakfast , come to call upon my sister . Rose have neither the discrimination nor the virulence to regard the little demon as I do , and they still preserve they former intimacy . at the moment of she arrival , however , there be no one in the room but Fergus and myself , my mother and sister be both of they absent , 'on household car intend ' ; but I be not go to lay myself out for she amusement , whoever else might so incline : I merely honoure she with a careless salutation and a few word of course , and then go on with my writing , leave my brother to be more polite if he choose . but she want to tease I . ' what a pleasure it be to find you at home , ! ' say she , with a disingenuously malicious smile . 'I so seldom see you now , for you never come to the vicarage . , be quite offended , I can tell you , ' she add playfully , look into my face with a impertinent laugh , as she seat herself , half beside and half before my desk , off the corner of the table . 'I have have a good deal to do of late , ' say I , without look up from my letter . ' have you , indeed ! somebody say you have be strangely neglect you business these last few month . ' ' somebody say wrong , for , these last two month especially , I have be particularly plodd and diligent . ' 'Ah ! well , there be nothing like active employment , I suppose , to conseal the afflict ; - and ,
, excuse I , , but you look so very far from well , and have be , by all account , so moody and thoughtful of late , - I could almost think you have some secret care prey on you spirit . Formerly , ' say she timidly , 'I could have venture to ask you what it be , and what I could do to comfort you : I dare not do it now . ' ' you be very kind , . when I think you can do anything to comfort I , I will make bold to tell you . ' ' pray do ! - I suppose I may not guess what it be that trouble you ? ' ' there be no necessity , for I will tell you plainly . the thing that trouble I the most at present be a young lady sit at my elbow , and prevent I from finish my letter , and , thereafter , repair to my daily business . ' before she could reply to this ungallant speech , rose enter the room ; and rise to greet she , they both seate themselves near the fire , where that idle lad be stand , lean he shoulder against the corner of the chimney - piece , with he leg cross and he hand in he breech -pocket . ' now , , I will tell you a piece of news - I hope you have not hear it before : for good , bad , or indifferent , one always like to be the first to tell . it be about that sad - ' ' Hush - sh - sh ! ' whisper , in a tone of solemn import . ' " we never mention she ; she name be never hear . " ' and glance up , I catch he with he eye askance on I , and he finger point to he forehead ; then , wink at the young lady with a doleful shake of the head , be whisper - 'A monomania - but do not mention it - all right but that . ' 'I should be sorry to injure any one 's feeling , ' return she , speak below she breath . 'Another time , perhaps . ' ' speak out , ! ' say I , not deign to notice the other 's buffoonery : ' you need not fear to say anything in my presence . ' ' well , ' answer she , ' perhaps you know already that 's husband be not really dead , and that she have run away from he ? ' I start , and feel my face glow ; but I bend it over my letter , and go on fold it up as she proceed . ' but perhaps you do not know that she be now go back to he again , and that a perfect reconciliation have take place between they ? only think , ' she continue , turn to the confound rose , ' what a fool the man must be ! ' ' and who give you this piece of intelligence , ? ' say I , interrupt my sister 's exclamation . 'I have it from a very authentic source . ' ' from whom , may I ask ? ' ' from one of the servant at . ' 'Oh ! I be not aware that you be on such intimate term with 's household . ' ' it be not from the man himself that I hear it , but he tell it in confidence to we maid , and tell it to I . ' 'In confidence , I suppose ? and you tell it in confidence to we ? but I can tell you that it be but a lame story after all , and scarcely one - half of it true . ' while I speak I complete the sealing and direction of my letter , with a somewhat unsteady hand , in spite of all my effort to retain composure , and in spite of my firm conviction that the story be a lame one - that the suppose , most certainly , have not voluntarily go back to she husband , or dreamt of a reconciliation . most likely she be go away , and the tale - bear servant , not know what be become of she , have conjecture that such be the case , and we fair visitor have detailead it as a certainty , delighte with such a opportunity of torment I . but it be possible - barly possible - that some one might have betraye she , and she have be take away by force . determined to know the worst , I hastily pocket my two letter , and mutter something about be too late for the post , leave the room , rush into the yard , and vociferously call for my horse . no one be there , I drag he out of the stable myself , strap the saddle on to he back and the bridle on to he head , mount , and speedily gallop away to . I find its owner pensively stroll in the grounds . ' be you sister go ? ' be my first word as I grasp he hand , instead of the usual inquiry after he health . ' yes , she be gone , ' be he answer , so calmly speak that my terror be at once remove . 'I suppose I may not know where she be ? ' say I , as I dismount , and relinquish my horse to the gardener , who , be the only servant within call , have be summon by he master , from he employment of raking up the dead leave on the lawn
lawn , to take he to the stable . my companion gravely take my arm , and lead I away to the garden , thus answer my question , - ' she be at , in - shire . ' ' where ? ' cry I , with a convulsive start . ' at . ' ' how be it ? ' I gas . ' who betraye she ? ' ' she go of she own accord . ' ' impossible , ! she could not be so frantic ! ' exclaim I , vehemently grasp he arm , as if to force he to unsay those hateful word . ' she do , ' persist he in the same grave , collect manner as before ; 'and not without reason ,' he continue , gently disengage himself from my grasp . ' be ill . ' ' and so she go to nurse he ? ' ' yes . ' ' ! ' I could not help exclaim , and look up with a rather reproachful glance . ' be he die , then ? ' 'I think not , . ' ' and how many more nurse have he ? how many lady be there beside to take care of he ? ' ' none ; he be alone , or she would not have go . ' 'Oh , confound it ! this be intolerable ! ' ' what be ? that he should be alone ? ' I attempt no reply , for I be not sure that this circumstance do not partly conduce to my distraction . I therefore continue to pace the walk in silent anguish , with my hand presse to my forehead ; then suddenly pause and turn to my companion , I impatiently exclaim , ' why do she take this infatuated step ? what fiend persuade she to it ? ' ' nothing persuade she but she own sense of duty . ' ' ! ' 'I be half inclined to say so myself , , at first . I assure you it be not by my advice that she go , for I detest that man as fervently as you can do , - except , indeed , that he reformation would give I much greater pleasure than he death ; but all I do be to inform she of the circumstance of he illness ( the consequence of a fall from he horse in hunting ) , and to tell she that that unhappy person , , have leave he some time ago . ' ' it be ill do ! now , when he find the convenience of she presence , he will make all manner of lie speeches and false , fair promise for the future , and she will believe he , and then she condition will be ten time worse and ten time more irremediable than before . ' ' there do not appear to be much ground for such apprehension at present , ' say he , produce a letter from he pocket . ' from the account I receive this morning , I should say - ' it be she write ! by a irresistible impulse I hold out my hand , and the word , ' let I see it , ' involuntarily pass my lip . he be evidently reluctant to grant the request , but while he hesitate I snatch it from he hand . Recollect myself , however , the minute after , I offer to restore it . ' here , take it , ' say I , ' if you do not want I to read it . ' ' no , ' reply he , ' you may read it if you like . ' I read it , and so may you . , 4th . dear , - I know you will be anxious to hear from I , and I will tell you all I can . be very ill , but not die , or in any immediate danger ; and he be rather better at present than he be when I come . I find the house in sad confusion : , , every decent servant have leave , and those that be come to supply they place be a negligent , disorderly set , to say no worse - I must change they again , if I stay . a professional nurse , a grim , hard old woman , have be hire to attend the wretched invalid . he suffer much , and have no fortitude to bear he through . the immediate injury he sustain from the accident , however , be not very severe , and would , as the doctor say , have be but trifl to a man of temperate habit , but with he it be very different . on the night of my arrival , when I first enter he room , he be lie in a kind of half delirium . he do not notice I till I speak , and then he mistake I for another . ' be it you , , come again ? ' he murmure . ' what do you leave I for ? ' ' it be I , - it be Helen , you wife , ' I reply . ' my wife ! ' say he , with a start . ' for heaven 's sake , do not mention she - I have none . take she ,' he cry , a moment after , ' and you , too ! what do you do it for ? ' I say no more ; but observe that he keep gaze towards the foot of the bed , I go and sit there , place the light so as to shine full upon I , for I think he might be die ,
, and I want he to know I . for a long time he lay silently look upon I , first with a vacant stare , then with a fix gaze of strange grow intensity . at last he start I by suddenly raise himself on he elbow and demand in a horrified whisper , with he eye still fix upon I , ' who be it ? ' ' it be , ' say I , quietly rise at the same time , and remove to a less conspicuous position . ' I must be go mad , ' cry he , 'or something - delirious , perhaps ; but leave I , whoever you be . I can not bear that white face , and those eye . for 's sake go , and send I somebody else that do not look like that ! ' I go at once , and send the hire nurse ; but next morning I venture to enter he chamber again , and , take the nurse 's place by he bedside , I watch he and wait on he for several hour , show myself as little as possible , and only speak when necessary , and then not above my breath . at first he address I as the nurse , but , on my cross the room to draw up the window - blind , in obedience to he direction , he say , ' no , it be not nurse ; it be . stay with I , do ! that old hag will be the death of I . ' 'I mean to stay with you , ' say I . and after that he would call I , or some other name almost equally repugnant to my feeling . I force myself to endure it for a while , fear a contradiction might disturb he too much ; but when , have ask for a glass of water , while I hold it to he lip , he murmure , ' thanks , dearest ! ' I could not help distinctly observe , ' you would not say so if you know I , ' intend to follow that up with another declaration of my identity ; but he merely mutter a incoherent reply , so I drop it again , till some time after , when , as I be bath he forehead and temple with vinegar and water to relieve the heat and pain in he head , he observe , after look earnestly upon I for some minute , 'I have such strange fancie - I can not get rid of they , and they will not let I rest ; and the most singular and pertinacious of they all be you face and voice - they seem just like hers . I could swear at this moment that she be by my side . ' ' she be , ' say I . ' that seem comfortable , ' continue he , without notice my word ; 'and while you do it , the other fancie fade away - but this only strengthen . - go on - go on , till it vanish , too . I can not stand such a mania as this ; it would kill I ! ' ' it never will vanish , ' say I , distinctly , ' for it be the truth ! ' ' the truth ! ' he cry , start , as if a asp have sting he . ' you do not mean to say that you be really she ? ' 'I do ; but you need not shrink away from I , as if I be you greatest enemy : I be come to take care of you , and do what none of they would do . ' ' for 's sake , do not torment I now ! ' cry he in pitiable agitation ; and then he begin to mutter bitter curse against I , or the evil fortune that have bring I there ; while I put down the sponge and basin , and resume my seat at the bed - side . ' where be they ? ' say he : ' have they all leave I - servants and all ? ' ' there be servants within call if you want they ; but you have better lie down now and be quiet : none of they could or would attend you as carefully as I shall do . ' 'I can not understand it at all , ' say he , in bewildered perplexity . ' be it a dream that - ' and he cover he eye with he hand , as if try to unravel the mystery . ' no , , it be not a dream , that you conduct be such as to oblige I to leave you ; but I hear that you be ill and alone , and I be come back to nurse you . you need not fear to trust I tell I all you want , and I will try to satisfy they . there be no one else to care for you ; and I shall not upbraid you now . ' 'Oh ! I see , ' say he , with a bitter smile ; ' it be a act of charity , whereby you hope to gain a higher seat in heaven for yourself , and scoop a deeper pit in hell for I . ' ' no ; I come to offer you that comfort and assistance you situation require ; and if I could benefit you soul as well as you body , and awake some sense of contrition and - ' ' oh , yes ; if you could overwhelm I with remorse and confusion of face , now be the time . what have you
you do with my son ? ' ' he be well , and you may see he some time , if you will compose yourself , but not now . ' ' where be he ? ' ' he be safe . ' ' be he here ? ' ' wherever he be , you will not see he till you have promise to leave he entirely under my care and protection , and to let I take he away whenever and wherever I please , if I should hereafter judge it necessary to remove he again . but we will talk of that to - morrow : you must be quiet now . ' ' no , let I see he now , I promise , if it must be so . ' ' no - ' 'i swear it , as be in heaven ! now , then , let I see he . ' ' but I can not trust you oath and promise : I must have a written agreement , and you must sign it in presence of a witness : but not to - day - to - morrow . ' 'no , to - day ; now , ' persist he : and he be in such a state of feverish excitement , and so bent upon the immediate gratification of he wish , that I think it better to grant it at once , as I see he would not rest till I do . but I be determine my son 's interest should not be forget ; and have clearly write out the promise I wish to give upon a slip of paper , I deliberately read it over to he , and make he sign it in the presence of . he beg I would not insist upon this : it be a useless exposure of my want of faith in he word to the servant . I tell he I be sorry , but since he have forfeit my confidence , he must take the consequence . he next plead inability to hold the pen . ' then we must wait until you can hold it , ' say I . upon which he say he would try ; but then he could not see to write . I place my finger where the signature be to be , and tell he he might write he name in the dark , if he only know where to put it . but he have not power to form the letter . ' in that case , you must be too ill to see the child , ' say I ; and find I inexorable , he at length manage to ratify the agreement ; and I bay send the boy . all this may strike you as harsh , but I feel I must not lose my present advantage , and my son 's future welfare should not be sacrifice to any mistaken tenderness for this man 's feeling . have not forget he father , but thirteen month of absence , during which he have seldom be permit to hear a word about he , or hardly to whisper he name , have render he somewhat shy ; and when he be usher into the darkened room where the sick man lay , so alte from he former self , with fiercely flush face and wildly - gleam eye - he instinctively cling to I , and stand look on he father with a countenance expressive of far more awe than pleasure . ' come here , , ' say the latter , extend he hand towards he . the child go , and timidly touche that burn hand , but almost start in alarm , when he father suddenly clutch he arm and draw he nearer to he side . ' do you know I ? ' ask , intently peruse he feature . ' yes . ' ' who be I ? ' ' . ' ' be you glad to see I ? ' 'yes . ' ' you be not ! ' reply the disappointed parent , relax he hold , and dart a vindictive glance at I . , thus release , creep back to I and put he hand in mine . he father swore I have make the child hate he , and abuse and curse I bitterly . the instant he begin I send we son out of the room ; and when he pause to breathe , I calmly assure he that he be entirely mistaken ; I have never once attempt to prejudice he child against he . 'I do indeed desire he to forget you ,' I say , ' and especially to forget the lesson you teach he ; and for that cause , and to lessen the danger of discovery , I own I have generally discourage he inclination to talk about you ; but no one can blame I for that , I think . ' the invalid only reply by groaning aloud , and roll he head on a pillow in a paroxysm of impatience . 'I be in hell , already ! ' cry he . ' this curse thirst be burn my heart to ash ! will nobody -? ' before he could finish the sentence I have pour out a glass of some acidulate , cool drink that be on the table , and bring it to he . he drank it greedily , but mutter , as I take away the glass , - ' I suppose you be heap coal of fire on my head , you think ? ' not notice this speech , I ask if there be anything else I could do for he . ' yes ; I will give you another opportunity of show you magnanimity , ' sneer he : ' set my pillow
pillow straight , and these confound bed - clothes . ' I do so . ' there : now get I another glass of that slop . ' I comply . ' this be delightful , be not it ? ' say he with a malicious grin , as I hold it to he lip ; ' you never hope for such a glorious opportunity ? ' ' now , shall I stay with you ? ' say I , as I replace the glass on the table : 'or will you be more quiet if I go and send the nurse ? ' 'Oh , yes , you be wondrous gentle and oblige ! but you have drive I mad with it all ! ' respond he , with a impatient toss . 'I will leave you , then , ' say I ; and I withdraw , and do not trouble he with my presence again that day , except for a minute or two at a time , just to see how he be and what he want . next morne the doctor order he to be b ; and after that he be more subdued and tranquil . I pass half the day in he room at different interval . my presence do not appear to agitate or irritate he as before , and he accept my service quietly , without any bitter remark : indeed , he scarcely speak at all , except to make know he want , and hardly then . but on the morrow , that be to say , in proportion as he recover from the state of exhaustion and stupefaction , he ill - nature appear to revive . 'Oh , this sweet revenge ! ' cry he , when I have be do all I could to make he comfortable and to remedy the carelessness of he nurse . ' and you can enjoy it with such a quiet conscience too , because it be all in the way of duty . ' ' it be well for I that I be do my duty , ' say I , with a bitterness I could not repress , ' for it be the only comfort I have ; and the satisfaction of my own conscience , it seem , be the only reward I need look for ! ' he look rather surprised at the earnestness of my manner . ' what reward do you look for ? ' he ask . ' you will think I a liar if I tell you ; but I do hope to benefit you : as well to better you mind as to alleviate you present suffering ; but it appear I be to do neither ; you own bad spirit will not let I . as far as you be concerned , I have sacrifice my own feeling , and all the little earthly comfort that be leave I , to no purpose ; and every little thing I do for you be ascribe to self - righteous malice and refin revenge ! ' ' it be all very fine , I daresay , ' say he , eye I with stupid amazement ; ' and of course I ought to be melt to tear of penitence and admiration at the sight of so much generosity and superhuman goodness ; but you see I can not manage it . however , pray do I all the good you can , if you do really find any pleasure in it ; for you perceive I be almost as miserable just now as you need wish to see I . since you come , I confess , I have have better attendance than before , for these wretch neglect I shamefully , and all my old friend seem to have fairly forsake I . I have have a dreadful time of it , I assure you : I sometimes think I should have die : do you think there be any chance ? ' ' there be always a chance of death ; and it be always well to live with such a chance in view . ' ' yes , yes ! but do you think there be any likelihood that this illness will have a fatal termination ? ' 'I can not tell ; but , suppose it should , how be you prepare to meet the event ? ' ' why , the doctor tell I I be not to think about it , for I be sure to get better if I stick to he regimen and prescription . ' 'I hope you may , ; but neither the doctor nor I can speak with certainty in such a case ; there be internal injury , and it be difficult to know to what extent . ' ' there now ! you want to scare I to death . ' ' no ; but I do not want to lull you to false security . if a consciousness of the uncertainty of life can dispose you to serious and useful thought , I would not deprive you of the benefit of such reflection , whether you do eventually recover or not . do the idea of death appal you very much ? ' ' it be just the only thing I can not bear to think of ; so if you 've any - ' ' but it must come some time , ' interrupt I , ' and if it be year hence , it will as certainly overtake you as if it come to - day , - and no doubt be as unwelcome then as now , unless you - ' ' oh , hang it ! do not torment I with you preachment now , unless you want to kill I outright . I can not stand it , I tell you . I have suffering
suffering enough without that . if you think there be danger , save I from it ; and then , in gratitude , I will hear whatever you like to say . ' I accordingly drop the unwelcome topic . and now , , I think I may bring my letter to a close . from these detail you may form you own judgment of the state of my patient , and of my own position and future prospect . let I hear from you soon , and I will write again to tell you how we get on ; but now that my presence be tolerate , and even require , in the sick - room , I shall have but little time to spare between my husband and my son , - for I must not entirely neglect the latter : it would not do to keep he always with , and I dare not leave he for a moment with any of the other servants , or suffer he to be alone , lest he should meet they . if he father get worse , I shall ask to take charge of he for a time , till I have reorganise the household at least ; but I greatly prefer keep he under my own eye . I find myself in rather a singular position : I be exert my utmost endeavour to promote the recovery and reformation of my husband , and if I succeed , what shall I do ? my duty , of course , - but how ? no matter ; I can perform the task that be before I now , and will give I strength to do whatever he require hereafter . good - by , dear . . ' what do you think of it ? ' say , as I silently refold the letter . ' it seem to I , ' return I , ' that she be cast she pearl before swine . may they be satisfied with trampl they under they foot , and not turn again and rmend she ! but I shall say no more against she : I see that she be actuate by the best and noblest motive in what she have do ; and if the act be not a wise one , may heave protect she from its consequence ! may I keep this letter , ? - you see she have never once mention I throughout - or make the most distant allusion to I ; therefore , there can be no impropriety or harm in it . ' ' and , therefore , why should you wish to keep it ? ' ' be not these characters write by she hand ? and be not these word conceive in she mind , and many of they speak by she lip ? ' ' well , ' say he . and so I keep it ; otherwise , , you could never have become so thoroughly acquaint with its contents . ' and when you write , ' say I , ' will you have the goodness to ask she if I may be permit to enlighten my mother and sister on she real history and circumstance , just so far as be necessary to make the neighbourhood sensible of the shameful injustice they have do she ? I want no tender message , but just ask she that , and tell she it be the greatest favour she could do I ; and tell she - no , nothing more . you see I know the address , and I might write to she myself , but I be so virtuous as to refrain . ' ' well , I will do this for you , . ' ' and as soon as you receive a answer , you will let I know ? ' ' if all be well , I will come myself and tell you immediately . ' five or six day after this Lawrence pay we the honour of a call ; and when he and I be alone together - which I contrive as soon as possible by bring he out to look at my cornstack - he show I another letter from he sister . this one he be quite willing to submit to my longing gaze ; he think , I suppose , it would do I good . the only answer it give to my message be this :- ' . be at liberty to make such revelation concern I as he judge necessary . he will know that I should wish but little to be say on the subject . I hope he be well ; but tell he he must not think of I . ' I can give you a few extract from the rest of the letter , for I be permit to keep this also - perhaps , as a antidote to all pernicious hope and fancie . * * * * * he be decidedly better , but very low from the depressing effect of he severe illness and the strict regimen he be oblige to observe - so opposite to all he previous habit . it be deplorable to see how completely he past life have degenerat he once noble constitution , and vitiate the whole system of he organization . but the doctor say he may now be consider out of danger , if he will only continue to observe the necessary restriction . some stimulate cordial he must have , but they should be judiciously dilute and sparingly use ; and I find it very difficult to keep he to this . at first , he extreme dread of death render the task a easy one ; but in proportion as he feel he acute suffer abat , and see the danger reced , the more intractable he become . now ,
, also , he appetite for food be begin to return ; and here , too , he long habits of self - indulgence be greatly against he . I watch and restrain he as well as I can , and often get bitterly abuse for my rigid severity ; and sometimes he contrive to elude my vigilance , and sometimes act in opposition to my will . but he be now so completely reconcile to my attendance in general that he be never satisfied when I be not by he side . I be oblige to be a little stiff with he sometimes , or he would make a complete slave of I ; and I know it would be unpardonable weakness to give up all other interest for he . I have the servants to overlook , and my little Arthur to attend to , - and my own health too , all of which would be entirely neglect be I to satisfy he exorbitant demand . I do not generally sit up at night , for I think the nurse who have make it she business be better qualified for such undertaking than I be ; - but still , a unbroken night 's rest be what I but seldom enjoy , and never can venture to reckon upon ; for my patient make no scruple of call I up at a hour when he want or he fancie require my presence . but he be manifestly afraid of my displeasure ; and if at one time he try my patience by he unreasonable exaction , and fretful complaint and reproach , at another he depresse I by he abject submission and deprecatory self - abasement when he fear he have go too far . but all this I can readily pardon ; I know it be chiefly the result of he enfeeble frame and disorder nerve . what annoy I the most , be he occasional attempt at affectionate fondness that I can neither credit nor return ; not that I hate he : he suffering and my own laborious care have give he some claim to my regard - to my affection even , if he would only be quiet and sincere , and content to let thing remain as they be ; but the more he try to conciliate I , the more I shrink from he and from the future . ' , what do you mean to do when I get well ? ' he ask this morning . ' will you run away again ? ' ' it entirely depend upon you own conduct . ' ' oh , I will be very good . ' ' but if I find it necessary to leave you , , I shall not " run away " : you know I have you own promise that I may go whenever I please , and take my son with I . ' 'Oh , but you shall have no cause . ' and then follow a variety of profession , which I rather coldly check . ' will you not forgive I , then ? ' say he . ' yes , - I have forgive you : but I know you can not love I as you once do - and I should be very sorry if you be to , for I could not pretend to return it : so let we drop the subject , and never recur to it again . by what I have do for you , you may judge of what I will do - if it be not incompatible with the higher duty I owe to my son ( higher , because he never forfeit he claim , and because I hope to do more good to he than I can ever do to you ) ; and if you wish I to feel kindly towards you , it be deeds not word which must purchase my affection and esteem . ' he sole reply to this be a slight grimace , and a scarcely perceptible shrug . Alas , unhappy man ! word , with he , be so much cheaper than deeds ; it be as if I have say , ' pound , not pence , must buy the article you want . ' and then he sigh a querulous , self - commiserat sigh , as if in pure regret that he , the love and court of so many worshipper , should be now abandon to the mercy of a harsh , exact , cold - hear woman like that , and even glad of what kindness she choose to bestow . ' it be a pity , be not it ? ' say I ; and whether I rightly divine he musing or not , the observation chim in with he thought , for he answer - ' it can not be help , ' with a rueful smile at my penetration . * * * * * I have I see twice . she be a charming creature , but she blito spirit be almost broken , and she sweet temper almost spoiled , by the still unremitting persecution of she mother in behalf of she reject suitor - not violent , but wearisome and unremitt like a continual dropping . the unnatural parent seem determined to make she daughter 's life a burden , if she will not yield to she desire . ' do all she can , ' say she , 'to make I feel myself a burden and incumbrance to the family , and the most ungrateful , selfish , and undutiful daughter that ever be bear ; and , too , be as stern and cold and haughty as if he hate I outright . I believe I should have yield at once if I have know , from the beginning , how much resistance
resistance would have cost I ; but now , for very obstinacy 's sake , I will stand out ! ' 'a bad motive for a good resolve ,' I answer . ' but , however , I know you have better motive , really , for you perseverance : and I counsel you to keep they still in view . ' ' trust I I will . I threaten mamma sometimes that I will run away , and disgrase the family by earn my own livelihood , if she torment I any more ; and then that frighten she a little . but I will do it , in good earnest , if they do not mind . ' ' be quiet and patient a while , ' say I , ' and better time will come . ' poor girl ! I wish somebody that be worthy to possess she would come and take she away - do not you , ? * * * * * if the perusal of this letter fill I with dismay for 's future life and mine , there be one great source of consolation : it be now in my power to clear she name from every foul aspersion . the and the Wilson should see with they own eye the bright sun burst from the cloud - and they should be scorch and dazzl by its beams ; - and my own friend too should see it - they whose suspicion have be such gall and wormwood to my soul . to effect this I have only to drop the seed into the ground , and it would soon become a stately , branch herb : a few word to my mother and sister , I know , would suffice to spread the news throughout the whole neighbourhood , without any further exertion on my part . Rose be delighted ; and as soon as I have tell she all I think proper - which be all I affect to know - she fly with alacrity to put on she bonnet and shawl , and hasten to carry the glad tiding to the Millwards and Wilsons - glad tiding , I suspect , to no but herself and - that steady , sensible girl , whose sterl worth have be so quickly perceive and duly value by the suppose , in spite of she plain outside ; and who , on she part , have be better able to see and appreciate that lady 's true character and quality than the brightest genius among they . as I may never have occasion to mention she again , I may as well tell you here that she be at this time privately engage to - a secret , I believe , to every one but themselves . that worthy student be now at , where he most exemplary conduct and he diligent perseverance in the pursuit of learning carry he safely through , and eventually bring he with hard - earn honour , and a untarnished reputation , to the close of he collegiate career . in due time he become 's first and only curate - for that gentleman 's declining year force he at last to acknowledge that the duty of he extensive parish be a little too much for those vaunted energie which he be will not to boast over he younger and less active breth of the cloth . this be what the patient , faithful lover have privately plan and quietly wait for year ago ; and in due time they be united , to the astonishment of the little world they live in , that have long since declare they both bear to single blessedness ; affirme it impossible that the pale , retire bookworm should ever summon courage to seek a wife , or be able to obtain one if he do , and equally impossible that the plain - looking , plain - dealing , unattractive , unconciliating should ever find a husband . they still continue to live at the vicarage , the lady divide she time between she father , she husband , and they poor parishioners , - and subsequently she rise family ; and now that the have be gather to he father , full of year and honour , the have succeed he to the vicarage of - hope , greatly to the satisfaction of its inhabitant , who have so long try and fully prove he merit , and those of he excellent and well - love partner . if you be interested in the after fate of that lady 's sister , I can only tell you - what perhaps you have hear from another quarter - that some twelve or thirteen year ago she relieve the happy couple of she presence by marry a wealthy tradesman of -; and I do not envy he he bargain . I fear she lead he a rather uncomfortable life , though , happily , he be too dull to perceive the extent of he misfortune . I have little enough to do with she myself : we have not meet for many year ; but , I be well assure , she have not yet forget or forgive either she former lover , or the lady whose superior quality first open he eye to the folly of he boyish attachment . as for 's sister , she , have be wholly unable to recapture , or obtain any partner rich and elegant enough to suit she idea of what the husband of ought to be , be yet in single blessedness . shortly after the death of she mother she withdraw the light of she presence from , finde it impossible any longer to endure the rough manners and unsophisticated habits of she honest brother and he worthy wife , or the idea of be identify with such vulgar
vulgar people in the eyes of the world , and take lodging in - the county town , where she liv , and still life , I suppose , in a kind of close- fiste , cold , uncomfortable gentility , do no good to other , and but little to herself ; spend she day in fancy - work and scandal ; refer frequently to she ' brother the vicar , ' and she ' sister , the vicar 's lady , ' but never to she brother the farmer and she sister the farmer 's wife ; see as much company as she can without too much expense , but love no one and belove by none - a cold - hear , supercilious , keenly , insidiously censorious old maid . though 's health be now quite re-establish , my visit to be as unremitting as ever ; though often less protract than before . we seldom talk about ; but yet we never meet without mention she , for I never seek he company but with the hope of hear something about she , and he never seek mine at all , because he see I often enough without . but I always begin to talk of other thing , and wait first to see if he would introduce the subject . if he do not , I would casually ask , ' have you hear from you sister lately ? ' if he say ' no , ' the matter be drop : if he say ' yes ,' I would venture to inquire , ' how be she ? ' but never ' how be she husband ? ' though I might be burn to know ; because i have not the hypocrisy to profess any anxiety for he recovery , and I have not the face to express any desire for a contrary result . have I any such desire ? - I fear I must plead guilty ; but since you have hear my confession , you must hear my justification as well - a few of the excuse , at least , wherewith I seek to pacify my own accuse conscience . in the first place , you see , he life do harm to other , and evidently no good to himself ; and though I wish it to terminate , I would not have hasten its close if , by the lifting of a finger , I could have do so , or if a spirit have whisper in my ear that a single effort of the will would be enough , - unless , indeed , I have the power to exchange he for some other victim of the grave , whose life might be of service to he race , and whose death would be lament by he friend . but be there any harm in wishing that , among the many thousand whose soul would certainly be require of they before the year be over , this wretch mortal might be one ? I think not ; and therefore I wished with all my heart that it might please heave to remove he to a better world , or if that might not be , still to take he out of this ; for if he be unfit to answer the summon now , after a warning sickness , and with such a angel by he side , it seem but too certain that he never would be - that , on the contrary , return health would bring return lust and villainy , and as he grow more certain of recovery , more accustom to she generous goodness , he feeling would become more callous , he heart more flinty and impervious to she persuasive argument - but know best . meantime , however , I could not but be anxious for the result of he decree ; know , as I do , that ( leave myself entirely out of the question ) , however Helen might feel interested in she husband 's welfare , however she might deplore he fate , still while he liv she must be miserable . a fortnight pass away , and my inquiry be always answer in the negative . at length a welcome ' yes ' drew from I the second question . Lawrence divine my anxious thought , and appreciate my reserve . I fear , at first , he be go to torture I by unsatisfactory reply , and either leave I quite in the dark concern what I want to know , or force I to drag the information out of he , morsel by morsel , by direct inquiry . ' and serve you right , ' you will say ; but he be more merciful ; and in a little while he put he sister 's letter into my hand . I silently read it , and restore it to he without comment or remark . this mode of procedure suite he so well , that thereafter he always pursue the plan of show I she letter at once , when ' inquire ' after she , if there be any to show - it be so much less trouble than to tell I they contents ; and I receive such confidence so quietly and discreetly that he be never induce to discontinue they . but I devoure those precious letter with my eye , and never let they go till they contents be stamp upon my mind ; and when I get home , the most important passage be enter in my diary among the remarkable event of the day . the first of these communications bring intelligence of a serious relapse in 's illness , entirely the result of he own infatuation in persisting in the indulgence of he appetite for stimulating drink . in vain have she remonstrate , in
in vain she have mingl he wine with water : she argument and entreaty be a nuisance , she interference be a insult so intolerable that , at length , on find she have covertly dilute the pale port that be bring he , he throw the bottle out of window , swear he would not be cheat like a baby , order the butler , on pain of instant dismissal , to bring a bottle of the strongest wine in the cellar , and affirme that he should have be well long ago if he have be let to have he own way , but she want to keep he weak in order that she might have he under she thumb - but , by the , he would have no more humbug - seize a glass in one hand and the bottle in the other , and never rest till he have drink it dry . alarming symptom be the immediate result of this ' imprudence , ' as she mildly term it - symptom which have rather increase than diminish since ; and this be the cause of she delay in writing to she brother . every former feature of he malady have return with augmented virulence : the slight external wound , half healed , have break out afresh ; internal inflammation have take place , which might terminate fatally if not soon remove . of course , the wretched sufferer 's temper be not improve by this calamity - in fact , I suspect it be well nigh insupportable , though he kind nurse do not complain ; but she say she have be oblige at last to give she son in charge to , as she presence be so constantly require in the sick - room that she could not possibly attend to he herself ; and though the child have beg to be allow to continue with she there , and to help she to nurse he papa , and though she have no doubt he would have be very good and quiet , she could not think of subject he young and tender feeling to the sight of so much suffer , or of allow he to witness he father 's impatience , or hear the dreadful language he be will not to use in he paroxysm of pain or irritation . the latter ( continue she ) most deeply regret the step that have occasion he relapse ; but , as usual , he throw the blame upon I . if I have reason with he like a rational creature , he say , it never would have happen ; but to be treat like a baby or a fool be enough to put any man past he patience , and drive he to assert he independence even at the sacrifice of he own interest . he forget how often I have reason he ' past he patience ' before . he appear to be sensible of he danger ; but nothing can induce he to behold it in the proper light . the other night , while I be wait on he , and just as I have bring he a dratch to assuage he burn thirst , he observe , with a return of he former sarcastic bitterness , ' yes , you be mighty attentive now ! I suppose there be nothing you would not do for I now ? ' ' you know , ' say I , a little surprised at he manner , ' that I be willing to do anything I can to relieve you . ' ' yes , now , my immaculate angel ; but when once you have secure you reward , and find yourself safe in heaven , and I how in hell - fire , catch you lift a finger to serve I then ! no , you will look complacently on , and not so much as dip the tip of you finger in water to cool my tongue ! ' ' if so , it will be because of the great gulf over which I can not pass ; and if I could look complacently on in such a case , it would be only from the assurance that you be be purify from you sins , and fit to enjoy the happiness I feel . - but be you determine , , that I shall not meet you in heaven ? ' ' Humph ! what should I do there , I should like to know ? ' ' indeed , I can not tell ; and I fear it be too certain that you taste and feeling must be widely alte before you can have any enjoyment there . but do you prefer sinking , without a effort , into the state of torment you picture to yourself ? ' 'Oh , it be all a fable , ' say he , contemptuously . ' be you sure , ? be you quite sure ? because , if there be any doubt , and if you should find yourself mistake after all , when it be too late to turn - ' ' it would be rather awkward , to be sure , ' say he ; ' but do not bother I now - I be not go to die yet . I can not and will not ,' he add vehemently , as if suddenly strike with the appalling aspect of that terrible event . ' Helen , you must save I ! ' and he earnestly seize my hand , and look into my face with such imploring eagerness that my heart b for he , and I could not speak for tear . * * * * * the next letter bring intelligence that the malady be fast increase ; and the poor sufferer 's horror of death be still more distressing
distressing than he impatience of bodily pain . all he friend have not forsake he ; for , hearing of he danger , have come to see he from he distant home in the north . he wife have accompany he , as much for the pleasure of see she dear friend , from whom she have be part so long , as to visit she mother and sister . express herself glad to see once more , and pleased to behold she so happy and well . she be now at the , continue the letter , but she often call to see I . spend much of he time at 's bed - side . with more good feeling than I give he credit for , he evince considerable sympathy for he unhappy friend , and be far more willing than able to comfort he . sometimes he try to joke and laugh with he , but that will not do ; sometimes he endeavour to cheer he with talk about old time , and this at one time may serve to divert the sufferer from he own sad thought ; at another , it will only plunge he into deeper melancholy than before ; and then be confound , and know not what to say , unless it be a timid suggestion that the clergyman might be send for . but yoArthu will never consent to that : he know he have reject the clergyman 's well - mean admonition with scoffing levity at other time , and can not dream of turn to he for consolation now . sometimes offer he service instead of mine , but yoArthu will not let I go : that strange whim still increase , as he strength decline - the fancy to have I always by he side . I hardly ever leave he , except to go into the next room , where I sometimes snatch a hour or so of sleep when he be quiet ; but even then the door be leave ajar , that he may know I to be within call . I be with he now , while I write , and I fear my occupation annoy he ; though I frequently break off to attend to he , and though be also by he side . that gentleman come , as he say , to beg a holiday for I , that I might have a run in the park , this fine frosty morning , with and and little , whom he have drive over to see I . we poor invalid evidently feel it a heartless proposition , and would have feel it still more heartless in I to accede to it . I therefore say I would only go and speak to they a minute , and then come back . I do but exchange a few word with they , just outside the portico , inhal the fresh , brace air as I stand , and then , resist the earnest and eloquent entreaty of all three to stay a little longer , and join they in a walk round the garden , I tore myself away and return to my patient . I have not be absent five minute , but he reproach I bitterly for my levity and neglect . he friend espouse my cause . ' Nay , nay , , ' say he , ' you be too hard upon she ; she must have food and sleep , and a mouthful of fresh air now and then , or she can not stand it , I tell you . look at she , man ! she be wear to a shadow already . ' ' what be she suffering to mine ? ' say the poor invalid . ' you do not grudge I these attention , do you , ? ' 'no , , if I could really serve you by they . I would give my life to save you , if I might . ' ' would you , indeed ? no ! ' ' most willingly I would . ' 'Ah ! that be because you think yourself more fit to die ! ' there be a painful pause . he be evidently plunge in gloomy reflection ; but while I ponder for something to say that might benefit without alarme he , , whose mind have be pursue almost the same course , break silence with , 'I say , , I would send for a parson of some sort : if you do not like the vicar , you know , you could have he curate , or somebody else . ' ' no ; none of they can benefit I if she can not , ' be the answer . and the tear gush from he eyes as he earnestly exclaim , , , if I have listen to you , it never would have come to this ! and if I have hear you long ago - oh , ! how different it would have be ! ' 'Hear I now , then , , ' say I , gently press he hand . ' it be too late now , ' say he despondingly . and after that another paroxysm of pain come on ; and then he mind begin to wander , and we fear he death be approach : but a opiate be administer : he suffering begin to abate , he gradually become more composed , and at length sank into a kind of slumber . he have be quieter since ; and now have leave he , express a hope that he shall find he better when he call to - morrow . ' perhaps I may recover , ' he reply ; ' who know ? this may have be the crisis . what do you think , ? ' Unwill
Unwill to depress he , I give the most cheering answer I could , but still recommend he to prepare for the possibility of what I inly fear be but too certain . but he be determined to hope . shortly after he relapse into a kind of doze , but now he groan again . there be a change . suddenly he call I to he side , with such a strange , excited manner , that I fear he be delirious , but he be not . ' that be the crisis , ! ' say he , delightedly . 'I have a infernal pain here - it be quite gone now . I never be so easy since the fall - quite gone , by heaven ! ' and he clasp and kiss my hand in the very fulness of he heart ; but find I do not participate he joy , he quickly fling it from he , and bitterly curse my coldness and insensibility . how could I reply ? Kneel beside he , I take he hand and fondly press it to my lip - for the first time since we separation - and tell he , as well as tear would let I speak , that it be not that that keep I silent : it be the fear that this sudden cessation of pain be not so favourable a symptom as he suppose . I immediately send for the doctor : we be now anxiously await he . I will tell you what he say . there be still the same freedom from pain , the same deadness to all sensation where the suffering be most acute . my worst fear be realise : mortification have commence . the doctor have tell he there be no hope . no word can describe he anguish . I can write no more . * * * * * the next be still more distressing in the tenor of its contents . the sufferer be fast approach dissolution - drag almost to the verge of that awful chasm he tremble to contemplate , from which no agony of prayer or tear could save he . nothing could comfort he now ; 's rough attempt at consolation be utterly in vain . the world be nothing to he : life and all its interest , it be petty care and transient pleasure , be a cruel mockery . to talk of the past be to torture he with vain remorse ; to refer to the future be to increase he anguish ; and yet to be silent be to leave he a prey to he own regret and apprehension . often he dwelt with shuddering minuteness on the fate of he perishing clay - the slow , piecemeal dissolution already invade he frame : the shroud , the coffin , the dark , lonely grave , and all the horror of corruption . ' if I try , ' say he afflict wife , 'to divert he from these thing - to raise he thought to higher themes , it be no better :- " worse and worse ! " he groan . " if there be really life beyond the tomb , and judgament after death , how can I face it ? " - I can not do he any good ; he will neither be enlighten , nor rouse , nor comfort by anything I say ; and yet he cling to I with unrelenting pertinacity - with a kind of childish desperation , as if I could save he from the fate he dread . he keep I night and day beside he . he be hold my left hand now , while I write ; he have hold it thus for hour : sometimes quietly , with he pale face upturn to mine : sometimes clutch my arm with violence - the big drop start from he forehead at the thought of what he see , or think he see , before he . if I withdraw my hand for a moment it distress he . ' " stay with I , , " he say ; " let I hold you so : it seem as if harm could not reach I while you be here . but death will come - it be come now - fast , fast ! - and - oh , if I could believe there be nothing after ! " ' " do not try to believe it , ; there be joy and glory after , if you will but try to reach it ! " ' " what , for I ? " he say , with something like a laugh . " be we not to be judge accord to the deed do in the body ? where be the use of a probationary existence , if a man may spend it as he please , just contrary to 's decree , and then go to heave with the best - if the vilest sinner may win the reward of the holiest saint , by merely say , " I repent ! " ' ' " but if you sincerely repent - " ' " I can not repent ; I only fear . " ' " you only regret the past for its consequence to yourself ? " ' " just so - except that I be sorry to have wrong you , , because you be so good to I . " ' " of the goodness of , and you can not but be grieve to have offended . " ' " what be ? - I can not see or hear . - be only a idea . " ' " be infinite , and power , and - and love ; but if this idea be too vast for you human faculty - if you mind lose
lose itself in its overwhelming infinitude , fix it on who condescende to take we nature upon , who be raise to heave even in he glorify human body , in whom the fulness of the shine . " ' but he only shook he head and sigh . then , in another paroxysm of shuddering horror , he tighten he grasp on my hand and arm , and , groan and lament , still cling to I with that wild , desperate earnestness so harrow to my soul , because I know I can not help he . I do my best to soothey and comfort he . ' " be so terrible , " he cry , " I can not bear it ! you do not know , - you can not imagine what it be , because you have not it before you ! and when I be bury , you will return to you old way and be as happy as ever , and all the world will go on just as busy and merry as if I have never be ; while I - " he burst into tear . ' " you need not let that distress you , " I say ; " we shall all follow you soon enough . " ' " I wish to I could take you with I now ! " he exclaim : " you should plead for I . " ' " no man can deliver he brother , nor make agreement unto for he , " I reply : " it cost more to redeem they soul - it cost the blood of a incarnate , perfect and sinless in himself , to redeem we from the bondage of the evil one :- let plead for you . " ' but I seem to speak in vain . he do not now , as formerly , laugh these bless truth to scorn : but still he can not trust , or will not comprehend they . he can not linger long . he suffer dreadfully , and so do those that wait upon he . but I will not harass you with further detail : I have say enough , I think , to convince you that I do well to go to he . ' * * * * * poor , poor Helen ! dreadful indeed she trial must have be ! and I could do nothing to lessen they - nay , it almost see as if I have bring they upon she myself by my own secret desire ; and whether I look at she husband 's suffering or she own , it seem almost like a judgment upon myself for have cherish such a wish . the next day but one there come another letter . that too be put into my hand without a remark , and these be its contents :- 5th . he be go at last . I sit beside he all night , with my hand fast look in he , watch the change of he feature and listen to he failing breath . he have be silent a long time , and I think he would never speak again , when he murmure , faintly but distinctly , - ' pray for I , ! ' 'I do pray for you , every hour and every minute , Arthur ; but you must pray for yourself . ' he lip move , but emitte no sound ; - then he look become unsettled ; and , from the incoherent , half - uttered word that escape he from time to time , suppose he to be now unconscious , I gently disengage my hand from he , intend to steal away for a breath of air , for I be almost ready to faint ; but a convulsive movement of the finger , and a faintly whispered ' do not leave I ! ' immediately recal I : I take he hand again , and hold it till he be no more - and then I faint . it be not grief ; it be exhaustion , that , till then , I have be enable successfully to combat . oh , ! none can imagine the misery , bodily and mental , of that death - bed ! how could I endure to think that that poor trembling soul be hurrie away to everlast torment ? it would drive I mad . but , thank , I have hope - not only from a vague dependence on the possibility that penitence and pardon might have reach he at the last , but from the bless confidence that , through whatever purging fire the erring spirit may be doom to pass - whatever fate await it - still it be not lose , and , who hateth nothing that he hath make , will bless it in the end ! he body will be consign on to that dark grave he so much dread ; but the coffin must be close as soon as possible . if you will attend the funeral , come quickly , for I need help . . on read this I have no reason to disguise my joy and hope from , for I have none to be asham of . I feel no joy but that he sister be at length release from she afflictive , overwhelme toil - no hope but that she would in time recover from the effect of it , and be suffer to rest in peace and quietness , at least , for the remainder of she life . I experience a painful commiseration for she unhappy husband ( though fully aware that he have bring every particle of he suffering upon himself , and but too well deserve they all ) , and a profound sympathy for she own affliction , and
and deep anxiety for the consequence of those harassing car , those dreadful vigil , that incessant and deleterious confinement beside a liive corpse - for I be persuade she have not hinte half the suffering she have have to endure . ' you will go to she , ? ' say I , as I put the letter into he hand . ' yes , immediately . ' ' that be right ! I will leave you , then , to prepare for you departure . ' 'I have do that already , while you be read the letter , and before you come ; and the carriage be now come round to the door . ' Inly approve he promptitude , I bade he good - morning , and withdrew . he give I a search glance as we press each other 's hand at parting ; but whatever he seek in my countenance , he see there nothing but the most become gravity - it might be mingl with a little sternness in momentary resentment at what I suspect to be pass in he mind . have I forget my own prospect , my ardent love , my pertinacious hope ? it seem like sacrilege to revert to they now , but I have not forget they . it be , however , with a gloomy sense of the darkness of those prospect , the fallacy of those hope , and the vanity of that affection , that I reflect on those thing as I remount my horse and slowly journey homeward . be free now ; it be no longer a crime to think of she - but do she ever think of I ? not now - of course it be not to be expect - but would she when this shock be over ? in all the course of she correspondence with she brother ( we mutual friend , as she herself have call he ) she have never mention I but once - and that be from necessity . this alone afford strong presumption that I be already forget ; yet this be not the worst : it might have be she sense of duty that have keep she silent : she might be only try to forget ; but in addition to this , I have a gloomy conviction that the awful reality she have see and feel , she reconciliation with the man she have once love , he dreadful suffering and death , must eventually efface from she mind all trace of she passing love for I . she might recover from these horror so far as to be restore to she former health , she tranquillity , she cheerfulness even - but never to those feeling which would appear to she , henceforth , as a fleeting fancy , a vain , illusive dream ; especially as there be no one to remind she of my existence - no means of assure she of my fervent constancy , now that we be so far apart , and delicacy forbade I to see she or to write to she , for month to come at least . and how could I engage she brother in my behalf ? how could I break that icy crust of shy reserve ? perhaps he would disapprove of my attachment now as highly as before ; perhaps he would think I too poor - too lowly bear , to match with he sister . yes , there be another barrier : doubtless there be a wide distinction between the rank and circumstance of , the lady of , and those of , the artist , the tenant of . and it might be deem presumption in I to offer my hand to the former , by the world , by she friend , if not by herself ; a penalty I might brave , if I be certain she love I ; but otherwise , how could I ? and , finally , she decease husband , with he usual selfishness , might have so construct he will as to place restriction upon she marry again . so that you see I have reason enough for despair if I choose to indulge it . nevertheless , it be with no small degree of impatience that I look forward to 's return from : impatience that increase in proportion as he absence be prolonge . he stay away some ten or twelve day . all very right that he should remain to comfort and help he sister , but he might have write to tell I how she be , or at least to tell I when to expect he return ; for he might have know I be suffer torture of anxiety for she , and uncertainty for my own future prospect . and when he do return , all he tell I about she be , that she have be greatly exhaust and wear by she unremitting exertion in behalf of that man who have be the scourge of she life , and have drag she with he nearly to the portal of the grave , and be still much shaken and depresse by he melancholy end and the circumstance attendant upon it ; but no word in reference to I ; no intimation that my name have ever pass she lip , or even be speak in she presence . to be sure , I ask no question on the subject ; I could not bring my mind to do so , believe , as I do , that be indeed averse to the idea of my union with he sister . I see that he expect to be further question concern he visit , and I see too , with the keen perception of awakened jealousy , or alarme self - esteem , or by whatever name I ought to call it
it , that he rather shrank from that impending scrutiny , and be no less pleased than surprised to find it do not come . of course , I be burn with anger , but pride oblige I to suppress my feeling , and preserve a smooth face , or at least a stoic calmness , throughout the interview . it be well it do , for , review the matter in my sober judgment , I must say it would have be highly absurd and improper to have quarrell with he on such a occasion . I must confess , too , that I wrong he in my heart : the truth be , he like I very well , but he be fully aware that a union between and I would be what the world call a mesalliance ; and it be not in he nature to set the world at defiance ; especially in such a case as this , for its dread laugh , or ill opinion , would be far more terrible to he direct against he sister than himself . have he believe that a union be necessary to the happiness of both , or of either , or have he know how fervently I love she , he would have ac differently ; but see I so calm and cool , he would not for the world disturb my philosophy ; and though refrain entirely from any active opposition to the match , he would yet do nothing to bring it about , and would much rather take the part of prudence , in aid we to overcome we mutual predilection , than that of feeling , to encourage they . ' and he be in the right of it , ' you will say . perhaps he be ; at any rate , I have no business to feel so bitterly against he as I do ; but I could not then regard the matter in such a moderate light ; and , after a brief conversation upon indifferent topics , I go away , suffer all the pang of wounded pride and injure friendship , in addition to those result from the fear that I be indeed forgotten , and the knowledge that she I love be alone and afflict , suffer from injured health and deject spirit , and I be forbidden to conseal or assist she : forbidden even to assure she of my sympathy , for the transmission of any such message through be now completely out of the question . but what should I do ? I would wait , and see if she would notice I , which of course she would not , unless by some kind message intrust to she brother , that , in all probability , he would not deliver , and then , dreadful thought ! she would think I cool and change for not return it , or , perhaps , he have already give she to understand that I have cease to think of she . I would wait , however , till the six month after we parting be fairly pass ( which would be about the close of ) , and then I would send she a letter , modestly remind she of she former permission to write to she at the close of that period , and hope I might avail myself of it - at least to express my heartfelt sorrow for she late affliction , my just appreciation of she generous conduct , and my hope that she health be now completely re-established , and that she would , some time , be permit to enjoy those blessing of a peaceful , happy life , which have be deny she so long , but which none could more truly be say to merit than herself - add a few word of kind remembrance to my little friend , with a hope that he have not forget I , and perhaps a few more in reference to bygo time , to the delightful hour I have pass in she society , and my unfading recollection of they , which be the salt and solace of my life , and a hope that she recent trouble have not entirely banish I from she mind . if she do not answer this , of course I should write no more : if she do ( as surely she would , in some fashion ) , my future proceedings should be regulate by she reply . ten week be long to wait in such a miserable state of uncertainty ; but courage ! it must be endure ! and meantime I would continue to see now and then , though not so often as before , and I would still pursue my habitual inquirie after he sister , if he have lately hear from she , and how she be , but nothing more . I do so , and the answer I receive be always provokingly limit to the letter of the inquiry : she be much as usual : she make no complaint , but the tone of she last letter evince great depression of mind : she say she be better : and , finally , she say she be well , and very busy with she son 's education , and with the management of she late husband 's property , and the regulation of he affair . the rascal have never tell I how that property be dispose , or whether have die intestate or not ; and I would sooner die than ask he , lest he should misconstrue into covetousness my desire to know . he never offer to show I he sister 's letter now , and I never hint a wish to see they . , however , be approach ; be past ; , at length , be almost
almost over - a few more week , and then , certain despair or renewal of hope would put a end to this long agony of suspense . but alas ! it be just about that time she be call to sustain another blow in the death of she uncle - a worthless old fellow enough in himself , I daresay , but he have always show more kindness and affection to she than to any other creature , and she have always be accustom to regard he as a parent . she be with he when he die , and have assist she aunt to nurse he during the last stage of he illness . she brother go to to attend the funeral , and tell I , upon he return , that she be still there , endeavour to cheer she aunt with she presence , and likely to remain some time . this be bad news for I , for while she continue there I could not write to she , as I do not know the address , and would not ask it of he . but week follow week , and every time I inquire about she she be still at . ' where be ? ' I ask at last . 'In - shire , ' be the brief reply ; and there be something so cold and dry in the manner of it , that I be effectually deter from request a more definite account . ' when will she return to ? ' be my next question . 'I do not know . ' ' Confound it ! ' I mutter . ' why , ? ' ask my companion , with a air of innocent surprise . but I do not deign to answer he , save by a look of silent , sullen contempt , at which he turn away , and contemplate the carpet with a slight smile , half pensive , half amuse ; but quickly look up , he begin to talk of other subject , try to draw I into a cheerful and friendly conversation , but I be too much irritate to discourse with he , and soon take leave . you see and I somehow could not manage to get on very well together . the fact be , I believe , we be both of we a little too touchy . it be a troublesome thing , , this susceptibility to affront where none be intend . I be no martyr to it now , as you can bear I witness : I have learn to be merry and wise , to be more easy with myself and more indulgent to my neighbour , and I can afford to laugh at both Lawrence and you . partly from accident , partly from wilful negligence on my part ( for I be really begin to dislike he ) , several week elapse before I see my friend again . when we do meet , it be he that seek I out . one bright morning , early in , he come into the field , where I be just commence my hay harvest . ' it be long since I see you , , ' say he , after the first few word have pass between we . ' do you never mean to come to again ? ' 'I call once , and you be out . ' 'I be sorry , but that be long since ; I hope you would call again , and now I have call , and you be out , which you generally be , or I would do myself the pleasure of call more frequently ; but be determined to see you this time , I have leave my pony in the lane , and come over hedge and ditch to join you ; for I be about to leave for a while , and may not have the pleasure of see you again for a month or two . ' ' where be you go ? ' first , ' say he , with a half - smile he would willingly have suppress if he could . ! be she there , then ? ' ' yes , but in a day or two she will leave it to accompany to - for the benefit of the sea air , and I shall go with they . ' ( - be at that time a quiet but respectable wate - place : it be considerably more frequented now . ) Lawrence seem to expect I to take advantage of this circumstance to entrust he with some sort of a message to he sister ; and I believe he would have undertake to deliver it without any material objection , if I have have the sense to ask he , though of course he would not offer to do so , if I be content to let it alone . but I could not bring myself to make the request , and it be not till after he be gone , that I see how fair a opportunity I have lose ; and then , indeed , I deeply regret my stupidity and my foolish pride , but it be now too late to remedy the evil . he do not return till towards the latter end of . he write to I twice or thrice from -, but he letter be most provokingly unsatisfactory , deal in generality or in trifle that I care nothing about , or replete with fancie and reflection equally unwelcome to I at the time , say next to nothing about he sister , and little more about himself . I would wait , however , till he come back ; perhaps I could get something more out of he then . at all event , I would not write to
to she now , while she be with he and she aunt , who doubtless would be still more hostile to my presumptuous aspiration than himself . when she be return to the silence and solitude of she own home , it would be my fittest opportunity . when come , however , he be as reserve as ever on the subject of my keen anxiety . he tell I that he sister have derive considerable benefit from she stay at - that she son be quite well , and - ala ! that both of they be gone , with , back to , and there they stay at least three month . but instead of bo you with my chagrin , my expectation and disappointment , my fluctuation of dull despondency and flicker hope , my varie resolution , now to drop it , and now to persevere - now to make a bold push , and now to let thing pass and patiently abide my time , - I will employ myself in settle the business of one or two of the character introduce in the course of this narrative , whom I may not have occasion to mention again . some time before 's death elop with another gallant to the continent , where , have live a while in reckless gaiety and dissipation , they quarrell and part . she go dashing on for a season , but year come and money go : she sink , at length , in difficulty and debt , disgrace and misery ; and die at last , as I have hear , in penury , neglect , and utter wretchedness . but this might be only a report : she may be live yet for anything I or any of she relative or former acquaintance can tell ; for they have all lose sight of she long year ago , and would as thoroughly forget she if they could . she husband , however , upon this second misdemeanour , immediately seek and obtain a divorce , and , not long after , marry again . it be well he do , for , morose and moody as he see , be not the man for a bachelor 's life . no public interest , no ambitious project , or active pursuits , - or tie of friendship even ( if he have have any friend ) , could compensate to he for the absence of domestic comforts and endearment . he have a son and a nominal daughter , it be true , but they too painfully remind he of they mother , and the unfortunate little be a source of perpetual bitterness to he soul . he have oblige himself to treat she with paternal kindness : he have force himself not to hate she , and even , perhaps , to feel some degree of kindly regard for she , at last , in return for she artless and unsuspecting attachment to himself ; but the bitterness of he self - condemnation for he inward feeling towards that innocent being , he constant struggle to subdue the evil prompting of he nature ( for it be not a generous one ) , though partly guess at by those who know he , could be know to and he own heart alone ; - so also be the hardness of he conflict with the temptation to return to the vice of he youth , and seek oblivion for past calamity , and deadness to the present misery of a blighted heart a joyless , friendless life , and a morbidly disconsolate mind , by yielding again to that insidious foe to health , and sense , and virtue , which have so deplorably enslave and degrad he before . the second object of he choice be widly different from the first . some wonder at he taste ; some even ridicule it - but in this they folly be more apparent than he . the lady be about he own age - i.e. , between thirty and forty - remarkable neither for beauty , nor wealth , nor brilliant accomplishment ; nor any other thing that I ever hear of , except genuine good sense , unswerving integrity , active piety , warm - hear benevolence , and a fund of cheerful spirit . these quality , however , as you way readily imagine , combine to render she a excellent mother to the child , and a invaluable wife to he lordship . he , with he usual self - depreciation , think she a world too good for he , and while he wonder at the kindness of Providence in conferr such a gift upon he , and even at she taste in prefer he to other man , he do he best to reciprocate the good she do he , and so far succeed that she be , and I believe still be , one of the happiest and fondest wives in ; and all who question the good taste of either partner may be thankful if they respective selection afford they half the genuine satisfaction in the end , or repay they preference with affection half as last and sincere . if you be at all interested in the fate of that low scoundrel , , I can only tell you that he go from bad to worse , sinke from batho to batho of vice and villainy , consort only with the worst member of he club and the lowest dregs of society - happily for the rest of the world - and at last meet he end in a drunken brawl , from the hand , it be say , of some brother scoundrel he have cheat at play . as for , he have never whobably forget he resolution to ' come out from among they , ' and behave
behave like a man and a , and the last illness and death of he once jolly friend so deeply and seriously impress he with the evil of they former practice , that he never need another lesson of the kind . avoid the temptation of the town , he continue to pass he life in the country , immerse in the usual pursuit of a hearty , active , country gentleman ; he occupations be those of farming , and breed horse and cattle , diversify with a little hunting and shoot , and enliven by the occasional companionship of he friend ( better friend than those of he youth ) , and the society of he happy little wife ( now cheerful and confid as heart could wish ) , and he fine family of stalwart son and bloom daughter . he father , the banker , have die some year ago and leave he all he riche , he have now full scope for the exercise of he prevailing taste , and I need not tell you that , , be celebrate throughout the country for he noble breed of horse . we will now turn to a certain still , cold , cloudy afternoon about the commencement of , when the first fall of snow lay thinly scatter over the blighted field and freeze roads , or store more thickly in the hollow of the deep cart -rut and footstep of man and horse impress in the now petrify mire of last month 's drenching rain . I remember it well , for I be walk home from the vicarage with no less remarkable a personage than by my side . I have be to call upon she father , - a sacrifice to civility undertake entirely to please my mother , not myself , for I hate to go near the house ; not merely on account of my antipathy to the once so bewitch , but because I have not half forgive the old gentleman himself for he ill opinion of ; for though now constrain to acknowledge himself mistaken in he former judgment , he still maintain that she have do wrong to leave she husband ; it be a violation of she sacred duty as a wife , and a tempting of Providence by lay herself open to temptation ; and nothing short of bodily ill - usage ( and that of no trifling nature ) could excuse such a step - nor even that , for in such a case she ought to appeal to the law for protection . but it be not of he I intend to speak ; it be of he daughter . just as I be take leave of the vicar , she enter the room , ready equip for a walk . 'I be just come to see , you sister , , ' say she ; ' and so , if you have no objection , I will accompany you home . I like company when I be walk out - do not you ? ' ' yes , when it be agreeable . ' ' that of course , ' rejoin the young lady , smile archly . so we proceed together . ' shall I find rose at home , do you think ? ' say she , as we close the garden gate , and set we face towards - . 'I believe so . ' 'I trust I shall , for I have a little bit of news for she - if you have not forestall I . ' 'I ? ' ' yes : do you know what be gone for ? ' she look up anxiously for my reply . ' be he go ? ' say I ; and she face brighten . 'Ah ! then he have not tell you about he sister ? ' ' what of she ? ' I demand in terror , lest some evil should have befall she . 'Oh , , how you blush ! ' cry she , with a tormenting laugh . 'Ha , ha , you have not forget she yet . but you have better be quick about it , I can tell you , for - ala , ala ! - she be go to be marry next ! ' 'no , , that be false . ' ' do you charge I with a falsehood , sir ? ' ' you be misinform . ' 'be I ? do you know better , then ? ' 'I think I do . ' ' what make you look so pale then ? ' say she , smile with delight at my emotion . ' be it anger at poor I for tell such a fib ? well , I only " tell the tale as ' tbe tell to I :" I do not vouch for the truth of it ; but at the same time , I do not see what reason should have for deceive I , or she informant for deceive she ; and that be what she tell I the footman tell she :- that be go to be marry on , and be go to the wedding . she do tell I the name of the gentleman , but I have forgote that . perhaps you can assist I to remember it . be there not some one that live near - or frequently visit the neighbourhood , that have long be attach to she ? - a - oh , dear ! - ' ' ? ' suggest I , with a bitter smile . ' you be right , ' cry she ; ' that be the very name . ' ' impossible , ! ' I exclaim , in a tone that make she start . ' well , you know , that be what they tell I
I , ' say she , composedly star I in the face . and then she break out into a long shrill laugh that put I to my wit 's end with fury . ' really you must excuse I , ' cry she . 'I know it be very rude , but ha , ha , ha ! - do you think to marry she yourself ? dear , dear , what a pity ! - ha , ha , ha ! , , be you go to faint ? oh , mercy ! shall I call this man ? here , - ' but check the word on she lip , I seize she arm and give it , I think , a pretty severe squeeze , for she shrank into herself with a faint cry of pain or terror ; but the spirit within she be not subdue : instantly rally , she continue , with well - feign concern , ' what can I do for you ? will you have some water - some brandy ? I daresay they have some in the public - house down there , if you will let I run . ' ' have do with this nonsense ! ' cry I , sternly . she look confounded - almost frightene again , for a moment . ' you know i hate such jest ,' I continue . ' indeed ! I be not jest ! ' ' you be laugh , at all event ; and I do not like to be laugh at , ' return I , make violent effort to speak with proper dignity and composure , and to say nothing but what be coherent and sensible . ' and since you be in such a merry mood , , you must be good enough company for yourself ; and therefore I shall leave you to finish you walk alone - for , now I think of it , I have business elsewhere ; so good - evening . ' with that I leave she ( smother she malicious laughter ) and turn aside into the field , spring up the bank , and push through the nearest gap in the hedge . Determine at once to prove the truth - or rather the falsehood - of she story , I hasten to as fast as my leg could carry I ; first veer round by a circuitous course , but the moment I be out of sight of my fair tormentor cut away across the country , just as a bird might fly , over pasture - land , and fallow , and stubble , and lane , clearing hedge and ditch and hurdle , till I come to the young squire 's gate . never till now have I know the full fervour of my love - the full strength of my hope , not wholly crush even in my hour of deepest despondency , always tenaciously cling to the thought that one day she might be mine , or , if not that , at least that something of my memory , some slight remembrance of we friendship and we love , would be for ever cherish in she heart . I march up to the door , determine , if I see the master , to question he boldly concern he sister , to wait and hesitate no longer , but cast false delicacy and stupid pride behind my back , and know my fate at once . 'Is at home ? ' I eagerly ask of the servant that open the door . ' no , sir , master go yesterday , ' reply he , look very alert . ' go where ? ' , sir - be not you aware , sir ? he be very close , be master , ' say the fellow , with a foolish , simper grin . 'I suppose , sir - ' but I turn and leave he , without wait to hear what he suppose . I be not go to stand there to expose my tortured feeling to the insolent laughter and impertinent curiosity of a fellow like that . but what be to be do now ? could it be possible that she have leave I for that man ? I could not believe it . I she might forsake , but not to give herself to he ! well , I would know the truth ; to no concern of daily life could I attend while this tempest of doubt and dread , of jealousy and rage , distract I . I would take the morning coach from - ( the evening one would be already gone ) , and fly to - I must be there before the marriage . and why ? because a thought struck I that perhaps I might prevent it - that if I do not , she and I might both lament it to the latest moment of we life . it struck I that someone might have bely I to she : perhaps she brother ; yes , no doubt she brother have persuade she that I be false and faithless , and take advantage of she natural indignation , and perhaps she despond carelessness about she future life , have urge she , artfully , cruelly , on to this other marriage , in order to secure she from I . if this be the case , and if she should only discover she mistake when too late to repair it - to what a life of misery and vain regret might she be doom as well as I ; and what remorse for I to think my foolish scruple have induce it all ! oh , I must see she - she must know my truth even if I tell it at the church door ! I might pass for
for a madman or a impertinent fool - even she might be offend at such a interruption , or at least might tell I it be now too late . but if I could save she , if she might be mine ! - it be too rapturous a thought ! Winge by this hope , and goad by these fear , I hurrie homeward to prepare for my departure on the morrow . I tell my mother that urgent business which admit no delay , but which I could not then explain , call I away . my deep anxiety and serious preoccupation could not be conceal from she maternal eye ; and I have much ado to calm she apprehension of some disastrous mystery . that night there come a heavy fall of snow , which so retarde the progress of the coach on the follow day that I be almost drive to distraction . I travel all night , of course , for this be : to - morrow morning , doubtless , the marriage would take place . but the night be long and dark : the snow heavily clog the wheel and ball the horse ' foot ; the animal be consumedly lazy ; the coachman most execrably cautious ; the passenger confoundedly apathetic in they supine indifference to the rate of we progression . instead of assist I to bully the several coachman and urge they forward , they merely sta and grin at my impatience : one fellow even venture to rally I upon it - but I silence he with a look that quell he for the rest of the journey ; and when , at the last stage , I would have take the rein into my own hand , they all with one accord oppose it . it be broad daylight when we enter m- and draw up at the ' and . ' I alight and call aloud for a post -chaise to . there be none to be have : the only one in the town be under repair . 'A gig , then - a fly - car - anything - only be quick ! ' there be a gig , but not a horse to spare . I send into the town to seek one : but they be such a intolerable time about it that I could wait no longer - I think my own foot could carry I sooner ; and bid they send the conveyance after I , if it be ready within a hour , I set off as fast as I could walk . the distance be little more than six miles , but the road be strange , and I have to keep stop to inquire my way ; halloo to carter and clodhopper , and frequently invade the cottage , for there be few abroad that winter 's morning ; sometimes knock up the lazy people from they bed , for where so little work be to be do , perhaps so little food and fire to be have , they car not to curtail they slumber . I have no time to think of they , however ; ach with weariness and desperation , I hurrie on . the gig do not overtake I : and it be well I have not wait for it ; vexatious rather , that I have be fool enough to wait so long . at length , however , I enter the neighbourhood of . I approach the little rural church - but lo ! there stand a train of carriage before it ; it need not the white favour bedeck the servants and horse , nor the merry voice of the village idler assemble to witness the show , to apprise I that there be a wedding within . I run in among they , demand , with breathless eagerness , have the ceremony long commence ? they only gap and stare . in my desperation , I push past they , and be about to enter the churchyard gate , when a group of rag urchin , that have be hang like be to the window , suddenly drop off and make a rush for the porch , vociferat in the uncouth dialect of they country something which signify , ' it be over - they be come out ! ' if have see I then she might indeed have be delight . I grasp the gate - post for support , and stand intently gaze towards the door to take my last look on my soul 's delight , my first on that detest mortal who have tear she from my heart , and doom she , I be certain , to a life of misery and hollow , vain repin - for what happiness could she enjoy with he ? I do not wish to shock she with my presence now , but I have not power to move away . come the bride and bridegroom . I see not ; I have eye for none but she . a long veil shroude half she graceful form , but do not hide it ; I could see that while she carry she head erect , she eye be bend upon the ground , and she face and neck be suffuse with a crimson blush ; but every feature be radiant with smile , and gleam through the misty whiteness of she veil be cluster of golden ringlet ! oh , heaven ! it be not my Helen ! the first glimpse make I start - but my eye be darken with exhaustion and despair . I trust they ? ' yes - it be not she ! it be a younger , slighter , rosier beauty - lovly indeed , but with far less dignity and depth of soul - without that indefinable grace , that keenly spiritual yet
yet gentle charm , that ineffable power to attract and subjugate the heart - my heart at least . I look at the bridegroom - it be ! I wip away the cold drop that be trick down my forehead , and step back as he approach ; but , he eye fall upon I , and he know I , alte as my appearance must have be . ' be that you , ? ' say he , start and confound at the apparition - perhaps , too , at the wildness of my look . ' yes , Lawrence ; be that you ? ' I muster the presence of mind to reply . he smile and colour , as if half - proud and half - asham of he identity ; and if he have reason to be proud of the sweet lady on he arm , he have no less cause to be asham of have conceal he good fortune so long . ' allow I to introduce you to my bride , ' say he , endeavour to hide he embarrassment by a assumption of careless gaiety . ' , this be ; my friend , , late . ' I bow to the bride , and vehemently wrng the bridegroom 's hand . ' why do you not tell I of this ? ' I say , reproachfully , pretend a resentment I do not feel ( for in truth I be almost wild with joy to find myself so happily mistaken , and overflow with affection to he for this and for the base injustice I feel that I have do he in my mind - he might have wronge I , but not to that extent ; and as I have hate he like a demon for the last forty hour , the reaction from such a feeling be so great that I could pardon all offence for the moment - and love he in spite of they too ) . 'I do tell you , ' say he , with a air of guilty confusion ; ' you receive my letter ? ' ' what letter ? ' ' the one announce my intend marriage . ' 'I never receive the most distant hint of such a intention . ' ' it must have cross you on you way then - it should have reach you yesterday morning - it be rather late , I acknowledge . but what bring you here , then , if you receive no information ? ' it be now my turn to be confound ; but the young lady , who have be busily pat the snow with she foot during we short sotto - voce colloquy , very opportunely come to my assistance by pinch she companion 's arm and whisper a suggestion that he friend should be invite to step into the carriage and go with they ; it be scarcely agreeable to stand there among so many gazer , and keep they friend wait into the bargain . ' and so cold as it be too ! ' say he , glance with dismay at she slight drapery , and immediately hand she into the carriage . ' , will you come ? we be go to , but we can drop you anywhere between this and . ' ' no , thank you . good - by - I need not wish you a pleasant journey ; but I shall expect a very handsome apology , some time , mind , and score of letter , before we meet again . ' he shook my hand , and hasten to take he place beside he lady . this be no time or place for explanation or discourse : we have already stand long enough to excite the wonder of the village sight - seer , and perhaps the wrath of the attendant bridal party ; though , of course , all this pass in a much shorter time than I have take to relate , or even than you will take to read it . I stand beside the carriage , and , the window be down , I see my happy friend fondly encircle he companion 's waist with he arm , while she rest she glow cheek on he shoulder , look the very impersonation of loving , trust bliss . in the interval between the footman 's close the door and take he place behind she raise she smile brown eye to he face , observe , playfully , - ' I fear you must think I very insensible , : I know it be the custom for lady to cry on these occasion , but I could not squeeze a tear for my life . ' he only answer with a kiss , and press she still closer to he bosom . ' but what be this ? ' he murmure . ' why , , you be cry now ! ' 'Oh , it be nothing - it be only too much happiness - and the wish , ' sob she , ' that we dear be as happy as ourselves . ' ' bless you for that wish ! ' I inwardly respond , as the carriage roll away - ' and heaven grant it be not wholly vain ! ' I think a cloud have suddenly darken she husband 's face as she speak . what do he think ? could he grudge such happiness to he dear sister and he friend as he now feel himself ? at such a moment it be impossible . the contrast between she fate and he must darke he bliss for a time . perhaps , too , he think of I : perhaps he regret the part he have have in prevent we union , by omitt to help we , if not by actually plot against
against we . I exonerate he from that charge now , and deeply lament my former ungenerous suspicion ; but he have wrong we , still - I hope , I trust that he have . he have not attempt to cheek the course of we love by actually damm up the stream in they passage , but he have passively watch the two current wander through life 's arid wilderness , decline to clear away the obstruction that divide they , and secretly hope that both would lose themselves in the sand before they could be join in one . and meantime he have be quietly proceed with he own affair ; perhaps , he heart and head have be so full of he fair lady that he have have but little think to spare for other . Doubtless he have make he first acquaintance with she - he first intimate acquaintance at least - during he three month ' sojourn at -, for I now recollect that he have once casually let fall a intimation that he aunt and sister have a young friend stay with they at the time , and this account for at least one - half he silence about all transaction there . now , too , I see a reason for many little thing that have slightly puzzl I before ; among the rest , for sundry departure from , and absence more or less prolonge , for which he never satisfactorily account , and concern which he hate to be question on he return . well might the servant say he master be ' very close . ' but why this strange reserve to I ? partly , from that remarkable idiosyncrasy to which I have before allude ; partly , perhaps , from tenderness to my feeling , or fear to disturb my philosophy by touch upon the infectious theme of love . the tardy gig have overtake I at last . I enter it , and bade the man who bring it drive to - I be too busy with my own thought to care to drive it myself . I would see - there could be no impropriety in that now that she husband have be dead above a year - and by she indifference or she joy at my unexpected arrival I could soon tell whether she heart be truly mine . but my companion , a loquacious , forward fellow , be not dispose to leave I to the indulgence of my private cogitation . ' there they go ! ' say he , as the carriage file away before we . ' there will be brave doings on yonder to - day , as what come to - morra . - know anything of that family , sir ? or you be a stranger in these part ? ' 'I know they by report . ' ' Humph ! there be the best of them go , anyhow . and I suppose the old missis be agoing to leave after this stir 's get overed , and take herself off , somewhere , to live on she bit of a jointure ; and the young 'un - at least the new 'un ( she be none so very young ) - be come down to live at the . ' 'Is marry , then ? ' 'Ay , sir , a few month since . he should a be we afore , to a widow lady , but they could not agree over the money : she ' a rare long purse , and want it all to hisself ; but she would not let it go , and so then they fall out . this one be not quite as rich , nor as handsome either , but she have not be marry before . she be very plain , they say , and get on to forty or past , and so , you know , if she do not jump at this hopportunity , she think she would never get a better . I guess she think such a handsome young husband be worth all ' at ever she have , and he might take it and welcome , but I lay she will rue she bargain afore long . they say she begin already to see ' at he be not not altogether that nice , generous , perlite , delightful gentleman ' at she think he afore marriage - he begin a be careless and masterful already . ay , and she will find he harder and carelesser nor she think on . ' ' you seem to be well acquaint with he ,' I observe . am , sir ; I have know he since he be quite a young gentleman ; and a proud 'un he be , and a wilful . I be servant yonder for several year ; but I could not stand they niggardly way - she get ever longer and worse , do missis , with she nipping and screwing , and watch and grudge ; so I think I would find another place . ' ' be we not near the house ? ' say I , interrupt he . ' yes , sir ; yond be the park . ' my heart sank within I to behold that stately mansion in the midst of its expansive grounds . the park as beautiful now , in its wintry garb , as it could be in its summer glory : the majestic sweep , the undulating swell and fall , display to full advantage in that robe of dazzling purity , stainless and printless - save one long , win track leave by the trooping deer - the stately timber - tree with they heavy - laden branch gleam white against the dull , grey sky ; the deep , encircle wood ; the broad expanse
expanse of water sleep in freeze quiet ; and the weeping ash and willow droop they snow - clad bough above it - all present a picture , strike indeed , and pleas to a unencumbered mind , but by no means encourage to I . there be one comfort , however , - all this be entail upon little , and could not under any circumstance , strictly speak , be he mother 's . but how be she situate ? Overcom with a sudden effort my repugnance to mention she name to my garrulous companion , I ask he if he know whether she late husband have leave a will , and how the property have be dispose of . oh , yes , he know all about it ; and I be quickly inform that to she have be leave the full control and management of the estate during she son 's minority , besides the absolute , unconditional possession of she own fortune ( but I know that she father have not give she much ) , and the small additional sum that have be settle upon she before marriage . before the close of the explanation we draw up at the park - gate . now for the trial . if I should find she within - but alas ! she might be still at : she brother have give I no intimation to the contrary . I inquire at the porter 's lodge if . be at home . no , she be with she aunt in - shire , but be expect to return before . she usually spend most of she time at , only come to occasionally , when the management of affair , or the interest of she tenant and dependent , require she presence . ' near what town be situate ? ' I ask . the requisite information be soon obtain . ' now then , my man , give I the rein , and we will return to m - . I must have some breakfast at the " and , " and then away to by the first coach for -. ' at m - I have time before the coach start to replenish my force with a hearty breakfast , and to obtain the refreshment of my usual morning 's ablution , and the amelioration of some slight change in my toilet , and also to despatch a short note to my mother ( excellent son that I be ) , to assure she that I be still in existence , and to excuse my non - appearance at the expect time . it be a long journey to for those slow - travel day , but I do not deny myself needful refreshment on the road , nor even a night 's rest at a wayside inn , choose rather to brook a little delay than to present myself worn , wild , and weather - beaten before my mistress and she aunt , who would be astonished enough to see I without that . next morning , therefore , I not only fortify myself with as substantial a breakfast as my excited feeling would allow I to swallow , but I bestow a little more than usual time and care upon my toilet ; and , furnish with a change of linen from my small carpet - bag , well - brush clothes , well - polish boot , and neat new glove , I mount ' the , ' and resume my journey . I have nearly two stage yet before I , but the coach , I be inform , pass through the neighbourhood of , and have desire to be set down as near the hall as possible , I have nothing to do but to sit with fold arm and speculate upon the come hour . it be a clear , frosty morning . the very fact of sitting exalt aloft , survey the snowy landscape and sweet sunny sky , inhal the pure , brace air , and crunch away over the crisp freeze snow , be exhilarat enough in itself ; but add to this the idea of to what goal I be hasten , and whom I expect to meet , and you may have some faint conception of my frame of mind at the time - only a faint one , though : for my heart swell with unspeakable delight , and my spirit rise almost to madness , in spite of my prudent endeavour to bind they down to a reasonable platitude by think of the undeniable difference between 's rank and mine ; of all that she have pass through since we part ; of she long , unbroken silence ; and , above all , of she cool , cautious aunt , whose counsels she would doubtless be careful not to slight again . these consideration make my heart flutter with anxiety , and my chest heave with impatience to get the crisis over ; but they could not dim she image in my mind , or mar the vivid recollection of what have be say and feel between we , or destroy the keen anticipation of what be to be : in fact , I could not realise they terror now . towards the close of the journey , however , a couple of my fellow - passenger kindly come to my assistance , and bring I low enough . ' Fine land this , ' say one of they , point with he umbrella to the wide field on the right , conspicuous for they compact hedgerow , deep , well - cut ditch , and fine timber - tree , grow sometimes on the border , sometimes in the midst of the enclosure : ' very fine land , if you see it in the summer or spring . '
' 'Ay , ' respond the other , a gruff elderly man , with a drab greatcoat button up to the ching , and a cotton umbrella between he knee . ' it be old 's , I suppose . ' ' it be he , sir ; but he be dead now , you be aware , and have leave it all to he niece . ' ' all ? ' ' every rood of it , and the mansion - house and all ! every hatom of he worldly goods , except just a trifle , by way of remembrance , to he nephew down in - shire , and a annuity to he wife . ' ' it be strange , sir ! ' ' it be , sir ; and she be not he own niece neither . but he have no near relation of he own - none but a nephew he would quarrell with ; and he always have a partiality for this one . and then he wife advise he to it , they say : she would bring most of the property , and it be she wish that this lady should have it . ' ' Humph ! she will be a fine catch for somebody . ' ' she will so . she be a widow , but quite young yet , and uncommon handsome : a fortune of she own , besides , and only one child , and she be nurse a fine estate for he in - . there will be lot to speak for she ! ' fraid there be no chance for uz ' - ( facetiously jogge I with he elbow , as well as he companion ) - 'ha , ha , ha ! no offence , sir , I hope ? ' - ( to I ) . ' Ahem ! I should think she will marry none but a nobleman myself . look ye , sir , ' resume he , turn to he other neighbour , and point past I with he umbrella , ' that be the : grand park , you see , and all they wood - plenty of timber there , and lot of game . Hallo ! what now ? ' this exclamation be occasion by the sudden stoppage of the coach at the park - gate . ' for ? ' cry the coachman and I rise and throw my carpet - bag on to the ground , preparatory to drop myself down after it . ' Sickly , sir ? ' ask my talkative neighbour , stare I in the face . I daresay it be white enough . ' no . here , coachman ! ' ' thank 'ee , sir . - all right ! ' the coachman pockete he fee and drive away , leave I , not walk up the park , but pace to and for before its gate , with fold arm , and eye fix upon the ground , a overwhelming force of image , thought , impressions crowding on my mind , and nothing tangibly distinct but this : my love have be cherish in vain - my hope be gone for ever ; I must tear myself away at once , and banish or suppress all thought of she , like the remembrance of a wild , mad dream . gladly would I have linger round the place for hour , in the hope of catching at least one distant glimpse of she before I go , but it must not be - I must not suffer she to see I ; for what could have bring I hither but the hope of revive she attachment , with a view hereafter to obtain she hand ? and could I bear that she should think I capable of such a thing ? - of presuming upon the acquaintance - the love , if you will - accidentally contract , or rather force upon she against she will , when she be a unknown fugitive , toil for she own support , apparently without fortune , family , or connection ; to come upon she now , when she be reinstate in she proper sphere , and claim a share in she prosperity , which , have it never fail she , would most certainly have keep she unknown to I for ever ? and this , too , when we have part sixteen month ago , and she have expressly forbide I to hope for a re-union in this world , and never send I a line or a message from that day to this . no ! the very idea be intolerable . and even if she should have a lingering affection for I still , ought I to disturb she peace by awaken those feeling ? to subject she to the struggle of conflict duty and inclination - to whichsoever side the latter might allure , or the former imperatively call she - whether she should deem it she duty to risk the slights and censure of the world , the sorrow and displeasure of those she love , for a romantic idea of truth and constancy to I , or to sacrifice she individual wish to the feeling of she friend and she own sense of prudence and the fitness of thing ? no - and I would not ! I would go at once , and she should never know that I have approach the place of she abode : for though I might disclaim all idea of ever aspire to she hand , or even of solicite a place in she friendly regard , she peace should not be break by my presence , nor she heart afflict by the sight of my fidelity . then , dear , forever ! forever adieu ! ' so say I - and yet
yet I could not tear myself away . I move a few pace , and then look back , for one last view of she stately home , that I might have its outward form , at least , impressed upon my mind as indelibly as she own image , which , alas ! I must not see again - then walk a few step further ; and then , lose in melancholy musing , pause again and lean my back against a rough old tree that grow beside the road . while stand thus , absorb in my gloomy reverie , a gentleman 's carriage come round the corner of the road . I do not look at it ; and have it roll quietly by I , I should not have remember the fact of its appearance at all ; but a tiny voice from within it rouse I by exclaiming , ' , , here be ! ' I do not hear the reply , but presently the same voice answer , ' it be indeed , mamma - look for yourself . ' I do not raise my eye , but I suppose mamma look , for a clear melodious voice , whose tone thrill through my nerve , exclaim , 'Oh , aunt ! here be , 's friend ! , ! ' there be such evidence of joyous though suppress excitement in the utterance of those few word - especially that tremulous , 'Oh , aunt ' - that it throw I almost off my guard . the carriage stop immediately , and I look up and meet the eye of a pale , grave , elderly lady survey I from the open window . she bow , and so do I , and then she withdraw she head , while scream to the footman to let he out ; but before that functionary could descmend from he box a hand be silently put forth from the carriage window . I know that hand , though a black glove conceal its delicate whiteness and half it be fair proportion , and quickly seize it , I press it in my own - ardently for a moment , but instantly recollect myself , I drop it , and it be immediately withdrawn . ' be you come to see we , or only pass by ? ' ask the low voice of its owner , who , I feel , be attentively survey my countenance from behind the thick black veil which , with the shadowing panel , entirely conceal she own from I . 'I - I come to see the place , ' falter I . ' the place , ' repeat she , in a tone which betoken more displeasure or disappointment than surprise . ' will you not enter it , then ? ' ' if you wish it . ' ' can you doubt ? ' ' yes , yes ! he must enter , ' cry , run round from the other door ; and seize my hand in both he , he shook it heartily . ' do you remember I , sir ? ' say he . ' yes , full well , my little man , alter though you be , ' reply I , survey the comparatively tall , slim young gentleman , with he mother 's image visibly stamp upon he fair , intelligent feature , in spite of the blue eye beam with gladness , and the bright lock cluster beneath he cap . ' be I not grow ? ' say he , stretch himself up to he full height . ' ! three inche , upon my word ! ' 'I be seven last birthday , ' be the proud rejoinder . ' in seven year more I shall be as tall as you nearly . ' ' , ' say he mother , ' tell he to come in . go on , . ' there be a touch of sadness as well as coldness in she voice , but I know not to what to ascribe it . the carriage drive on and enter the gate before we . my little companion lead I up the park , discourse merrily all the way . arrive at the hall - door , I pause on the step and look round I , wait to recover my composure , if possible - or , at any rate , to remember my new - form resolution and the principle on which they be founde ; and it be not till have be for some time gently pull my coat , and repeat he invitations to enter , that I at length consent to accompany he into the apartment where the lady await we . ey I as I enter with a kind of gentle , serious scrutiny , and politely ask after and . I respectfully answer she inquiry . beg I to be seat , observe it be rather cold , but she suppose I have not travel far that morning . ' not quite twenty mile ,' I answer . ' not on foot ! ' 'no , , by coach . ' ' be , sir , ' say , the only truly happy one amongst we , direct my attention to that worthy individual , who have just enter to take she mistress 's thing . she vouchsaf I a almost friendly smile of recognition - a favour that demand , at least , a civil salutation on my part , which be accordingly give and respectfully return - she have see the error of she former estimation of my character . when be divest of she lugubrious bonnet and veil , she heavy winter cloak , & c. , she look so like herself that I know not how to bear it . I be particularly glad to
to see she beautiful black hair , unstint still , and unconceal in its glossy luxuriance . ' have leave off she widow 's cap in honour of uncle 's marriage , ' observe , read my look with a child 's mingled simplicity and quickness of observation . look grave and shook she head . ' and be never go to leave off hers , ' persist the naughty boy ; but when he see that he pertness be seriously displeasing and painful to he aunt , he go and silently put he arm round she neck , kiss she cheek , and withdraw to the recess of one of the great bay - window , where he quietly amuse himself with he dog , while gravely discuss with I the interesting topic of the weather , the season , and the roads . I consider she presence very useful as a check upon my natural impulse - a antidote to those emotion of tumultuous excitement which would otherwise have carry I away against my reason and my will ; but just then I feel the restraint almost intolerable , and I have the greatest difficulty in forcing myself to attend to she remark and answer they with ordinary politeness ; for I be sensible that be stand within a few foot of I beside the fire . I da not look at she , but I feel she eye be upon I , and from one hasty , furtive glance , I think she cheek be slightly flushed , and that she finger , as she play with she watch - chain , be agitate with that restless , trembl motion which betoken high excitement . ' tell I , ' say she , avail herself of the first pause in the attempt conversation between she aunt and I , and speak fast and low , with she eye bend on the gold chain - for I now venture another glance - ' tell I how you all be at - hope - have nothing happen since I leave you ? ' 'I believe not . ' ' nobody dead ? nobody marry ? ' ' no . ' - or expect to marry ? - no old tie dissolve or new one for ? no old friend forget or supplant ? ' she drop she voice so low in the last sentence that no one could have catch the concluding word but myself , and at the same time turn she eye upon I with a dawning smile , most sweetly melancholy , and a look of timid though keen inquiry that make my cheek tingle with inexpressible emotion . 'I believe not ,' I answer . ' certainly not , if other be as little change as I . ' she face glow in sympathy with mine . ' and you really do not mean to call ? ' she exclaim . 'I fear to intrude . ' 'to intrude ! ' cry she , with a impatient gesture . ' what - ' but as if suddenly recollect she aunt 's presence , she check herself , and , turn to that lady , continue - ' why , aunt , this man be my brother 's close friend , and be my own intimate acquaintance ( for a few short month at least ) , and profess a great attachment to my boy - and when he pass the house , so many score of mile from he home , he decline to look in for fear of intruding ! ' ' be over -modest , ' observ . ' over - ceremonious rather , ' say she niece - ' over - well , it be no matter . ' and turn from I , she seat herself in a chair beside the table , and pull a book to she by the cover , begin to turn over the leave in a energetic kind of abstraction . ' if I have know , ' say I , ' that you would have honoure I by remember I as a intimate acquaintance , I most likely should not have deny myself the pleasure of call upon you , but I think you have forget I long ago . ' ' you judge of other by yourself , ' mutter she without raise she eye from the book , but redden as she speak , and hastily turn over a dozen leave at once . there be a pause , of which yoArthu think he might venture to avail himself to introduce he handsome young setter , and show I how wonderfully it be grow and improve , and to ask after the welfare of its father . then withdraw to take off she thing . immediately push the book from she , and after silently survey she son , he friend , and he dog for a few moment , she dismiss the former from the room under pretence of wish he to fetch he last new book to show I . the child obey with alacrity ; but I continue caresse the dog . the silence might have last till its master 's return , have it depend on I to break it ; but , in half a minute or less , my hostess impatiently rise , and , take she former station on the rug between I and the chimney corner , earnestly exclaim - ' , what be the matter with you ? - why be you so change ? it be a very indiscreet question , I know , ' she hasten to add : ' perhaps a very rude one - do not answer it if you think so - but I hate mystery and concealment . ' 'I be not change , - unfortunately I be as keen and passionate as ever - it be not I
I , it be circumstance that be change . ' ' what circumstance ? do tell I ! ' she cheek be blanch with the very anguish of anxiety - could it be with the fear that I have rashly pledge my faith to another ? 'I will tell you at once , ' say I . 'I will confess that I come here for the purpose of see you ( not without some monitory misgiving at my own presumption , and fear that I should be as little welcome as expect when I come ) , but I do not know that this estate be yours until enlighten on the subject of you inheritance by the conversation of two fellow- passenger in the last stage of my journey ; and then I see at once the folly of the hope I have cherish , and the madness of retain they a moment longer ; and though I alight at you gate , I determine not to enter within they ; I linger a few minute to see the place , but be fully resolve to return to m- without see its mistress . ' ' and if my aunt and I have not be just return from we morning drive , I should have see and hear no more of you ? ' 'I think it would be better for both that we should not meet , ' reply I , as calmly as I could , but not da to speak above my breath , from conscious inability to steady my voice , and not da to look in she face lest my firmness should forsake I altogether . 'I think a interview would only disturb you peace and madden I . but I be glad , now , of this opportunity of see you once more and know that you have not forget I , and of assure you that I shall never cease to remember you . ' there be a moment 's pause . move away , and stand in the recess of the window . do she regard this as a intimation that modesty alone prevent I from ask she hand ? and be she consider how to repulse I with the smallest injury to my feeling ? before I could speak to relieve she from such a perplexity , she break the silence herself by suddenly turn towards I and observe - ' you might have have such a opportunity before - as far , I mean , as regards assure I of you kindly recollection , and yourself of mine , if you have write to I . ' 'I would have do so , but I do not know you address , and do not like to ask you brother , because I think he would object to my writing ; but this would not have deter I for a moment , if I could have venture to believe that you expect to hear from I , or even waste a thought upon you unhappy friend ; but you silence naturally lead I to conclude myself forgote . ' ' do you expect I to write to you , then ? ' 'no , - , ' say I , blush at the implied imputation , ' certainly not ; but if you have send I a message through you brother , or even ask he about I now and then - ' 'I do ask about you frequently . I be not go to do more , ' continue she , smile , 'so long as you continue to restrict yourself to a few polite inquirie about my health . ' ' you brother never tell I that you have mention my name . ' ' do you ever ask he ? ' ' no ; for I see he do not wish to be question about you , or to afford the slightest encouragement or assistance to my too obstinate attachment . ' Helen do not reply . ' and he be perfectly right , ' add I . but she remain in silence , look out upon the snowy lawn . ' oh , I will relieve she of my presence , ' think I ; and immediately I rise and advanc to take leave , with a most heroic resolution - but pride be at the bottom of it , or it could not have carry I through . ' be you go already ? ' say she , take the hand I offer , and not immediately let it go . ' why should I stay any longer ? ' ' wait till Arthur come , at least . ' only too glad to obey , I stand and lean against the opposite side of the window . ' you tell I you be not change , ' say my companion : ' you be - very much so . ' ' no , , I only ought to be . ' ' do you mean to maintain that you have the same regard for I that you have when last we meet ? ' 'I have ; but it would be wrong to talk of it now . ' ' it be wrong to talk of it then , ; it would not now - unless to do so would be to violate the truth . ' I be too much agitate to speak ; but , without wait for a answer , she turn away she glistening eye and crimson cheek , and throw up the window and look out , whether to calm she own , excited feeling , or to relieve she embarrassment , or only to pluck that beautiful half - blow - rose that grow upon the little shrub without , just pee from the snow that have hithertoo , no doubt , defend it from the frost , and be
be now melt away in the sun . Pluck it , however , she do , and have gently dash the glittering powder from its leave , approach it to she lip and say : ' this rose be not so fragrant as a summer flower , but it have stand through hardship none of they could bear : the cold rain of winter have suffice to nourish it , and it be faint sun to warm it ; the bleak wind have not blanch it , or break its stem , and the keen frost have not blight it . look , , it be still fresh and bloom as a flower can be , with the cold snow even now on its petal . - will you have it ? ' I hold out my hand : I da not speak lest my emotion should overmaster I . she lay the rose across my palm , but I scarcely close my finger upon it , so deeply be I absorb in think what might be the meaning of she word , and what I ought to do or say upon the occasion ; whether to give way to my feeling or restrain they still . Misconstrue this hesitation into indifference - or reluctance even - to accept she gift , suddenly snatch it from my hand , throw it out on to the snow , shut down the window with a emphasis , and withdraw to the fire . ' , what mean this ? ' I cry , electrify at this startling change in she demeanour . ' you do not understand my gift , ' say she - 'or , what be worse , you despise it . I be sorry I give it you ; but since I do make such a mistake , the only remedy I could think of be to take it away . ' ' you misunderstand I cruelly ,' I reply , and in a minute I have open the window again , leape out , pick up the flower , bring it in , and present it to she , implor she to give it I again , and I would keep it for ever for she sake , and prize it more highly than anything in the world I possess . ' and will this contend you ? ' say she , as she take it in she hand . ' it shall ,' I answer . ' there , then ; take it . ' I press it earnestly to my lip , and put it in my bosom , look on with a half - sarcastic smile . ' now , be you go ? ' say she . 'I will if - if I must . ' ' you be change , ' persist she - ' you be grow either very proud or very indifferent . ' 'I be neither , - . if you could see my heart - ' ' you must be one , - if not both . and why ? - why not Hel , as before ? ' 'Helen , then - dear ! ' I murmure . I be in a agony of mingled love , hope , delight , uncertainty , and suspense . ' the rose I give you be a emblem of my heart , ' say she ; ' would you take it away and leave I here alone ? ' ' would you give I you hand too , if I ask it ? ' ' have I not say enough ? ' she answer , with a most enchanting smile . I snatch she hand , and would have fervently kiss it , but suddenly check myself , and say , - ' but have you consider the consequence ? ' ' hardly , I think , or I should not have offer myself to one too proud to take I , or too indifferent to make he affection outweigh my worldly goods . ' blockhead that I be ! - I tremble to clasp she in my arm , but da not believe in so much joy , and yet restrain myself to say , - ' but if you should repent ! ' ' it would be you fault , ' she reply : 'I never shall , unless you bitterly disappoind I . if you have not sufficient confidence in my affection to believe this , let I alone . ' ' my darl angel - my own , ' cry I , now passionately kiss the hand I still retain , and throw my left arm around she , ' you never shall repent , if it depend on I alone . but have you think of you aunt ? ' I tremble for the answer , and clasp she closer to my heart in the instinctive dread of lose my new - find treasure . ' my aunt must not know of it yet , ' say she . ' she would think it a rash , wild step , because she could not imagine how well I know you ; but she must know you herself , and learn to like you . you must leave we now , after lunch , and come again in spring , and make a longer stay , and cultivate she acquaintance , and I know you will like each other . ' ' and then you will be mine , ' say I , print a kiss upon she lip , and another , and another ; for I be as daring and impetuous now as I have be backward and constrain before . ' no - in another year , ' reply she , gently disengage herself from my embrace , but still fondly clasp my hand . 'Another year ! oh , , I could not wait
wait so long ! ' ' where be you fidelity ? ' 'i mean I could not endure the misery of so long a separation . ' ' it would not be a separation : we will write every day : my spirit shall be always with you , and sometimes you shall see I with you bodily eye . I will not be such a hypocrite as to pretend that I desire to wait so long myself , but as my marriage be to please myself , alone , I ought to consult my friend about the time of it . ' ' you friend will disapprove . ' ' they will not greatly disapprove , dear , ' say she , earnestly kiss my hand ; ' they cannot , when they know you , or , if they could , they would not be true friend - I should not care for they estrangement . now be you satisfie ? ' she look up in my face with a smile of ineffable tenderness . ' can I be otherwise , with you love ? and you do love I , ? ' say I , not doubt the fact , but wish to hear it confirm by she own acknowledgment . ' if you love as I do , ' she earnestly reply , ' you would not have so nearly lose I - these scruple of false delicacy and pride would never thus have trouble you - you would have see that the greatest worldly distinction and discrepancy of rank , birth , and fortune be as dust in the balance compare with the unity of accordant thought and feeling , and truly love , sympathise heart and soul . ' ' but this be too much happiness , ' say I , embrace she again ; 'I have not deserve it , - I dare not believe in such felicity : and the longer I have to wait , the greater will be my dread that something will intervene to snatch you from I - and think , a thousand thing may happen in a year ! - I shall be in one long fever of restless terror and impatience all the time . and besides , winter be such a dreary season . ' 'I think so too , ' reply she gravely : 'I would not be marry in winter - in , at least , ' she add , with a shudder - for in that month have occur both the ill - starr marriage that have bound she to she former husband , and the terrible death that release she - ' and therefore I say another year , in spring . ' ' next spr ? ' 'no , no - next autumn , perhaps . ' ' summer , then ? ' ' well , the close of summer . there now ! be satisfied . ' while she be speak re-enter the room - good boy for keep out so long . ' , I could not find the book in either of the place you tell I to look for it ' ( there be a conscious something in mamma 's smile that seem to say , ' no , dear , I know you could not ' ) , ' but get it for I at last . look , , a natural history , with all kind of bird and beast in it , and the reading as nice as the picture ! ' in great good humour I sit down to examine the book , and draw the little fellow between my knee . have he come a minute before I should have receive he less graciously , but now I affectionately strok he curling look , and even kiss he ivory forehead : he be my own 's son , and therefore mine ; and as such I have ever since regard he . that pretty child be now a fine young man : he have realise he mother 's brightest expectation , and be at present residing in with he young wife - the merry little of . I have not look through half the book before . appear to invite I into the other room to lunch . that lady 's cool , distant manners rather chill I at first ; but I do my best to propitiate she , and not entirely without success , I think , even in that first short visit ; for when I talk cheerfully to she , she gradually become more kind and cordial , and when I depart she bade I a gracious adieu , hope ere long to have the pleasure of see I again . ' but you must not go till you have see the conservatory , my aunt 's winter , ' say , as I advance to take leave of she , with as much philosophy and self - command as I could summon to my aid . I gladly avail myself of such a respite , and follow she into a large and beautiful conservatory , plentifully furnish with flower , consider the season - but , of course , I have little attention to spare for they . it be not , however , for any tender colloquy that my companion have bring I there :- ' my aunt be particularly fond of flower , ' she observ , ' and she be fond of too : I bring you here to offer a petition in she behalf , that this may be she home as long as she live , and - if it be not we home likewise - that I may often see she and be with she ; for I fear she will be sorry to lose I ; and though she lead a retired and contemplative life , she be apt to
