and by 1 it be a truth universally acknowledge , that a single man in possession of a good fortune , must be in want of a wife . however little know the feeling or view of such a man may be on he first enter a neighbourhood , this truth be so well fix in the mind of the surround family , that he be consider the rightful property of some one or other of they daughter . " my dear , " say he lady to he one day , " have you hear that be let at last ? " reply that he have not . " but it be , " return she ; " for . long have just be here , and she tell I all about it . " make no answer . " do you not want to know who have take it ? " cry he wife impatiently . " _You want to tell I , and I have no objection to hear it . " this be invitation enough . " why , my dear , you must know , . say that be take by a young man of large fortune from the north of ; that he come down on in a chaise and four to see the place , and be so much delighted with it , that he agree with immediately ; that he be to take possession before , and some of he servants be to be in the house by the end of next week . " " what be he name ? " " . " " be he marry or single ? " " oh ! , my dear , to be sure ! a single man of large fortune ; four or five thousand a year . what a fine thing for we girl ! " " how so ? how can it affect they ? " " my dear , " reply he wife , " how can you be so tiresome ! you must know that I be think of he marry one of they . " " be that he design in settling here ? " " Design ! Nonsense , how can you talk so ! but it be very likely that he may fall in love with one of they , and therefore you must visit he as soon as he come . " " I see no occasion for that . you and the girl may go , or you may send they by themselves , which perhaps will be still better , for as you be as handsome as any of they , may like you the best of the party . " " my dear , you flatter I . I certainly have have my share of beauty , but I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now . when a woman have five grow - up daughter , she ought to give over thinking of she own beauty . " " in such case , a woman have not often much beauty to think off . " " but , my dear , you must indeed go and see when he come into the neighbourhood . " " it be more than I engage for , I assure you . " " but consider you daughter . only think what a establishment it would be for one of they . and be determined to go , merely on that account , for in general , you know , they visit no newcomer . indeed you must go , for it will be impossible for we to visit he if you do not . " " you be over-scrupulous , surely . I dare say will be very glad to see you ; and I will send a few line by you to assure he of my hearty consent to he marry whichever he choose of the girl ; though I must throw in a good word for my little . " " I desire you will do no such thing . be not a bit better than the other ; and I be sure she be not half so handsome as , nor half so good - humour as . but you be always give she the preference . " " they have none of they much to recommend they , " reply he ; " they be all silly and ignorant like other girl ; but have something more of quickness than she sister . " " , how can you abuse you own child in such a way ? you take delight in vex I . you have no compassion for my poor nerve . " " you mistake I , my dear . I have a high respect for you nerve . they be my old friend . I have hear you mention they with consideration these last twenty year at least . " be so odd a mixture of quick part , sarcastic humour , reserve , and caprice , that the experience of three - and - twenty year have be insufficient to make he wife understand he character . she mind be less difficult to develop . she be a woman of mean understanding , little information , and uncertain temper . when she be discontent , she fancie herself nervous . the business of she life be to get she daughter marry ; its solace be visit and news . 2 be among the earliest of those who wait on . he have always intend to visit he , though to the last always assure he wife that he should not go ; and till the evening after the visit be pay she have no knowledge of it . it be then disclose in the follow manner . Observe he second daughter employ in trimm a hat , he suddenly address she with : "
" I hope will like it , . " " we be not in a way to know what like , " say she mother resentfully , " since we be not to visit . " " but you forget , mamma , " say , " that we shall meet he at the assemblie , and that Mrs . Long promise to introduce he . " " I do not believe . long will do any such thing . she have two niece of she own . she be a selfish , hypocritical woman , and I have no opinion of she . " " no more have I , " say ; " and I be glad to find that you do not depend on she serve you . " deign not to make any reply , but , unable to contain herself , begin scold one of she daughter . " do not keep coughing so , , for 's sake ! have a little compassion on my nerve . you tear they to piece . " " have no discretion in she cough , " say she father ; " she time they ill . " " I do not cough for my own amusement , " reply fretfully . " when be you next ball to be , ? " " to - morrow fortnight . " " aye , so it be , " cry she mother , " and . long do not come back till the day before ; so it will be impossible for she to introduce he , for she will not know he herself . " " then , my dear , you may have the advantage of you friend , and introduce to she . " " impossible , , impossible , when I be not acquaint with he myself ; how can you be so tease ? " " I honour you circumspection . a fortnight 's acquaintance be certainly very little . one can not know what a man really be by the end of a fortnight . but if we do not venture somebody else will ; and after all , . and she daughter must stand they chance ; and , therefore , as she will think it a act of kindness , if you decline the office , I will take it on myself . " the girl star at they father . say only , " Nonsense , nonsense ! " " what can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation ? " cry he . " do you consider the form of introduction , and the stress that be laid on they , as nonsense ? I can not quite agree with you there . what say you , ? for you be a young lady of deep reflection , I know , and read great book and make extract . " wish to say something sensible , but know not how . " while be adjust she idea , " he continue , " let we return to . " " I be sick of , " cry he wife . " I be sorry to hear that ; but why do not you tell I that before ? if I have know as much this morning I certainly would not have call on he . it be very unlucky ; but as I have actually pay the visit , we can not escape the acquaintance now . " the astonishment of the ladie be just what he wish ; that of . Bennet perhaps surpass the rest ; though , when the first tumult of joy be over , she begin to declare that it be what she have expect all the while . " how good it be in you , my dear ! but I know I should persuade you at last . I be sure you love you girl too well to neglect such a acquaintance . well , how pleased I be ! and it be such a good joke , too , that you should have go this morning and never say a word about it till now . " " now , , you may cough as much as you choose , " say ; and , as he speak , he leave the room , fatigue with the rapture of he wife . " what a excellent father you have , girl ! " say she , when the door be shut . " I do not know how you will ever make he amend for he kindness ; or I , either , for that matter . at we time of life it be not so pleasant , I can tell you , to be make new acquaintance every day ; but for you sake , we would do anything . , my love , though you be the youngest , I dare say will dance with you at the next ball . " " oh ! " say stoutly , " I be not afraid ; for though I be the youngest , I be the tallest . " the rest of the evening be spend in conjectur how soon he would return 's visit , and determine when they should ask he to dinner . chapter 3 not all that , however , with the assistance of she five daughter , could ask on the subject , be sufficient to draw from she husband any satisfactory description of . they attack he in various way --- with barefaced question , ingenious supposition , and distant surmise ; but he elude the skill of they all , and they be at last obliged to accept the second - hand intelligence of they neighbour , . she report be highly favourable . have be deligh with he . he be quite young , wonderfully handsome , extremely agreeable , and , to
to cry the whole , he mean to be at the next assembly with a large party . nothing could be more delightful ! to be fond of dancing be a certain step towards fall in love ; and very lively hope of 's heart be entertained . " if I can but see one of my daughter happily settle at , " say to she husband , " and all the other equally well marry , I shall have nothing to wish for . " in a few day return 's visit , and sit about ten minute with he in he library . he have entertain hope of be admit to a sight of the young lady , of whose beauty he have hear much ; but he see only the father . the lady be somewhat more fortunate , for they have the advantage of ascertaining from a upper window that he wear a blue coat , and ride a black horse . a invitation to dinner be soon afterwards dispatch ; and already have Mrs . plan the course that be to do credit to she housekeeping , when a answer arrive which defer it all . be oblige to be in town the follow day , and , consequently , unable to accept the honour of they invitation , etc . be quite disconcert . she could not imagine what business he could have in town so soon after he arrival in ; and she begin to fear that he might be always fly about from one place to another , and never settle at as he ought to be . quiet she fear a little by start the idea of he be go to only to get a large party for the ball ; and a report soon follow that be to bring twelve lady and seven gentleman with he to the assembly . the girl grieve over such a number of lady , but be comfort the day before the ball by hearing , that instead of twelve he bring only six with he from --- he five sister and a cousin . and when the party enter the assembly room it consist of only five altogether --- , he two sister , the husband of the eldest , and another young man . be good - look and gentlemanlike ; he have a pleasant countenance , and easy , unaffected manners . he sister be fine woman , with a air of decided fashion . he brother - in - law , , merly look the gentleman ; but he friend soon draw the attention of the room by he fine , tall person , handsome feature , noble mien , and the report which be in general circulation within five minute after he entrance , of he have ten thousand a year . the gentleman pronounce he to be a fine figure of a man , the lady declare he be much handsomer than , and he be look at with great admiration for about half the evening , till he manners give a disgust which turn the tide of he popularity ; for he be discover to be proud ; to be above he company , and above be pleased ; and not all he large estate in could then save he from have a most forbidding , disagreeable countenance , and be unworthy to be compare with he friend . have soon make himself acquaint with all the principal people in the room ; he be lively and unreserved , dance every dance , be angry that the ball close so early , and talk of give one himself at . such amiable quality must speak for themselves . what a contrast between he and he friend ! dance only once with and once with , decline be introduce to any other lady , and spend the rest of the evening in walking about the room , speak occasionally to one of he own party . he character be decide . he be the proudest , most disagreeable man in the world , and everybody hope that he would never come there again . amongst the most violent against he be . , whose dislike of he general behaviour be sharpen into particular resentment by he have slighte one of she daughter . have be oblige , by the scarcity of gentleman , to sit down for two dance ; and during part of that time , have be stand near enough for she to hear a conversation between he and , who come from the dance for a few minute , to press he friend to join it . " come , , " say he , " I must have you dance . I hate to see you stand about by yourself in this stupid manner . you have much better dance . " " I certainly shall not . you know how I detest it , unless I be particularly acquaint with my partner . at such a assembly as this it would be insupportable . you sister be engage , and there be not another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to I to stand up with . " " I would not be so fastidious as you be , " cry , " for a kingdom ! upon my honour , I never meet with so many pleasant girl in my life as I have this evening ; and there be several of they you see uncommonly pretty . " " _You be dancing with the only handsome girl in the room , " say , look at the eldest . " oh ! she be the most beautiful creature I ever beheld ! but there be one of she sister sit down just behind you , who be very pretty , and I dare say very agreeable . do
do let I ask my partner to introduce you . " " which do you mean ? " and turn round he look for a moment at , till catch she eye , he withdraw he own and coldly say : " she be tolerable , but not handsome enough to tempt I ; I be in no humour at present to give consequence to young lady who be slighte by other man . you have better return to you partner and enjoy she smile , for you be waste you time with I . " follow he advice . walk off ; and remain with no very cordial feeling toward he . she tell the story , however , with great spirit among she friend ; for she have a lively , playful disposition , which delighte in anything ridiculous . the evening altogether pass off pleasantly to the whole family . have see she eldest daughter much admire by the . have dance with she twice , and she have be distinguished by he sister . be as much gratify by this as she mother could be , though in a quieter way . feel 's pleasure . have hear herself mention to as the most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood ; and and have be fortunate enough never to be without partner , which be all that they have yet learn to care for at a ball . they return , therefore , in good spirit to , the village where they live , and of which they be the principal inhabitant . they find still up . with a book he be regardless of time ; and on the present occasion he have a good deal of curiosity as to the event of a evening which have raise such splendid expectation . he have rather hope that he wife 's view on the stranger would be disappoint ; but he soon find out that he have a different story to hear . " oh ! my dear , " as she enter the room , " we have have a most delightful evening , a most excellent ball . I wish you have be there . be so admired , nothing could be like it . everybody say how well she look ; and think she quite beautiful , and dance with she twice ! only think of that , my dear ; he actually dance with she twice ! and she be the only creature in the room that he ask a second time . first of all , he ask . I be so vex to see he stand up with she ! but , however , he do not admire she at all ; indeed , nobody can , you know ; and he seem quite struck with as she be go down the dance . so he inquire who she be , and get introduced , and ask she for the two next . then the two third he dance with , and the two fourth with , and the two fifth with again , and the two sixth with , and the _Boulanger _-- " " if he have have any compassion for I , " cry she husband impatiently , " he would not have dance half so much ! for 's sake , say no more of he partner . of that he have sprain he ankle in the first place ! " " oh ! my dear , I be quite delighted with he . he be so excessively handsome ! and he sister be charme woman . I never in my life see anything more elegant than they dress . I dare say the lace upon 's gown --- " here she be interrupt again . protest against any description of finery . she be therefore oblige to seek another branch of the subject , and related , with much bitterness of spirit and some exaggeration , the shocking rudeness of . " but I can assure you , " she add , " that do not lose much by not suit he fancy ; for he be a most disagreeable , horrid man , not at all worth pleasing . so high and so conceit that there be no endure he ! he walk here , and he walk there , fancie himself so very great ! not handsome enough to dance with ! I wish you have be there , my dear , to have give he one of you set - downs . I quite detest the man . " 4 and be alone , the former , who have be cautious in she praise of before , express to she sister just how very much she admire he . " he be just what a young man ought to be , " say she , " sensible , good - humoure , lively ; and I never see such happy manners !-- so much ease , with such perfect good breeding ! " " he be also handsome , " reply , " which a young man ought likewise to be , if he possibly can . he character be thereby complete . " " I be very much flatter by he ask I to dance a second time . I do not expect such a compliment . " " do not you ? I do for you . but that be one great difference between we . compliment always take you by surprise , and I never . what could be more natural than he ask you again ? he could not help see that you be about five time as pretty as every other woman in the room . no thanks to he gallantry for that . well , he certainly be very agreeable , and I give you leave to like he . you have like many a stupider person .
. " " dear ! " " oh ! you be a great deal too apt , you know , to like people in general . you never see a fault in anybody . all the world be good and agreeable in you eyes . I never hear you speak ill of a human be in you life . " " I would not wish to be hasty in censur anyone ; but I always speak what I think . " " I know you do ; and it be that which make the wonder . with you good sense , to be so honestly blind to the folly and nonsense of other ! affectation of candour be common enough --- one meet with it everywhere . but to be cando without ostentation or design --- to take the good of everybody 's character and make it still better , and say nothing of the bad --- belong to you alone . and so you like this man 's sister , too , do you ? they manners be not equal to he . " " certainly not --- at first . but they be very pleasing woman when you converse with they . be to live with she brother , and keep he house ; and I be much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in she . " listen in silence , but be not convince ; they behaviour at the assembly have not be calculate to please in general ; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than she sister , and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself , she be very little dispose to approve they . they be in fact very fine lady ; not deficient in good humour when they be pleased , nor in the power of make themselves agreeable when they choose it , but proud and conceit . they be rather handsome , have be educate in one of the first private seminary in town , have a fortune of twenty thousand pound , be in the habit of spend more than they ink , and of associating with people of rank , and be therefore in every respect entitle to think well of themselves , and meanly of other . they be of a respectable family in the north of ; a circumstance more deeply impressed on they memory than that they brother 's fortune and they own have be acquire by trade . inherit property to the amount of nearly a hundred thousand pound from he father , who have intend to purchase a estate , but do not live to do it . intend it likewise , and sometimes make choice of he county ; but as he be now provide with a good house and the liberty of a manor , it be doubtful to many of those who best know the easiness of he temper , whether he might not spend the remainder of he day at , and leave the next generation to purchase . he sister be anxious for he have a estate of he own ; but , though he be now only establish as a tenant , be by no means unwilling to preside at he table --- nor be Mrs . , who have marry a man of more fashion than fortune , less dispose to consider he house as she home when it sui she . have not be of age two year , when he be tempt by a accidental recommendation to look at . he do look at it , and into it for half - a - hour --- be pleased with the situation and the principal room , satisfy with what the owner say in its praise , and take it immediately . between he and there be a very steady friendship , in spite of great opposition of character . be endear to by the easiness , openness , and ductility of he temper , though no disposition could offer a greater contrast to he own , and though with he own he never appear dissatisfied . on the strength of 's regard , have the firmest reliance , and of he judgement the highest opinion . in understanding , be the superior . be by no means deficient , but be clever . he be at the same time haughty , reserve , and fastidious , and he manners , though well - breed , be not invite . in that respect he friend have greatly the advantage . be sure of be like wherever he appear , be continually give offense . the manner in which they speak of the assembly be sufficiently characteristic . Bingley have never meet with more pleasant people or prettier girl in he life ; everybody have be most kind and attentive to he ; there have be no formality , no stiffness ; he have soon felt acquaint with all the room ; and , as to , he could not conceive a angel more beautiful . Darcy , on the contrary , have see a collection of people in whom there be little beauty and no fashion , for none of whom he have feel the smallest interest , and from none receive either attention or pleasure . he acknowledge to be pretty , but she smile too much . and she sister allow it to be so --- but still they admire she and like she , and pronounce she to be a sweet girl , and one whom they would not object to know more of . be therefore establish as a sweet girl , and they brother felt authorize by such commendation to think of she as he choose . 5 within a short walk of live a family with whom the be particularly intimate . have be formerly in trade in
in , where he have make a tolerable fortune , and risen to the honour of knighthood by a address to the king during he mayoralty . the distinction have perhaps be feel too strongly . it have give he a disgust to he business , and to he residence in a small market town ; and , in quit they both , he have remove with he family to a house about a mile from , denominate from that period , where he could think with pleasure of he own importance , and , unshackle by business , occupy himself solely in be civil to all the world . for , though elate by he rank , it do not render he supercilious ; on the contrary , he be all attention to everybody . by nature inoffensive , friendly , and oblige , he presentation at 's have make he courteous . be a very good kind of woman , not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to . they have several child . the eldest of they , a sensible , intelligent young woman , about twenty - seven , be 's intimate friend . that the and the should meet to talk over a ball be absolutely necessary ; and the morning after the assembly bring the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate . " _You_ begin the evening well , , " say with civil self - command to . " _you_ be 's first choice . " " yes ; but he seem to like he second better . " " oh ! you mean , I suppose , because he dance with she twice . to be sure that do seem as if he admire she --- indeed I rather believe he _do _-- I hear something about it --- but I hardly know what --- something about . " " perhaps you mean what I overhear between he and ; do not I mention it to you ? 's ask he how he like we assemblie , and whether he do not think there be a great many pretty woman in the room , and which he think the prettiest ? and he answer immediately to the last question : 'Oh ! the eldest , beyond a doubt ; there can not be two opinion on that point . ' " " upon my word ! well , that be very decided indeed --- that do seem as if --- but , however , it may all come to nothing , you know . " " _my overhearing be more to the purpose than yours , , " say . " be not so well worth listen to as he friend , be he ?-- poor ! -- to be only just tolerable . " " I beg you would not put it into 's head to be vex by he ill - treatment , for he be such a disagreeable man , that it would be quite a misfortune to be like by he . . tell I last night that he sit close to she for half - a - hour without once open he lip . " " be you quite sure , ma 'am ?-- be not there a little mistake ? " say . " I certainly see speak to she . " " aye --- because she ask he at last how he like , and he could not help answer she ; but she say he seem quite angry at be speak to . " " tell I , " say , " that he never speak much , unless among he intimate acquaintance . with they he be remarkably agreeable . " " I do not believe a word of it , my dear . if he have be so very agreeable , he would have talk to . but I can guess how it be ; everybody say that he be eat up with pride , and I dare say he have hear somehow that . long do not keep a carriage , and have come to the ball in a hack chaise . " " I do not mind he not talk to , " say , " but I wish he have dance with . " " another time , , " say she mother , " I would not dance with he , if I be you . " " I believe , ma 'am , I may safely promise you never to dance with he . " " he pride , " say , " do not offend I so much as pride often do , because there be a excuse for it . one can not wonder that so very fine a young man , with family , fortune , everything in he favour , should think highly of himself . if I may so express it , he have a right to be proud . " " that be very true , " reply , " and I could easily forgive he pride , if he have not mortify mine . " " pride , " observ , who pique herself upon the solidity of she reflection , " be a very common failing , I believe . by all that I have ever read , I be convinced that it be very common indeed ; that human nature be particularly prone to it , and that there be very few of we who do not cherish a feeling of self - complacency on the score of some quality or other , real or imaginary . Vanity and pride be different thing , though the word be often use synonymously . a person may be proud without be vain . pride relate more to we opinion of ourselves , vanity to what we would have other think of we . " " if I be
be as rich as , " cry a young , who come with he sister , " I should not care how proud I be . I would keep a pack of foxhound , and drink a bottle of wine a day . " " then you would drink a great deal more than you ought , " say ; " and if I be to see you at it , I should take away you bottle directly . " the boy protest that she should not ; she continue to declare that she would , and the argument ende only with the visit . chapter 6 the lady of soon wait on those of . the visit be soon return in due form . 's pleasing manners grow on the goodwill of and ; and though the mother be find to be intolerable , and the younger sister not worth speak to , a wish of be better acquaint with they be express towards the two eldest . by , this attention be receive with the greatest pleasure , but still see superciliousness in they treatment of everybody , hardly except even she sister , and could not like they ; though they kindness to , such as it be , have a value as arising in all probability from the influence of they brother 's admiration . it be generally evident whenever they meet , that he do admire she and to she it be equally evident that be yield to the preference which she have begin to entertain for he from the first , and be in a way to be very much in love ; but she consider with pleasure that it be not likely to be discover by the world in general , since , with great strength of feeling , a composure of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard she from the suspicion of the impertinent . she mention this to she friend . " it may perhaps be pleasant , " reply , " to be able to impose on the public in such a case ; but it be sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guarded . if a woman conceal she affection with the same skill from the object of it , she may lose the opportunity of fix he ; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark . there be so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment , that it be not safe to leave any to itself . we can all begin freely --- a slight preference be natural enough ; but there be very few of we who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement . in nine case out of ten a woman have better show more affection than she feel . like you sister undoubtedly ; but he may never do more than like she , if she do not help he on . " " but she do help he on , as much as she nature will allow . if I can perceive she regard for he , he must be a simpleton , indeed , not to discover it too . " " remember , , that he do not know 's disposition as you do . " " but if a woman be partial to a man , and do not endeaavor to conceal it , he must find it out . " " perhaps he must , if he see enough of she . but , though and meet tolerably often , it be never for many hour together ; and , as they always see each other in large mix party , it be impossible that every moment should be employ in conversing together . should therefore make the most of every half - hour in which she can command he attention . when she be secure of he , there will be more leisure for fall in love as much as she choose . " " you plan be a good one , " reply , " where nothing be in question but the desire of be well marrie , and if I be determined to get a rich husband , or any husband , I dare say I should adopt it . but these be not 's feeling ; she be not act by design . as yet , she can not even be certain of the degree of she own regard nor of its reasonableness . she have know he only a fortnight . she dance four dance with he at ; she see he one morning at he own house , and have since dine with he in company four time . this be not quite enough to make she understand he character . " " not as you represent it . have she merely dine with he , she might only have discover whether he have a good appetite ; but you must remember that four evening have also be spend together --- and four evening may do a great deal . " " yes ; these four evening have enable they to ascertain that they both like Vingt - un better than Commerce ; but with respect to any other lead characteristic , I do not imagine that much have be unfolded . " " well , " say , " I wish success with all my heart ; and if she be marry to he to - morrow , I should think she have as good a chance of happiness as if she be to be study he character for a twelvemonth . happiness in marriage be entirely a matter of chance . if the disposition of the party be ever so well know to each other or ever so similar beforehand , it do not advance they felicity in the least . they
they always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to have they share of vexation ; and it be better to know as little as possible of the defects of the person with whom you be to pass you life . " " you make I laugh , ; but it be not sound . you know it be not sound , and that you would never act in this way yourself . " occupy in observe 's attention to she sister , be far from suspect that she be herself become a object of some interest in the eyes of he friend . have at first scarcely allow she to be pretty ; he have look at she without admiration at the ball ; and when they next meet , he look at she only to criticise . but no sooner have he make it clear to himself and he friend that she hardly have a good feature in she face , than he begin to find it be render uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of she dark eye . to this discovery succeed some other equally mortify . though he have detect with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in she form , he be force to acknowledge she figure to be light and pleasing ; and in spite of he assert that she manners be not those of the fashionable world , he be catch by they easy playfulness . of this she be perfectly unaware ; to she he be only the man who make himself agreeable nowhere , and who have not think she handsome enough to dance with . he begin to wish to know more of she , and as a step towards converse with she himself , attend to she conversation with other . he do so draw she notice . it be at 's , where a large party be assemble . " what do mean , " say she to , " by listen to my conversation with ? " " that be a question which Darcy only can answer . " " but if he do it any more I shall certainly let he know that I see what he be about . he have a very satirical eye , and if I do not begin by be impertinent myself , I shall soon grow afraid of he . " on he approach they soon afterwards , though without seem to have any intention of speaking , defy she friend to mention such a subject to he ; which immediately provoke to do it , she turn to he and say : " do you not think , , that I express myself uncommonly well just now , when I be tease to give we a ball at ? " " with great energy ; but it be always a subject which make a lady energetic . " " you be severe on we . " " it will be she turn soon to be tease , " say . " I be go to open the instrument , , and you know what follow . " " you be a very strange creature by way of a friend !-- always want I to play and s before anybody and everybody ! if my vanity have take a musical turn , you would have be invaluable ; but as it be , I would really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hear the very best performer . " on 's persevering , however , she add , " very well , if it must be so , it must . " and gravely glance at , " there be a fine old say , which everybody here be of course familiar with : ' keep you breath to cool you porridge ' ; and I shall keep mine to swell my song . " she performance be pleasing , though by no means capital . after a song or two , and before she could reply to the entreaty of several that she would s again , she be eagerly succeed at the instrument by she sister , who have , in consequence of be the only plain one in the family , work hard for knowledge and accomplishment , be always impatient for display . have neither genius nor taste ; and though vanity have give she application , it have give she likewise a pedantic air and conceit manner , which would have injure a higher degree of excellence than she have reach . , easy and unaffected , have be listen to with much more pleasure , though not play half so well ; and , at the end of a long concerto , be glad to purchase praise and gratitude by and irish air , at the request of she younger sister , who , with some of the Lucas , and two or three officer , join eagerly in dancing at one end of the room . stand near they in silent indignation at such a mode of pass the evening , to the exclusion of all conversation , and be too much engross by he thought to perceive that be he neighbour , till thus begin : " what a charming amusement for young people this be , ! there be nothing like dance after all . I consider it as one of the first refinement of polished society . " " certainly , sir ; and it have the advantage also of be in vogue amongst the less polished societie of the world . every savage can dance . " only smile . " you friend perform delightfully , " he continue after a pause , on see join the group ; " and I doubt not that you be a adept in the science yourself , . " " you see
see I dance at , I believe , sir . " " yes , indeed , and receive no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight . do you often dance at 's ? " " never , sir . " " do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place ? " " it be a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it . " " you have a house in town , I conclude ? " bow . " I have once have some thought of fixing in town myself --- for I be fond of superior society ; but I do not feel quite certain that the air of would agree with . " he pause in hope of a answer ; but he companion be not dispose to make any ; and at that instant move towards they , he be strike with the action of do a very gallant thing , and call out to she : " my dear , why be you not dance ? , you must allow I to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner . you can not refuse to dance , I be sure when so much beauty be before you . " and , take she hand , he would have give it to who , though extremely surprised , be not unwilling to receive it , when she instantly draw back , and say with some discomposure to : " indeed , sir , I have not the least intention of dancing . I entreat you not to suppose that I move this way in order to beg for a partner . " , with grave propriety , request to be allow the honour of she hand , but in vain . be determined ; nor do at all shake she purpose by he attempt at persuasion . " you excel so much in the dance , , that it be cruel to deny I the happiness of see you ; and though this gentleman dislike the amusement in general , he can have no objection , I be sure , to oblige we for one half - hour . " " be all politeness , " say , smile . " he be , indeed ; but , consider the inducement , my dear , we can not wonder at he complaisance --- for who would object to such a partner ? " look archly , and turn away . she resistance have not injur she with the gentleman , and he be think of she with some complacency , when thus accost by : " I can guess the subject of you reverie . " " I should imagine not . " " you be consider how insupportable it would be to pass many evening in this manner --- in such society ; and indeed I be quite of you opinion . I be never more annoyed ! the insipidity , and yet the noise --- the nothingness , and yet the self - importance of all those people ! what would I give to hear you stricture on they ! " " you conjecture be totally wrong , I assure you . my mind be more agreeably engage . I have be meditat on the very great pleasure which a pair of fine eye in the face of a pretty woman can bestow . " immediately fix she eye on he face , and desire he would tell she what lady have the credit of inspiring such reflection . reply with great intrepidity : " . " " ! " repeat . " I be all astonishment . how long have she be such a favourite ?-- and pray , when be I to wish you joy ? " " that be exactly the question which I expect you to ask . a lady 's imagination be very rapid ; it jump from admiration to love , from love to matrimony , in a moment . I know you would be wish I joy . " " Nay , if you be serious about it , I shall consider the matter be absolutely settled . you will be have a charming mother - in - law , indeed ; and , of course , she will always be at with you . " he listen to she with perfect indifference while she choose to entertain herself in this manner ; and as he composure convince she that all be safe , she wit flow long . 7 's property consist almost entirely in a estate of two thousand a year , which , unfortunately for he daughter , be entail , in default of heir male , on a distant relation ; and they mother 's fortune , though ample for she situation in life , could but ill supply the deficiency of he . she father have be a attorney in , and have leave she four thousand pound . she have a sister marry to a , who have be a clerk to they father and succeed he in the business , and a brother settle in in a respectable line of trade . the village of be only one mile from ; a most convenient distance for the young lady , who be usually tempt thither three or four time a week , to pay they duty to they aunt and to a milliner 's shop just over the way . the two youngest of the family , and , be particularly frequent in these attention ; they minds be more vacant than they sister ' , and when nothing better offer , a walk to be necessary to amuse they morning hour and furnish conversation for the evening ; and however bare of news the country in general might be , they always contrive to learn some from
from they aunt . at present , indeed , they be well suppli both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood ; it be to remain the whole winter , and be the headquarters . they visit to Phillips be now productive of the most interesting intelligence . every day add something to they knowledge of the officer 's name and connection . they lodging be not long a secret , and at length they begin to know the officer themselves . visit they all , and this open to he niece a store of felicity unknown before . they could talk of nothing but officer ; and 's large fortune , the mention of which give animation to they mother , be worthless in they eye when oppose to the regimental of a ensign . after listen one morning to they effusion on this subject , coolly observe : " from all that I can collect by you manner of talking , you must be two of the silliest girl in the country . I have suspect it some time , but I be now convince . " be disconcert , and make no answer ; but , with perfect indifference , continue to express she admiration of , and she hope of see he in the course of the day , as he be go the next morning to . " I be astonish , my dear , " say , " that you should be so ready to think you own child silly . if I wish to think slightingly of anybody 's child , it should not be of my own , however . " " if my child be silly , I must hope to be always sensible of it . " " yes --- but as it happen , they be all of they very clever . " " this be the only point , I flatter myself , on which we do not agree . I have hope that we sentiment coincide in every particular , but I must so far differ from you as to think we two youngest daughter uncommonly foolish . " " my dear , you must not expect such girl to have the sense of they father and mother . when they get to we age , I dare say they will not think about officer any more than we do . I remember the time when I like a red coat myself very well --- and , indeed , so I do still at my heart ; and if a smart young colonel , with five or six thousand a year , should want one of my girl I shall not say nay to he ; and I think look very become the other night at 's in he regimental . " " , " cry , " my aunt say that and do not go so often to 's as they do when they first come ; she see they now very often stand in 's library . " be prevent reply by the entrance of the footman with a note for ; it come from , and the servant wait for a answer . 's eye sparkle with pleasure , and she be eagerly call out , while she daughter read , " well , , who be it from ? what be it about ? what do he say ? well , , make haste and tell we ; make haste , my love . " " it be from , " say , and then read it aloud . " my ,-- " if you be not so compassionate as to dine to - day with and I , we shall be in danger of hate each other for the rest of we life , for a whole day 's tete - a - tete between two woman can never end without a quarrel . come as soon as you can on receipt of this . my brother and the gentleman be to dine with the officer .--- yours ever , " " " with the officer ! " cry . " I wonder my aunt do not tell we of that . " " dine out , " say , " that be very unlucky . " " can I have the carriage ? " say . " no , my dear , you have better go on horseback , because it seem likely to rain ; and then you must stay all night . " " that would be a good scheme , " say , " if you be sure that they would not offer to send she home . " " oh ! but the gentleman will have 's chaise to go to , and the Hurst have no horse to theirs . " " I have much rather go in the coach . " " but , my dear , you father can not spare the horse , I be sure . they be want in the farm , , be they not ? " " they be want in the farm much oftener than I can get they . " " but if you have get they to - day , " say , " my mother 's purpose will be answer . " she do at last extort from she father a acknowledgment that the horse be engage . be therefore oblige to go on horseback , and she mother attend she to the door with many cheerful prognostic of a bad day . she hope be answer ; have not be go long before it rain hard . she sister be uneasy for she , but she mother be delighted . the rain continue the whole evening without intermission ; certainly could not come back . " this be a lucky idea of mine , indeed ! "
" say more than once , as if the credit of make it rain be all she own . till the next morning , however , she be not aware of all the felicity of she contrivance . Breakfast be scarcely over when a servant from bring the follow note for : " I find myself very unwell this morning , which , I suppose , be to be impute to my get wet through yesterday . my kind friend will not hear of my returning till I be better . they insist also on my see --- therefore do not be alarme if you should hear of he have be to I --- and , except a sore throat and headache , there be not much the matter with I .--- yours , etc . " " well , my dear , " say , when have read the note aloud , " if you daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness --- if she should die , it would be a comfort to know that it be all in pursuit of , and under you order . " " oh ! I be not afraid of she die . people do not die of little trifling cold . she will be take good care of . as long as she stay there , it be all very well . I would go and see she if I could have the carriage . " , feel really anxious , be determined to go to she , though the carriage be not to be have ; and as she be no horsewoman , walking be she only alternative . she declare she resolution . " how can you be so silly , " cry she mother , " as to think of such a thing , in all this dirt ! you will not be fit to be see when you get there . " " I shall be very fit to see --- which be all I want . " " be this a hint to I , , " say she father , " to send for the horse ? " " no , indeed , I do not wish to avoid the walk . the distance be nothing when one have a motive ; only three mile . I shall be back by dinner . " " I admire the activity of you benevolence , " observe , " but every impulse of feeling should be guide by reason ; and , in my opinion , exertion should always be in proportion to what be require . " " we will go as far as with you , " say and . accept they company , and the three young lady set off together . " if we make haste , " say , as they walk along , " perhaps we may see something of before he go . " in they part ; the two youngest repair to the lodging of one of the officer ' wife , and continue she walk alone , cross field after field at a quick pace , jump over stile and spring over puddle with impatient activity , and find herself at last within view of the house , with weary ankle , dirty stocking , and a face glow with the warmth of exercise . she be show into the breakfast - parlour , where all but be assemble , and where she appearance create a great deal of surprise . that she should have walk three mile so early in the day , in such dirty weather , and by herself , be almost incredible to and ; and be convinced that they hold she in contempt for it . she be receive , however , very politely by they ; and in they brother 's manners there be something better than politeness ; there be good humour and kindness . say very little , and nothing at all . the former be divide between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise have give to she complexion , and doubt as to the occasion 's justify she come so far alone . the latter be think only of he breakfast . she inquiry after she sister be not very favourably answer . have sleep ill , and though up , be very feverish , and not well enough to leave she room . be glad to be take to she immediately ; and , who have only be withheld by the fear of give alarm or inconvenience from expressing in she note how much she longe for such a visit , be delighte at she entrance . she be not equal , however , to much conversation , and when leave they together , could attempt little besides expression of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she be treat with . silently attend she . when breakfast be over they be join by the sister ; and begin to like they herself , when she see how much affection and solicitude they show for . the apothecary come , and have examine he patient , say , as might be suppose , that she have catch a violent cold , and that they must endeaavor to get the better of it ; advise she to return to bed , and promise she some draught . the advice be follow readily , for the feverish symptom increase , and she head ach acutly . do not quit she room for a moment ; nor be the other lady often absent ; the gentleman be out , they have , in fact , nothing to do elsewhere . when the clock struck three , feel that she must go , and very unwillingly say so . offer she the carriage , and she only want a little pressing to accept it , when testify such concern in part with she ,
, that be obliged to convert the offer of the chaise to a invitation to remain at for the present . Elizabeth most thankfully consent , and a servant be dispatch to Longbourn to acquaint the family with she stay and bring back a supply of clothes . 8 at five o'clock the two lady retire to dress , and at half - past six be summon to dinner . to the civil inquiry which then pour in , and amongst which she have the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of 's , she could not make a very favourable answer . be by no means better . the sister , on hear this , repeat three or four time how much they be grieve , how shock it be to have a bad cold , and how excessively they dislike be ill themselves ; and then think no more of the matter : and they indifference towards when not immediately before they restore to the enjoyment of all she former dislike . they brother , indeed , be the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency . he anxiety for be evident , and he attention to herself most pleasing , and they prevent she feel herself so much a intruder as she believe she be consider by the other . she have very little notice from any but he . be engross by , she sister scarcely less so ; and as for , by whom sat , he be a indolent man , who liv only to eat , drink , and play at card ; who , when he find she to prefer a plain dish to a ragout , have nothing to say to she . when dinner be over , she return directly to , and begin abuse she as soon as she be out of the room . she manners be pronounce to be very bad indeed , a mixture of pride and impertinence ; she have no conversation , no style , no beauty . think the same , and add : " she have nothing , in short , to recommend she , but be a excellent walker . I shall never forget she appearance this morning . she really look almost wild . " " she do , indeed , . I could hardly keep my countenance . very nonsensical to come at all ! why must she be scamper about the country , because she sister have a cold ? she hair , so untidy , so blowsy ! " " yes , and she petticoat ; I hope you see she petticoat , six inch deep in mud , I be absolutely certain ; and the gown which have be let down to hide it not do its office . " " you picture may be very exact , , " say ; " but this be all lose upon I . I think look remarkably well when she come into the room this morning . she dirty petticoat quite escape my notice . " " observ it , Darcy , I be sure , " say ; " and I be inclin to think that you would not wish to see you sister make such a exhibition . " " certainly not . " " to walk three mile , or four mile , or five mile , or whatever it be , above she ankle in dirt , and alone , quite alone ! what could she mean by it ? it seem to I to show a abominable sort of conceit independence , a most country - town indifference to decorum . " " it show a affection for she sister that be very pleasing , " say . " I be afraid , , " observ in a half whisper , " that this adventure have rather affect you admiration of she fine eye . " " not at all , " he reply ; " they be brighten by the exercise . " a short pause follow this speech , and . begin again : " I have a excessive regard for , she be really a very sweet girl , and I wish with all my heart she be well settle . but with such a father and mother , and such low connections , I be afraid there be no chance of it . " " I think I have hear you say that they uncle be a attorney on . " " yes ; and they have another , who live somewhere near . " " that be capital , " add she sister , and they both laugh heartily . " if they have uncle enough to fill all Cheapside , " cry , " it would not make they one jot less agreeable . " " but it must very materially lessen they chance of marry man of any consideration in the world , " reply . to this speech make no answer ; but he sister give it they hearty assent , and indulge they mirth for some time at the expense of they dear friend 's vulgar relation . with a renewal of tenderness , however , they return to she room on leave the dining - parlour , and sit with she till summon to coffee . she be still very poorly , and would not quit she at all , till late in the evening , when she have the comfort of see she sleep , and when it seem to she rather right than pleasant that she should go downstairs herself . on enter the drawing - room she find the whole party at loo , and be immediately invite to join they ; but suspect they to be play high she decline it , and make she sister the excuse , say she would amuse herself
herself for the short time she could stay below , with a book . look at she with astonishment . " do you prefer read to card ? " say he ; " that be rather singular . " " , " say , " despise card . she be a great reader , and have no pleasure in anything else . " " I deserve neither such praise nor such censure , " cry ; " I be not a great reader , and I have pleasure in many thing . " " in nurse you sister I be sure you have pleasure , " say ; " and I hope it will be soon increase by see she quite well . " thank he from she heart , and then walk towards the table where a few book be lie . he immediately offer to fetch she other --- all that he library afforde . " and I wish my collection be larger for you benefit and my own credit ; but I be a idle fellow , and though I have not many , I have more than I ever look into . " assure he that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room . " I be astonish , " say , " that my father should have leave so small a collection of book . what a delightful library you have at , ! " " it ought to be good , " he reply , " it have be the work of many generation . " " and then you have add so much to it yourself , you be always buy book . " " I can not comprehend the neglect of a family library in such day as these . " " Neglect ! I be sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauty of that noble place . Charle , when you build you house , I wish it may be half as delightful as . " " I wish it may . " " but I would really advise you to make you purchase in that neighbourhood , and take for a kind of model . there be not a finer county in than . " " with all my heart ; I will buy itself if will sell it . " " I be talk of possibility , Charles . " " upon my word , , I should think it more possible to get by purchase than by imitation . " be so much catch with what pass , as to leave she very little attention for she book ; and soon lay it wholly aside , she draw near the card - table , and station herself between and he eldest sister , to observe the game . " be much grow since the spring ? " say ; " will she be as tall as I be ? " " I think she will . she be now about 's height , or rather taller . " " how I long to see she again ! I never meet with anybody who delight I so much . such a countenance , such manners ! and so extremely accomplish for she age ! she performance on the pianoforte be exquisite . " " it be amazing to I , " say , " how young lady can have patience to be so very accomplished as they all are . " " all young lady accomplish ! my dear Charles , what do you mean ? " " yes , all of they , I think . they all paint table , cover screen , and net purse . I scarcely know anyone who can not do all this , and I be sure I never hear a young lady speak of for the first time , without be inform that she be very accomplished . " " you list of the common extent of accomplishment , " say , " have too much truth . the word be apply to many a woman who deserve it no otherwise than by net a purse or cover a screen . but I be very far from agree with you in you estimation of lady in general . I can not boast of know more than half - a- dozen , in the whole range of my acquaintance , that be really accomplish . " " nor I , I be sure , " say . " then , " observ , " you must comprehend a great deal in you idea of a accomplished woman . " " yes , I do comprehend a great deal in it . " " oh ! certainly , " cry he faithful assistant , " no one can be really esteem accomplished who do not greatly surpass what be usually meet with . a woman must have a thorough knowledge of music , singe , draw , dancing , and the modern language , to deserve the word ; and besides all this , she must possess a certain something in she air and manner of walking , the tone of she voice , she address and expression , or the word will be but half - deserv . " " all this she must possess , " add , " and to all this she must yet add something more substantial , in the improvement of she mind by extensive reading . " " I be no longer surprise at you know only six accomplished woman . I rather wonder now at you know any . " " be you so severe upon you own sex as to doubt the possibility of all this ? " " I never see such a woman . I never see such capacity , and taste , and application , and elegance , as you describe . " and both cry
cry out against the injustice of she implied doubt , and be both protest that they know many woman who answer this description , when call they to order , with bitter complaint of they inattention to what be go forward . as all conversation be thereby at a end , soon afterwards leave the room . " , " say , when the door be close on she , " be one of those young lady who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervalue they own ; and with many man , I dare say , it succeed . but , in my opinion , it be a paltry device , a very mean art . " " undoubtedly , " reply , to whom this remark be chiefly addressed , " there be a meanness in all the art which lady sometimes condescmend to employ for captivation . whatever bear affinity to cunn be despicable . " be not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject . join they again only to say that she sister be worse , and that she could not leave she . urge be send for immediately ; while he sister , convince that no country advice could be of any service , recommend a express to town for one of the most eminent physician . this she would not hear of ; but she be not so unwilling to comply with they brother 's proposal ; and it be settle that should be send for early in the morning , if be not decidedly better . be quite uncomfortable ; he sister declare that they be miserable . they solace they wretchedness , however , by duet after supper , while he could find no better relief to he feeling than by give he housekeeper direction that every attention might be pay to the sick lady and she sister . 9 pass the chief of the night in she sister 's room , and in the morning have the pleasure of be able to send a tolerable answer to the inquiry which she very early receive from by a housemaid , and some time afterwards from the two elegant lady who wait on he sister . in spite of this amendment , however , she request to have a note send to , desire she mother to visit , and form she own judgement of she situation . the note be immediately dispatch , and its contents as quickly comply with . , accompany by she two youngest girl , reach soon after the family breakfast . have she find in any apparent danger , . would have be very miserable ; but be satisfied on see she that she illness be not alarme , she have no wish of she recover immediately , as she restoration to health would probably remove she from . she would not listen , therefore , to she daughter 's proposal of be carry home ; neither do the apothecary , who arrive about the same time , think it at all advisable . after sit a little while with , on 's appearance and invitation , the mother and three daughter all attend she into the breakfast parlour . Bingley meet they with hope that have not find worse than she expect . " indeed I have , sir , " be she answer . " she be a great deal too ill to be move . say we must not think of move she . we must trespass a little longer on you kindness . " " remove ! " cry . " it must not be think of . my sister , I be sure , will not hear of she removal . " " you may depend upon it , Madam , " say , with cold civility , " that will receive every possible attention while she remain with we . " be profuse in she acknowledgment . " I be sure , " she add , " if it be not for such good friend I do not know what would become of she , for she be very ill indeed , and suffer a vast deal , though with the greatest patience in the world , which be always the way with she , for she have , without exception , the sweetest temper I have ever meet with . I often tell my other girl they be nothing to she . you have a sweet room here , , and a charming prospect over the gravel walk . I do not know a place in the country that be equal to . you will not think of quit it in a hurry , I hope , though you have but a short lease . " " whatever I do be do in a hurry , " reply he ; " and therefore if I should resolve to quit , I should probably be off in five minute . at present , however , I consider myself as quite fix here . " " that be exactely what I should have suppose of you , " say . " you begin to comprehend I , do you ? " cry he , turn towards she . " oh ! yes --- I understand you perfectly . " " I wish I might take this for a compliment ; but to be so easily see through I be afraid be pitiful . " " that be as it happen . it do not follow that a deep , intricate character be more or less estimable than such a one as yours . " " Lizzy , " cry she mother , " remember where you be , and do not run on in the wild manner that you be suffer to do at home . " " I do not know before , "
" continue immediately , " that you be a studier of character . it must be a amusing study . " " yes , but intricate characters be the most amusing . they have at least that advantage . " " the country , " say , " can in general supply but a few subject for such a study . in a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society . " " but people themselves alter so much , that there be something new to be observe in they for ever . " " yes , indeed , " cry , offend by he manner of mention a country neighbourhood . " I assure you there be quite as much of that go on in the country as in town . " everybody be surprised , and , after look at she for a moment , turn silently away . , who fancie she have gain a complete victory over he , continue she triumph . " I can not see that have any great advantage over the country , for my part , except the shop and public place . the country be a vast deal pleasanter , be it not , ? " " when I be in the country , " he reply , " I never wish to leave it ; and when I be in town it be pretty much the same . they have each they advantage , and I can be equally happy in either . " " aye --- that be because you have the right disposition . but that gentleman , " look at , " seem to think the country be nothing at all . " " indeed , , you be mistaken , " say , blush for she mother . " you quite mistook . he only mean that there be not such a variety of people to be meet with in the country as in the town , which you must acknowledge to be true . " " certainly , my dear , nobody say there be ; but as to not meet with many people in this neighbourhood , I believe there be few neighbourhood larger . I know we dine with four - and - twenty family . " nothing but concern for could enable to keep he countenance . he sister be less delicate , and direct she eye towards with a very expressive smile . , for the sake of say something that might turn she mother 's thought , now ask she if have be at since she come away . " yes , she call yesterday with she father . what a agreeable man be , , be not he ? so much the man of fashion ! so genteel and easy ! he have always something to say to everybody . that be my idea of good breeding ; and those person who fancy themselves very important , and never open they mouths , quite mistake the matter . " " do dine with you ? " " no , she would go home . I fancy she be wante about the mince -py . for my part , , I always keep servants that can do they own work ; my daughter be bring up very differently . but everybody be to judge for themselves , and the Lucas be a very good sort of girl , I assure you . it be a pity they be not handsome ! not that I think so very plain --- but then she be we particular friend . " " she seem a very pleasant young woman . " " oh ! dear , yes ; but you must own she be very plain . herself have often say so , and envy I 's beauty . I do not like to boast of my own child , but to be sure , --- one do not often see anybody better look . it be what everybody say . I do not trust my own partiality . when she be only fifteen , there be a man at my brother 's in town so much in love with she that my sister - in - law be sure he would make she a offer before we come away . but , however , he do not . perhaps he think she too young . however , he write some verse on she , and very pretty they be . " " and so end he affection , " say impatiently . " there have be many a one , I fancy , overcome in the same way . I wonder who first discover the efficacy of poetry in drive away love ! " " I have be use to consider poetry as the food of love , " say . " of a fine , stout , healthy love it may . everything nourish what be strong already . but if it be only a slight , thin sort of inclination , I be convince that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away . " Darcy only smile ; and the general pause which ensue make tremble lest she mother should be expose herself again . she longe to speak , but could think of nothing to say ; and after a short silence begin repeat she thanks to for he kindness to , with a apology for trouble he also with . be unaffectedly civil in he answer , and force he younger sister to be civil also , and say what the occasion require . she perform she part indeed without much graciousness , but be satisfied , and soon afterwards order she carriage . upon this signal , the youngest of she daughter put herself forward . the two girl have be whisper to each other during the whole visit , and the
the result of it be , that the youngest should tax with have promise on he first come into the country to give a ball at . be a stout , well - grow girl of fifteen , with a fine complexion and good - humoure countenance ; a favourite with she mother , whose affection have bring she into public at a early age . she have high animal spirit , and a sort of natural self - consequence , which the attention of the officer , to whom she uncle 's good dinner , and she own easy manners recommend she , have increase into assurance . she be very equal , therefore , to address on the subject of the ball , and abruptly remind he of he promise ; add , that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if he do not keep it . he answer to this sudden attack be delightful to they mother 's ear : " I be perfectly ready , I assure you , to keep my engagement ; and when you sister be recover , you shall , if you please , name the very day of the ball . but you would not wish to be dance when she be ill . " declare herself satisfied . " oh ! yes --- it would be much better to wait till be well , and by that time most likely would be at again . and when you have give you ball , " she add , " I shall insist on they give one also . I shall tell it will be quite a shame if he do not . " and she daughter then depart , and return instantly to , leave she own and she relation 's behaviour to the remark of the two lady and ; the latter of whom , however , could not be prevail on to join in they censure of she , in spite of all 's witticism on fine eye . 10 the day pass much as the day before have do . and have spend some hour of the morning with the invalid , who continue , though slowly , to mmend ; and in the evening join they party in the drawing - room . the loo -table , however , do not appear . be write , and , seat near he , be watch the progress of he letter and repeatedly call off he attention by message to he sister . and be at piquet , and . be obserive they game . take up some needlework , and be sufficiently amused in attend to what pass between and he companion . the perpetual commendation of the lady , either on he handwriting , or on the evenness of he line , or on the length of he letter , with the perfect unconcern with which she praise be receive , form a curiious dialogue , and be exactly in union with she opinion of each . " how delighted will be to receive such a letter ! " he make no answer . " you write uncommonly fast . " " you be mistaken . I write rather slowly . " " how many letter you must have occasion to write in the course of a year ! letter of business , too ! how odious I should think they ! " " it be fortunate , then , that they fall to my lot instead of yours . " " pray tell you sister that I long to see she . " " I have already tell she so once , by you desire . " " I be afraid you do not like you pen . let I mmend it for you . I mmend pens remarkably well . " " thank you --- but I always mmend my own . " " how can you contrive to write so even ? " he be silent . " tell you sister I be delighted to hear of she improvement on the harp ; and pray let she know that I be quite in rapture with she beautiful little design for a table , and I think it infinitely superior to 's . " " will you give I leave to defer you rapture till I write again ? at present I have not room to do they justice . " " oh ! it be of no consequence . I shall see she in . but do you always write such charme long letter to she , ? " " they be generally long ; but whether always charme it be not for I to determine . " " it be a rule with I , that a person who can write a long letter with ease , can not write ill . " " that will not do for a compliment to , , " cry she brother , " because he do not write with ease . he study too much for word of four syllable . do not you , ? " " my style of writing be very different from yours . " " oh ! " cry , " charle write in the most careless way imaginable . he leave out half he word , and blot the rest . " " my idea flow so rapidly that I have not time to express they --- by which mean my letter sometimes convey no idea at all to my correspondent . " " you humility , , " say , " must disarm reproon . " " nothing be more deceitful , " say , " than the appearance of humility . it be often only carelessness of opinion , and sometimes a indirect boast . " " and which of the two do you call my little recent piece of modesty ? " " the
the indirect boast ; for you be really proud of you defects in writing , because you consider they as proceed from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution , which , if not estimable , you think at least highly interesting . the power of do anything with quickness be always prize much by the possessor , and often without any attention to the imperfection of the performance . when you tell . Bennet this mor that if you ever resolve upon quit you should be go in five minute , you mean it to be a sort of panegyric , of compliment to yourself --- and yet what be there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone , and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else ? " " Nay , " cry , " this be too much , to remember at night all the foolish thing that be say in the morning . and yet , upon my honour , I believe what I say of myself to be true , and I believe it at this moment . at least , therefore , I do not assume the character of needless precipitance merely to show off before the lady . " " I dare say you believe it ; but I be by no means convince that you would be go with such celerity . you conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as that of any man I know ; and if , as you be mount you horse , a friend be to say , ' Bingley , you have better stay till next week , ' you would probably do it , you would probably not go --- and at another word , might stay a month . " " you have only prove by this , " cry , " that do not do justice to he own disposition . you have show he off now much more than he do himself . " " I be exceedingly gratify , " say , " by you convert what my friend say into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper . but I be afraid you be give it a turn which that gentleman do by no means intend ; for he would certainly think better of I , if under such a circumstance I be to give a flat denial , and ride off as fast as I could . " " would then consider the rashness of you original intention as aton for by you obstinacy in adhering to it ? " " upon my word , I can not exactly explain the matter ; Darcy must speak for himself . " " you expect I to account for opinion which you choose to call mine , but which I have never acknowledge . allow the case , however , to stand accord to you representation , you must remember , , that the friend who be suppose to desire he return to the house , and the delay of he plan , have merely desire it , ask it without offer one argument in favour of its propriety . " " to yield readily --- easily --- to the persuasion of a friend be no merit with you . " " to yield without conviction be no compliment to the understanding of either . " " you appear to I , , to allow nothing for the influence of friendship and affection . a regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request , without wait for argument to reason one into it . I be not particularly speak of such a case as you have suppose about . we may as well wait , perhaps , till the circumstance occur before we discuss the discretion of he behaviour thereupon . but in general and ordinary case between friend and friend , where one of they be desire by the other to change a resolution of no very great moment , should you think ill of that person for comply with the desire , without wait to be argue into it ? " " will it not be advisable , before we proceed on this subject , to arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which be to appertain to this request , as well as the degree of intimacy subsist between the party ? " " by all mean , " cry ; " let we hear all the particular , not forget they comparative height and size ; for that will have more weight in the argument , , than you may be aware of . I assure you , that if Darcy be not such a great tall fellow , in comparison with myself , I should not pay he half so much deference . I declare I do not know a more awful object than , on particular occasion , and in particular place ; at he own house especially , and of a evening , when he have nothing to do . " smile ; but think she could perceive that he be rather offended , and therefore check she laugh . warmly resent the indignity he have receive , in a expostulation with she brother for talk such nonsense . " I see you design , , " say he friend . " you dislike a argument , and want to silence this . " " perhaps I do . argument be too much like dispute . if you and will defer yours till I be out of the room , I shall be very thankful ; and then you may say whatever you like of I . " " what you ask , " say , " be no sacrifice on my side ; and have much better finish he letter . " take
take she advice , and do finish he letter . when that business be over , he apply to and for a indulgence of some music . move with some alacrity to the pianoforte ; and , after a polite request that would lead the way which the other as politely and more earnestly negativ , she seat herself . sang with she sister , and while they be thus employ , could not help observe , as she turn over some music - book that lay on the instrument , how frequently 's eye be fix on she . she hardly know how to suppose that she could be a object of admiration to so great a man ; and yet that he should look at she because he dislike she , be still more strange . she could only imagine , however , at last that she draw he notice because there be something more wrong and reprehensible , accord to he idea of right , than in any other person present . the supposition do not pain she . she like he too little to care for he approbation . after play some italian song , vari the charm by a lively Scotch air ; and soon afterwards , draw near , say to she : " do not you feel a great inclination , , to seize such a opportunity of dance a reel ? " she smile , but make no answer . he repeat the question , with some surprise at she silence . " oh ! " say she , " I hear you before , but I could not immediately determine what to say in reply . you want I , I know , to say ' yes , ' that you might have the pleasure of despise my taste ; but I always delight in overthrow those kind of scheme , and cheat a person of they premeditated contempt . I have , therefore , make up my mind to tell you , that I do not want to dance a reel at all --- and now despise I if you dare . " " indeed I do not dare . " , have rather expect to affront he , be amaze at he gallantry ; but there be a mixture of sweetness and archness in she manner which make it difficult for she to affront anybody ; and have never be so bewitch by any woman as he be by she . he really believe , that be it not for the inferiority of she connection , he should be in some danger . see , or suspect enough to be jealous ; and she great anxiety for the recovery of she dear friend receive some assistance from she desire of get rid of . she often try to provoke into dislik she guest , by talk of they suppose marriage , and plan he happiness in such a alliance . " I hope , " say she , as they be walk together in the shrubbery the next day , " you will give you mother - in - law a few hint , when this desirable event take place , as to the advantage of hold she tongue ; and if you can compass it , do sure the younger girl of run after officer . and , if I may mention so delicate a subject , endeavou to check that little something , bordering on conceit and impertinence , which you lady possess . " " have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity ? " " oh ! yes . do let the portrait of you uncle and aunt be place in the gallery at . put they next to you great - uncle the judge . they be in the same profession , you know , only in different line . as for you 's picture , you must not have it take , for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eye ? " " it would not be easy , indeed , to catch they expression , but they colour and shape , and the eyelash , so remarkably fine , might be copy . " at that moment they be meet from another walk by and herself . " I do not know that you intend to walk , " say , in some confusion , lest they have be overheard . " you use we abominably ill , " answer , " run away without tell we that you be come out . " then take the disengaged arm of , she leave to walk by herself . the path just admit three . feel they rudeness , and immediately say : " this walk be not wide enough for we party . we have better go into the avenue . " but , who have not the least inclination to remain with they , laughingly answer : " no , no ; stay where you be . you be charmingly group , and appear to uncommon advantage . the picturesque would be spoil by admit a fourth . good - bye . " she then run gaily off , rejoice as she ramble about , in the hope of be at home again in a day or two . be already so much recover as to intend leave she room for a couple of hour that evening . 11 when the lady remove after dinner , run up to she sister , and see she well guard from cold , attend she into the drawing - room , where she be welcome by she two friend with many profession of pleasure ; and have never see they so agreeable as they be during the hour which pass before the gentleman appear . they power of conversation be considerable . they could describe a entertainment with accuracy , relate
relate a anecdote with humour , and laugh at they acquaintance with spirit . but when the gentleman enter , be no longer the first object ; 's eye be instantly turn toward , and she have something to say to he before he have advance many step . he address himself to , with a polite congratulation ; also make she a slight bow , and say he be " very glad ; " but diffuseness and warmth remain for 's salutation . he be full of joy and attention . the first half - hour be spend in piling up the fire , lest she should suffer from the change of room ; and she remove at he desire to the other side of the fireplace , that she might be further from the door . he then sit down by she , and talk scarcely to anyone else . , at work in the opposite corner , see it all with great delight . when tea be over , remind he sister - in - law of the card - table --- but in vain . she have obtain private intelligence that do not wish for card ; and soon find even he open petition reject . she assure he that no one intend to play , and the silence of the whole party on the subject seem to justify she . have therefore nothing to do , but to stretch himself on one of the sofa and go to sleep . take up a book ; do the same ; and . , principally occupy in play with she bracelet and ring , join now and then in she brother 's conversation with . 's attention be quite as much engage in watch 's progress through he book , as in read she own ; and she be perpetually either make some inquiry , or look at he page . she could not win he , however , to any conversation ; he merely answer she question , and read on . at length , quite exhaust by the attempt to be amuse with she own book , which she have only chosen because it be the second volume of he , she give a great yawn and say , " how pleasant it be to spend a evening in this way ! I declare after all there be no enjoyment like reade ! how much sooner one tire of anything than of a book ! when I have a house of my own , I shall be miserable if I have not a excellent library . " no one make any reply . she then yawn again , throw aside she book , and cast she eye round the room in quest for some amusement ; when hear she brother mention a ball to , she turn suddenly towards he and say : " by the bye , Charles , be you really serious in meditat a dance at ? I would advise you , before you determine on it , to consult the wish of the present party ; I be much mistaken if there be not some among we to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure . " " if you mean , " cry she brother , " he may go to bed , if he choose , before it begin --- but as for the ball , it be quite a settled thing ; and as soon as have make white soup enough , I shall send round my card . " " I should like ball infinitely better , " she reply , " if they be carry on in a different manner ; but there be something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting . it would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing be make the order of the day . " " Much more rational , my dear , I dare say , but it would not be near so much like a ball . " make no answer , and soon afterwards she get up and walk about the room . she figure be elegant , and she walk well ; but , at whom it be all aim , be still inflexibly studious . in the desperation of she feeling , she resolve on one effort more , and , turn to , say : " , let I persuade you to follow my example , and take a turn about the room . I assure you it be very refresh after sit so long in one attitude . " be surprised , but agree to it immediately . succeed no less in the real object of she civility ; look up . he be as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as herself could be , and unconsciously close he book . he be directly invite to join they party , but he decline it , observe that he could imagine but two motive for they choosing to walk up and down the room together , with either of which motives he join they would interfere . " what could he mean ? she be die to know what could be he mean ? " --- and ask whether she could at all understand he ? " not at all , " be she answer ; " but depend upon it , he mean to be severe on we , and we surest way of disappoint he will be to ask nothing about it . " , however , be incapable of disappointing Darcy in anything , and persever therefore in require a explanation of he two motive . " I have not the smallest objection to explai they , " say he , as soon as she allow he to speak . " you either choose this method of
of pass the evening because you be in each other 's confidence , and have secret affair to discuss , or because you be conscious that you figure appear to the greatest advantage in walking ; if the first , I would be completely in you way , and if the second , I can admire you much better as I sit by the fire . " " oh ! shocke ! " cry . " I never hear anything so abominable . how shall we punish he for such a speech ? " " nothing so easy , if you have but the inclination , " say . " we can all plague and punish one another . Tease he --- laugh at he . intimate as you be , you must know how it be to be do . " " but upon my honour , I do not . I do assure you that my intimacy have not yet teach I then . Tease calmness of manner and presence of mind ! no , no --- feel he may defy we there . and as to laughter , we will not expose ourselves , if you please , by attempt to laugh without a subject . may hug himself . " " be not to be laugh at ! " cry . " that be a uncommon advantage , and uncommon I hope it will continue , for it would be a great loss to I to have many such acquaintance . I dearly love a laugh . " " , " say he , " have give I more credit than can be . the wisest and the best of man --- nay , the wisest and best of they action --- may be render ridiculous by a person whose first object in life be a joke . " " certainly , " reply --- " there be such people , but I hope I be not one of they . I hope I never ridicule what be wise and good . Follie and nonsense , whim and inconsistency , do divert I , I own , and I laugh at they whenever I can . but these , I suppose , be precisely what you be without . " " perhaps that be not possible for anyone . but it have be the study of my life to avoid those weakness which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule . " " such as vanity and pride . " " yes , vanity be a weakness indeed . but pride --- where there be a real superiority of mind , pride will be always under good regulation . " turn away to hide a smile . " you examination of be over , I presume , " say ; " and pray what be the result ? " " I be perfectly convince by it that have no defect . he own it himself without disguise . " " no , " say , " I have make no such pretension . I have fault enough , but they be not , I hope , of understanding . my temper I dare not vouch for . it be , I believe , too little yielding --- certainly too little for the convenience of the world . I can not forget the folly and vex of other so soon as I ink , nor they offense against myself . my feeling be not puff about with every attempt to move they . my temper would perhaps be call resentful . my good opinion once lose , be lose forever . " " _That be a failing indeed ! " cry . " Implacable resentment be a shade in a character . but you have choose you fault well . I really can not laugh at it . you be safe from I . " " there be , I believe , in every disposition a tendency to some particular evil --- a natural defect , which not even the best education can overcome . " " and you defect be to hate everybody . " " and yours , " he reply with a smile , " be willfully to misunderstand they . " " do let we have a little music , " cry , tired of a conversation in which she have no share . " Louisa , you will not mind my waking ? " she sister have not the smallest objection , and the pianoforte be open ; and , after a few moment ' recollection , be not sorry for it . he begin to feel the danger of pay too much attention . 12 in consequence of a agreement between the sister , write the next morning to they mother , to beg that the carriage might be send for they in the course of the day . but , who have calculate on she daughter remain at till the follow , which would exactly finish 's week , could not bring herself to receive they with pleasure before . she answer , therefore , be not propitious , at least not to 's wish , for she be impatient to get home . send they word that they could not possibly have the carriage before ; and in she postscript it be add , that if and he sister press they to stay longer , she could spare they very well . against stay longer , however , be positively resolve --- nor do she much expect it would be ask ; and fearful , on the contrary , as be consider as intrud themselves needlessly long , she urge to borrow 's carriage immediately , and at length it be settle that they original design of leave that morning should be mention , and the request make . the communication excite many profession of concern ; and enough be
be say of wish they to stay at least till the follow day to work on ; and till the morrow they go be defer . be then sorry that she have propose the delay , for she jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceed she affection for the other . the master of the house hear with real sorrow that they be to go so soon , and repeatedly try to persuade that it would not be safe for she --- that she be not enough recover ; but be firm where she feel herself to be right . to it be welcome intelligence --- have be at long enough . she attract he more than he like --- and be uncivil to she , and more teasing than usual to himself . he wisely resolve to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should now escape he , nothing that could elevate she with the hope of influence he felicity ; sensible that if such a idea have be suggest , he behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirm or crush it . steady to he purpose , he scarcely speak ten word to she through the whole of , and though they be at one time leave by themselves for half - a - hour , he adhere most conscientiously to he book , and would not even look at she . on , after morning service , the separation , so agreeable to almost all , take place . 's civility to increase at last very rapidly , as well as she affection for ; and when they part , after assure the latter of the pleasure it would always give she to see she either at or , and embrace she most tenderly , she even shook hand with the former . take leave of the whole party in the liveliest of spirit . they be not welcome home very cordially by they mother . wonder at they come , and think they very wrong to give so much trouble , and be sure would have catch cold again . but they father , though very laconic in he expressions of pleasure , be really glad to see they ; he have feel they importance in the family circle . the evening conversation , when they be all assemble , have lose much of its animation , and almost all its sense by the absence of and . they find , as usual , deep in the study of thorough - bass and human nature ; and have some extract to admire , and some new observation of threadbare morality to listen to . and have information for they of a different sort . much have be do and much have be say in the regiment since the preceding ; several of the officer have dine lately with they uncle , a private have be flog , and it have actually be hint that be go to be marry . chapter 13 " I hope , my dear , " say to he wife , as they be at breakfast the next morning , " that you have order a good dinner to - day , because I have reason to expect a addition to we family party . " " who do you mean , my dear ? I know of nobody that be come , I be sure , unless should happen to call in --- and I hope my dinner be good enough for she . I do not believe she often see such at home . " " the person of whom I speak be a gentleman , and a stranger . " 's eye sparkle . " a gentleman and a stranger ! it be , I be sure ! well , I be sure I shall be extremely glad to see . but --- good ! how unlucky ! there be not a bit of fish to be get to - day . , my love , ring the bell --- I must speak to Hill this moment . " " it be not , " say she husband ; " it be a person whom I never see in the whole course of my life . " this rouse a general astonishment ; and he have the pleasure of be eagerly question by he wife and he five daughters at once . after amuse himself some time with they curiosity , he thus explain : " about a month ago I receive this letter ; and about a fortnight ago I answer it , for I think it a case of some delicacy , and require early attention . it be from my cousin , , who , when I be dead , may turn you all out of this house as soon as he please . " " oh ! my dear , " cry he wife , " I can not bear to hear that mention . pray do not talk of that odious man . I do think it be the hardest thing in the world , that you estate should be entail away from you own child ; and I be sure , if I have be you , I should have try long ago to do something or other about it . " and try to explain to she the nature of a entail . they have often attempt to do it before , but it be a subject on which be beyond the reach of reason , and she continue to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settle a estate away from a family of five daughter , in favour of a man whom nobody care anything about . " it certainly be a most iniquitous affair , " say , " and nothing can clear from the guilt of inherit . but if you will listen
listen to he letter , you may perhaps be a little softened by he manner of express himself . " " no , that I be sure I shall not ; and I think it be very impertinent of he to write to you at all , and very hypocritical . I hate such false friend . why could he not keep on quarreling with you , as he father do before he ? " " why , indeed ; he do seem to have have some filial scruple on that head , as you will hear . " " , near , , . " dear Sir ,-- " the disagreement subsist between yourself and my late honoure father always give I much uneasiness , and since I have have the misfortune to lose he , I have frequently wish to heal the breach ; but for some time I be keep back by my own doubt , fear lest it might seem disrespectful to he memory for I to be on good term with anyone with whom it have always please he to be at variance .---' there , .' --- my mind , however , be now make up on the subject , for have receive ordination at , I have be so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the , widow of , whose bounty and beneficence have prefer I to the valuable rectory of this parish , where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards she ladyship , and be ever ready to perform those rite and ceremony which be institute by the of . as a clergyman , moreover , I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all family within in the reach of my influence ; and on these grounds I flatter myself that my present overture be highly commendable , and that the circumstance of my be next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly overlook on you side , and not lead you to reject the offer olive - branch . I can not be otherwise than concerned at be the means of injur you amiable daughter , and beg leave to apologise for it , as well as to assure you of my readiness to make they every possible amend --- but of this hereafter . if you should have no objection to receive I into you house , I propose myself the satisfaction of wait on you and you family , , , by four o'clock , and shall probably trespass on you hospitality till the se'ennight follow , which I can do without any inconvenience , as be far from object to my occasional absence on a , provide that some other clergyman be engage to do the duty of the day .--- I remain , dear sir , with respectful compliment to you lady and daughter , you well - wisher and friend , " at four o'clock , therefore , we may expect this peace - make gentleman , " say , as he fold up the letter . " he seem to be a most conscientious and polite young man , upon my word , and I doubt not will prove a valuable acquaintance , especially if should be so indulgent as to let he come to we again . " " there be some sense in what he say about the girl , however , and if he be dispose to make they any amend , I shall not be the person to discourage he . " " though it be difficult , " say , " to guess in what way he can mean to make we the atonement he think we due , the wish be certainly to he credit . " be chiefly strike by he extraordinary deference for , and he kind intention of christening , marry , and bury he parishioner whenever it be require . " he must be a oddity , I think , " say she . " I can not make he out .--- there be something very pompous in he style .--- and what can he mean by apologising for be next in the entail ?-- we can not suppose he would help it if he could .--- could he be a sensible man , sir ? " " no , my dear , I think not . I have great hope of find he quite the reverse . there be a mixture of servility and self - importance in he letter , which promise well . I be impatient to see he . " " in point of composition , " say , " the letter do not seem defective . the idea of the olive - branch perhaps be not wholly new , yet I think it be well express . " to and , neither the letter nor its writer be in any degree interesting . it be next to impossible that they cousin should come in a scarlet coat , and it be now some week since they have receive pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour . as for they mother , 's letter have do away much of she ill - will , and she be prepare to see he with a degree of composure which astonished she husband and daughter . be punctual to he time , and be receive with great politeness by the whole family . indeed say little ; but the lady be ready enough to talk , and see neither in need of encouragement , nor inclin to be silent himself . he be a tall , heavy - look young man of five - and - twenty . he air be grave and stately , and he manners be very formal . he have not be long seat before he compliment
compliment . Bennet on have so fine a family of daughter ; say he have hear much of they beauty , but that in this instance fame have fall short of the truth ; and add , that he do not doubt she see they all in due time dispose of in marriage . this gallantry be not much to the taste of some of he hearer ; but , who quarrel with no compliment , answer most readily . " you be very kind , I be sure ; and I wish with all my heart it may prove so , for else they will be destitute enough . thing be settle so oddly . " " you allude , perhaps , to the entail of this estate . " " ah ! sir , I do indeed . it be a grievous affair to my poor girl , you must confess . not that I mean to find fault with you , for such thing I know be all chance in this world . there be no know how estate will go when once they come to be entail . " " I be very sensible , madam , of the hardship to my fair cousins , and could say much on the subject , but that I be cautious of appear forward and precipitate . but I can assure the young lady that I come prepare to admire they . at present I will not say more ; but , perhaps , when we be better acquaint --- " he be interrupt by a summon to dinner ; and the girl smile on each other . they be not the only object of 's admiration . the hall , the dining - room , and all its furniture , be examine and praise ; and he commendation of everything would have touch 's heart , but for the mortifying supposition of he view it all as he own future property . the dinner too in its turn be highly admired ; and he beg to know to which of he fair cousins the excellency of its cooking be owe . but he be set right there by . , who assure he with some asperity that they be very well able to keep a good cook , and that she daughter have nothing to do in the kitchen . he beg pardon for have displease she . in a soften tone she declare herself not at all offended ; but he continue to apologise for about a quarter of a hour . 14 dinner , scarcely speak at all ; but when the servants be withdrawn , he think it time to have some conversation with he guest , and therefore start a subject in which he expect he to shine , by observe that he see very fortunate in he patroness . 's attention to he wish , and consideration for he comfort , appear very remarkable . could not have choose better . be eloquent in she praise . the subject elevate he to more than usual solemnity of manner , and with a most important aspect he protest that " he have never in he life witness such behaviour in a person of rank --- such affability and condescension , as he have himself experience from . she have be graciously pleased to approve of both of the discourse which he have already have the honour of preaching before she . she have also ask he twice to dine at , and have send for he only the before , to make up she pool of quadrille in the evening . be reckon proud by many people he know , but he have never see anything but affability in she . she have always spoken to he as she would to any other gentleman ; she make not the smallest objection to he joining in the society of the neighbourhood nor to he leave the parish occasionally for a week or two , to visit he relation . she have even condescende to advise he to marry as soon as he could , provide he choose with discretion ; and have once pay he a visit in he humble parsonage , where she have perfectly approve all the alteration he have be make , and have even vouchsaf to suggest some herself --- some shelf in the closet upstairs . " " that be all very proper and civil , I be sure , " say , " and I dare say she be a very agreeable woman . it be a pity that great lady in general be not more like she . do she live near you , sir ? " " the garden in which stand my humble abode be separate only by a lane from , she ladyship 's residence . " " I think you say she be a widow , sir ? have she any family ? " " she have only one daughter , the heiress of Rosings , and of very extensive property . " " ah ! " say , shak she head , " then she be better off than many girl . and what sort of young lady be she ? be she handsome ? " " she be a most charming young lady indeed . herself say that , in point of true beauty , be far superior to the handsomest of she sex , because there be that in she feature which mark the young lady of distinguished birth . she be unfortunately of a sickly constitution , which have prevent she from make that progress in many accomplishment which she could not have otherwise fail of , as I be inform by the lady who superintend she education , and who still reside with they . but she be perfectly amiable , and often condescend to drive by my humble abode
abode in she little phaeton and pony . " " have she be present ? I do not remember she name among the ladie at court . " " she indifferent state of health unhappily prevent she be in town ; and by that mean , as I tell one day , have deprive the british court of its brightest ornament . she ladyship seem pleased with the idea ; and you may imagine that I be happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliment which be always acceptable to lady . I have more than once observe to , that she charme daughter seem bear to be a duchess , and that the most elevated rank , instead of give she consequence , would be adorn by she . these be the kind of little thing which please she ladyship , and it be a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay . " " you judge very properly , " say , " and it be happy for you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy . may I ask whether these pleasing attention proceed from the impulse of the moment , or be the result of previous study ? " " they arise chiefly from what be pass at the time , and though I sometimes amuse myself with suggest and arrange such little elegant compliment as may be adapt to ordinary occasion , I always wish to give they as unstudy a air as possible . " 's expectation be fully answer . he cousin be as absurd as he have hope , and he listen to he with the keenest enjoyment , maintain at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance , and , except in a occasional glance at , require no partner in he pleasure . by tea - time , however , the dose have be enough , and be glad to take he guest into the drawing - room again , and , when tea be over , glad to invite he to read aloud to the ladie . readily assent , and a book be produce ; but , on behold it ( for everything announce it to be from a circulate library ) , he start back , and begge pardon , protest that he never read novel . star at he , and exclaim . other boonks be produce , and after some deliberation he choose 's . gap as he open the volume , and before he have , with very monotonous solemnity , read three page , she interrupt he with : " do you know , mamma , that my uncle talk of turn away ; and if he do , will hire he . my aunt tell I so herself on . I shall walk to to - morrow to hear more about it , and to ask when come back from town . " be bid by she two eldest sister to hold she tongue ; but , much offended , laid aside he book , and say : " I have often observe how little young lady be interested by book of a serious stamp , though write solely for they benefit . it amaze I , I confess ; for , certainly , there can be nothing so advantageous to they as instruction . but I will no longer importune my young cousin . " then turn to , he offer himself as he antagonist at backgammon . accept the challenge , observe that he act very wisely in leave the girl to they own trifling amusement . and she daughter apologise most civilly for 's interruption , and promise that it should not occur again , if he would resume he book ; but , after assure they that he bear he young cousin no ill - will , and should never resent she behaviour as any affront , seat himself at another table with , and prepare for backgammon . 15 be not a sensible man , and the deficiency of nature have be but little assist by education or society ; the greatest part of he life have be spend under the guidance of a illiterate and miserly father ; and though he belong to one of the university , he have merely keep the necessary term , without form at it any useful acquaintance . the subjection in which he father have bring he up have give he originally great humility of manner ; but it be now a good deal counteract by the self - conceit of a weak head , live in retirement , and the consequential feeling of early and unexpected prosperity . a fortunate chance have recommend he to when the living of be vacant ; and the respect which he feel for she high rank , and he veneration for she as he patroness , mingl with a very good opinion of himself , of he authority as a clergyman , and he right as a rector , make he altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness , self - importance and humility . have now a good house and a very sufficient income , he intend to marry ; and in seek a reconciliation with the family he have a wife in view , as he mean to choose one of the daughter , if he find they as handsome and amiable as they be represent by common report . this be he plan of amend --- of atonement --- for inherit they father 's estate ; and he think it a excellent one , full of eligibility and suitableness , and excessively generous and disinterest on he own part . he plan do not vary on see they . 's lovely face confirm he view , and establish all he strictest notion of what be due to seniority ; and for
for the first evening she be he settled choice . the next morning , however , make a alteration ; for in a quarter of a hour 's tete - a - tete with . before breakfast , a conversation begin with he parsonage - house , and lead naturally to the avowal of he hope , that a mistress might be find for it at , produce from she , amid very complaisant smile and general encouragement , a caution against the very he have fix on . " as to she younger daughter , she could not take upon she to say --- she could not positively answer --- but she do not know of any prepossession ; she eldest daughter , she must just mention --- she feel it incumbent on she to hind , be likely to be very soon engage . " have only to change from to --- and it be soon do --- do while be stirr the fire . , equally next to in birth and beauty , succeed she of course . treasure up the hint , and trust that she might soon have two daughter marry ; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before be now high in she good graces . 's intention of walking to be not forget ; every sister except agree to go with she ; and be to attend they , at the request of , who be most anxious to get rid of he , and have he library to himself ; for thither have follow he after breakfast ; and there he would continue , nominally engage with one of the largest folio in the collection , but really talk to , with little cessation , of he house and garden at . such doings discompose exceedingly . in he library he have be always sure of leisure and tranquillity ; and though prepare , as he tell , to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of the house , he be use to be free from they there ; he civility , therefore , be most prompt in inviting to join he daughter in they walk ; and , be in fact much better fitte for a walker than a reader , be extremely pleased to close he large book , and go . in pompous nothing on he side , and civil assent on that of he cousin , they time pass till they enter . the attention of the younger one be then no longer to be gain by he . they eye be immediately wandere up in the street in quest of the officer , and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed , or a really new muslin in a shop window , could recall they . but the attention of every lady be soon catch by a young man , whom they have never see before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walk with another officer on the other side of the way . the officer be the very concerning whose return from come to inquire , and he bow as they pass . all be struck with the stranger 's air , all wonder who he could be ; and and , determine if possible to find out , lead the way across the street , under pretense of want something in a opposite shop , and fortunately have just gain the pavement when the two gentleman , turn back , have reach the same spot . address they directly , and entreate permission to introduce he friend , , who have return with he the day before from town , and he be happy to say have accept a commission in they corps . this be exactly as it should be ; for the young man want only regimental to make he completely charme . he appearance be greatly in he favour ; he have all the best part of beauty , a fine countenance , a good figure , and very pleasing address . the introduction be follow up on he side by a happy readiness of conversation --- a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming ; and the whole party be still stand and talk together very agreeably , when the sound of horse draw they notice , and and be see ride down the street . on distinguishe the lady of the group , the two gentleman come directly towards they , and begin the usual civility . be the principal spokesman , and the principal object . he be then , he say , on he way to Longbourn on purpose to inquire after she . corroborate it with a bow , and be begin to determine not to fix he eye on , when they be suddenly arrest by the sight of the stranger , and happen to see the countenance of both as they look at each other , be all astonishment at the effect of the meeting . both change colour , one look white , the other red . , after a few moment , touch he hat --- a salutation which just deign to return . what could be the meaning of it ? it be impossible to imagine ; it be impossible not to long to know . in another minute , , but without seem to have notice what pass , take leave and ride on with he friend . and walk with the young lady to the door of 's house , and then make they bow , in spite of 's pressing entreaty that they should come in , and even in spite of 's throw up the parlour window and loudly second the invitation . be always glad to see she niece ; and the two eldest , from they recent absence , be particularly welcome , and
and she be eagerly express she surprise at they sudden return home , which , as they own carriage have not fetch they , she should have know nothing about , if she have not happen to see 's shop - boy in the street , who have tell she that they be not to send any more draught to because the be come away , when she civility be claim towards by 's introduction of he . she receive he with she very best politeness , which he return with as much more , apologise for he intrusion , without any previous acquaintance with she , which he could not help flatter himself , however , might be justifi by he relationship to the young lady who introduce he to she notice . be quite aw by such a excess of good breeding ; but she contemplation of one stranger be soon put to a end by exclamation and inquirie about the other ; of whom , however , she could only tell she niece what they already know , that have bring he from , and that he be to have a lieutenant 's commission in the ---- shire . she have be watch he the last hour , she say , as he walk up and down the street , and have appear , and would certainly have continue the occupation , but unluckily no one pass window now except a few of the officer , who , in comparison with the stranger , be become " stupid , disagreeable fellow . " some of they be to dine with the the next day , and they aunt promise to make she husband call on , and give he a invitation also , if the family from would come in the evening . this be agree to , and protest that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery ticket , and a little bit of hot supper afterwards . the prospect of such delights be very cheering , and they part in mutual good spirit . repeat he apology in quit the room , and be assure with unwearying civility that they be perfectly needless . as they walk home , relate to what she have see pass between the two gentleman ; but though would have defend either or both , have they appear to be in the wrong , she could no more explain such behaviour than she sister . on he return highly gratify by admir 's manners and politeness . he protest that , except and she daughter , he have never see a more elegant woman ; for she have not only receive he with the utmost civility , but even pointedly include he in she invitation for the next evening , although utterly unknown to she before . something , he suppose , might be attribute to he connection with they , but yet he have never meet with so much attention in the whole course of he life . chapter 16 as no objection be make to the young people 's engagement with they aunt , and all 's scruple of leave and . Bennet for a single evening during he visit be most steadily resist , the coach convey he and he five cousin at a suitable hour to ; and the girl have the pleasure of hearing , as they enter the drawing - room , that have accept they uncle 's invitation , and be then in the house . when this information be give , and they have all take they seat , be at leisure to look around he and admire , and he be so much struck with the size and furniture of the apartment , that he declare he might almost have suppose himself in the small summer breakfast parlour at ; a comparison that do not at first convey much gratification ; but when understand from he what be , and who be its proprietor --- when she have listen to the description of only one of 's drawing - room , and find that the chimney - piece alone have cost eight hundred pound , she feel all the force of the compliment , and would hardly have resent a comparison with the housekeeper 's room . in describe to she all the grandeur of and she mansion , with occasional digression in praise of he own humble abode , and the improvement it be receive , he be happily employ until the gentleman join they ; and he find in a very attentive listener , whose opinion of he consequence increase with what she hear , and who be resolve to retail it all among she neighbour as soon as she could . to the girl , who could not listen to they cousin , and who have nothing to do but to wish for a instrument , and examine they own indifferent imitation of china on the mantelpiece , the interval of waiting appear very long . it be over at last , however . the gentleman do approach , and when walk into the room , feel that she have neither be see he before , nor think of he since , with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration . the officer of the ---- shire be in general a very creditable , gentlemanlike set , and the best of they be of the present party ; but be as far beyond they all in person , countenance , air , and walk , as they be superior to the broad - face , stuffy uncle Phillips , breathe port wine , who follow they into the room . be the happy man towards whom almost every female eye be turn , and be the happy woman by whom he finally seate himself ; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fall into conversation ,
, though it be only on its be a wet night , make she feel that the commonest , dullest , most threadbare topic might be render interesting by the skill of the speaker . with such rival for the notice of the fair as and the officer , seem to sink into insignificance ; to the young lady he certainly be nothing ; but he have still at interval a kind listener in , and be by she watchfulness , most abundantly supply with coffee and muffin . when the card - table be place , he have the opportunity of oblige she in turn , by sit down to whist . " I know little of the game at present , " say he , " but I shall be glad to improve myself , for in my situation in life - -- " be very glad for he compliance , but could not wait for he reason . do not play at whist , and with ready delight be he receive at the other table between and . at first there seem danger of 's engrosse he entirely , for she be a most determined talker ; but be likewise extremely fond of lottery ticket , she soon grow too much interested in the game , too eager in make bet and exclaim after prize to have attention for anyone in particular . allow for the common demand of the game , be therefore at leisure to talk to , and she be very willing to hear he , though what she chiefly wish to hear she could not hope to be tell --- the history of he acquaintance with . she da not even mention that gentleman . she curiosity , however , be unexpectedly relieved . begin the subject himself . he inquire how far be from ; and , after receive she answer , ask in a hesitat manner how long have be stay there . " about a month , " say ; and then , unwilling to let the subject drop , add , " he be a man of very large property in , I understand . " " yes , " reply ; " he estate there be a noble one . a clear ten thousand per annum . you could not have meet with a person more capable of give you certain information on that head than myself , for I have be connect with he family in a particular manner from my infancy . " could not but look surprised . " you may well be surprised , , at such a assertion , after see , as you probably might , the very cold manner of we meeting yesterday . be you much acquaint with ? " " as much as I ever wish to be , " cry very warmly . " I have spend four day in the same house with he , and I think he very disagreeable . " " I have no right to give my opinion , " say , " as to he be agreeable or otherwise . I be not qualified to form one . I have know he too long and too well to be a fair judge . it be impossible for I to be impartial . but I believe you opinion of he would in general astonish --- and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else . here you be in you own family . " " upon my word , I say no more here than I might say in any house in the neighbourhood , except . he be not at all like in . everybody be disgust with he pride . you will not find he more favourably speak of by anyone . " " I can not pretend to be sorry , " say , after a short interruption , " that he or that any man should not be estimate beyond they desert ; but with he I believe it do not often happen . the world be blind by he fortune and consequence , or frightene by he high and imposing manners , and see he only as he choose to be see . " " I should take he , even on my slight acquaintance , to be a ill - tempered man . " only shook he head . " I wonder , " say he , at the next opportunity of speak , " whether he be likely to be in this country much longer . " " I do not at all know ; but I hear nothing of he go away when I be at . I hope you plan in favour of the ---- shire will not be affect by he be in the neighbourhood . " " oh ! no --- it be not for I to be drive away by . if he wish to avoid see I , he must go . we be not on friendly term , and it always give I pain to meet he , but I have no reason for avoid he but what I might proclaim before all the world , a sense of very great ill - usage , and most painful regret at he be what he be . he father , , the late , be one of the best man that ever breathe , and the truest friend I ever have ; and I can never be in company with this Darcy without be grieve to the soul by a thousand tender recollection . he behaviour to myself have be scandalous ; but I verily believe I could forgive he anything and everything , rather than he disappoint the hope and disgrac the memory of he father . " find the interest of the subject increase , and listen with all she heart ; but the delicacy of
of it prevent further inquiry . begin to speak on more general topic , , the neighbourhood , the society , appear highly pleased with all that he have yet see , and speak of the latter with gentle but very intelligible gallantry . " it be the prospect of constant society , and good society , " he add , " which be my chief inducement to enter the ---- shire . I know it to be a most respectable , agreeable corps , and my friend temp I further by he account of they present quarter , and the very great attention and excellent acquaintance have procure they . , I own , be necessary to I . I have be a disappointed man , and my spirit will not bear solitude . I must have employment and society . a military life be not what I be intend for , but circumstance have now make it eligible . the church ought to have be my profession --- I be bring up for the church , and I should at this time have be in possession of a most valuable living , have it pleas the gentleman we be speak of just now . " " indeed ! " " yes --- the late bequeath I the next presentation of the best live in he gift . he be my godfather , and excessively attach to I . I can not do justice to he kindness . he mean to provide for I amply , and think he have do it ; but when the living fell , it be give elsewhere . " " good heaven ! " cry ; " but how could that be ? how could he will be disregarde ? why do you not seek legal redress ? " " there be just such a informality in the term of the bequest as to give I no hope from law . a man of honou could not have doubt the intention , but choose to doubt it --- or to treat it as a merely conditional recommendation , and to assert that I have forfeit all claim to it by extravagance , imprudence --- in short anything or nothing . certain it be , that the living become vacant two year ago , exactly as I be of a age to hold it , and that it be give to another man ; and no less certain be it , that I can not accuse myself of have really do anything to deserve to lose it . I have a warm , unguarded temper , and I may have speak my opinion of he , and to he , too freely . I can recall nothing worse . but the fact be , that we be very different sort of man , and that he hate I . " " this be quite shocking ! he deserve to be publicly disgrace . " " some time or other he will be --- but it shall not be by I . I can forget he father , I can never defy or expose he . " honoure he for such feeling , and think he handsomer than ever as he express they . " but what , " say she , after a pause , " can have be he motive ? what can have induce he to behave so cruelly ? " " a thorough , determined dislike of I --- a dislike which I can not but attribute in some measure to jealousy . have the late like I less , he son might have borne with I better ; but he father 's uncommon attachment to I irritate he , I believe , very early in life . he have not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stand --- the sort of preference which be often give I . " " I have not think so bad as this --- though I have never like he . I have not think so very ill of he . I have suppose he to be despise he fellow - creature in general , but do not suspect he of descending to such malicious revenge , such injustice , such inhumanity as this . " after a few minute ' reflection , however , she continue , " I do remember he boast one day , at , of the implacability of he resentment , of he have a unforgiving temper . he disposition must be dreadful . " " I will not trust myself on the subject , " reply ; " I can hardly be just to he . " be again deep in thought , and after a time exclaim , " to treat in such a manner the godson , the friend , the favourite of he father ! " she could have add , " a young man , too , like you , whose very countenance may vouch for you be amiable " --- but she contente herself with , " and one , too , who have probably be he companion from childhood , connect together , as I think you say , in the closest manner ! " " we be bear in the same parish , within the same park ; the greatest part of we youth be pass together ; inmate of the same house , share the same amusement , object of the same parental care . my father begin life in the profession which you uncle , , appear to do so much credit to --- but he give up everything to be of use to the late and devote all he time to the care of the property . he be most highly esteem by , a most intimate , confidential friend . often acknowledge himself to be under the greatest obligation to my father 's active
active superintendence , and when , immediately before my father 's death , give he a voluntary promise of provide for I , I be convinced that he feel it to be as much a debt of gratitude to he , as of he affection to myself . " " how strange ! " cry . " how abominable ! I wonder that the very pride of this have not make he just to you ! if from no better motive , that he should not have be too proud to be dishonest --- for dishonesty I must call it . " " it be wonderful , " reply , " for almost all he action may be trace to pride ; and pride have often be he best friend . it have connect he nearer with virtue than with any other feeling . but we be none of we consistent , and in he behaviour to I there be stronger impulse even than pride . " " can such abominable pride as he have ever do he good ? " " yes . it have often lead he to be liberal and generous , to give he money freely , to display hospitality , to assist he tenant , and relieve the poor . family pride , and filial pride --- for he be very proud of what he father be --- have do this . not to appear to disgrase he family , to degenerate from the popular quality , or lose the influence of the , be a powerful motive . he have also brotherly pride , which , with some brotherly affection , make he a very kind and careful guardian of he sister , and you will hear he generally cry up as the most attentive and best of brothers . " " what sort of girl be ? " he shook he head . " I wish I could call she amiable . it give I pain to speak ill of a Darcy . but she be too much like she brother --- very , very proud . as a child , she be affectionate and pleasing , and extremely fond of I ; and I have devote hour and hour to she amusement . but she be nothing to I now . she be a handsome girl , about fifteen or sixteen , and , I understand , highly accomplish . since she father 's death , she home have be , where a lady live with she , and superintend she education . " after many pause and many trials of other subject , could not help revert once more to the first , and say : " I be astonished at he intimacy with ! how can , who seem good humour itself , and be , I really believe , truly amiable , be in friendship with such a man ? how can they suit each other ? do you know ? " " not at all . " " he be a sweet - tempered , amiable , charme man . he can not know what be . " " probably not ; but can please where he choose . he do not want ability . he can be a conversible companion if he think it worth he while . among those who be at all he equal in consequence , he be a very different man from what he be to the less prosperous . he pride never desert he ; but with the rich he be liberal - minded , just , sincere , rational , honourable , and perhaps agreeable --- allow something for fortune and figure . " the whist party soon afterwards break up , the player gather round the other table and take he station between he cousin and . the usual inquirie as to he success be make by the latter . it have not be very great ; he have lose every point ; but when begin to express she concern thereupon , he assure she with much earnest gravity that it be not of the least importance , that he consider the money as a mere trifle , and beg that she would not make herself uneasy . " I know very well , madam , " say he , " that when person sit down to a card - table , they must take they chance of these thing , and happily I be not in such circumstance as to make five shilling any object . there be undoubtedly many who could not say the same , but thanks to , I be remove far beyond the necessity of regard little matters . " 's attention be catch ; and after observe for a few moment , he ask in a low voice whether she relation be very intimately acquaint with the family of . " , " she reply , " have very lately give he a living . I hardly know how be first introduce to she notice , but he certainly have not know she long . " " you know of course that and be sister ; consequently that she be aunt to the present . " " no , indeed , I do not . I know nothing at all of 's connection . I never hear of she existence till the day before yesterday . " " she daughter , , will have a very large fortune , and it be believe that she and she cousin will unite the two estate . " this information make smile , as she think of poor . avain indeed must be all she attention , vain and useless she affection for he sister and she praise of himself , if he be already self - destin for another . " , " say she , " speak highly both of and she daughter ; but from
from some particular that he have related of she ladyship , I suspect he gratitude mislead he , and that in spite of she be he patroness , she be a arrogant , conceit woman . " " I believe she to be both in a great degree , " reply ; " I have not see she for many year , but I very well remember that I never like she , and that she manners be dictatorial and insolent . she have the reputation of be remarkably sensible and clever ; but I rather believe she derive part of she ability from she rank and fortune , part from she authoritative manner , and the rest from the pride for she nephew , who choose that everyone connect with he should have a understanding of the first class . " allow that he have give a very rational account of it , and they continue talk together , with mutual satisfaction till supper put a end to card , and give the rest of the ladie they share of 's attention . there could be no conversation in the noise of 's supper party , but he manners recommend he to everybody . whatever he say , be say well ; and whatever he do , do gracefully . go away with she head full of he . she could think of nothing but of , and of what he have tell she , all the way home ; but there be not time for she even to mention he name as they go , for neither nor be once silent . talk incessantly of lottery ticket , of the fish she have lost and the fish she have win ; and Collin in describe the civility of and , protest that he do not in the least regard he loss at whist , enumerat all the dish at supper , and repeatedly fear that he crowd he cousin , have more to say than he could well manage before the carriage stop at . 17 related to the next day what have pass between and herself . listen with astonishment and concern ; she know not how to believe that could be so unworthy of 's regard ; and yet , it be not in she nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as . the possibility of he have endure such unkindness , be enough to interest all she tender feeling ; and nothing remain therefore to be do , but to think well of they both , to defend the conduct of each , and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explain . " they have both , " say she , " be deceive , I dare say , in some way or other , of which we can form no idea . interested people have perhaps misrepresent each to the other . it be , in short , impossible for we to conjecture the causis or circumstance which may have alienate they , without actual blame on either side . " " very true , indeed ; and now , my dear , what have you get to say on behalf of the interested people who have probably be concerned in the business ? do clear they too , or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody . " " laugh as much as you choose , but you will not laugh I out of my opinion . my dearest , do but consider in what a disgraceful light it place , to be treat he father 's favourite in such a manner , one whom he father have promise to provide for . it be impossible . no man of common humanity , no man who have any value for he character , could be capable of it . can he most intimate friend be so excessively deceive in he ? oh ! no . " " I can much more easily believe 's be impos on , than that should invent such a history of himself as he give I last night ; name , fact , everything mention without ceremony . if it be not so , let contradict it . besides , there be truth in he look . " " it be difficult indeed --- it be distressing . one do not know what to think . " " I beg you pardon ; one know exactly what to think . " but could think with certainty on only one point --- that , if he have be impos on , would have much to suffer when the affair become public . the two young lady be summon from the shrubbery , where this conversation pass , by the arrival of the very person of whom they have be speak ; and he sister come to give they personal invitation for the long -expected ball at , which be fix for the follow . the two lady be delighted to see they dear friend again , call it a age since they have meet , and repeatedly ask what she have be do with herself since they separation . to the rest of the family they pay little attention ; avoid as much as possible , say not much to , and nothing at all to the other . they be soon go again , rise from they seat with a activity which take they brother by surprise , and hurrie off as if eager to escape from 's civility . the prospect of the ball be extremely agreeable to every female of the family . choose to consider it as give in compliment to she eldest daughter , and be particularly flatter by receive the invitation from himself , instead of a ceremonious card . picture to herself a happy evening in the
the society of she two friend , and the attention of she brother ; and think with pleasure of dance a great deal with , and of see a confirmation of everything in 's look and behavior . the happiness anticipate by and depend less on any single event , or any particular person , for though they each , like , mean to dance half the evening with , he be by no means the only partner who could satisfy they , and a ball be , at any rate , a ball . and even could assure she family that she have no disinclination for it . " while I can have my morning to myself , " say she , " it be enough --- I think it be no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagement . have claim on we all ; and I profess myself one of those who consider interval of recreation and amusement as desirable for everybody . " 's spirit be so high on this occasion , that though she do not often speak unnecessarily to , she could not help ask he whether he intend to accept 's invitation , and if he do , whether he would think it proper to join in the evening 's amusement ; and she be rather surprised to find that he entertaine no scruple whatever on that head , and be very far from dread a rebuke either from the , or , by venturing to dance . " I be by no means of the opinion , I assure you , " say he , " that a ball of this kind , give by a young man of character , to respectable people , can have any evil tendency ; and I be so far from object to dance myself , that I shall hope to be honoure with the hand of all my fair cousins in the course of the evening ; and I take this opportunity of solicite yours , , for the two first dance especially , a preference which I trust my cousin will attribute to the right cause , and not to any disrespect for she . " feel herself completely take in . she have fully propose be engage by for those very dance ; and to have instead ! she liveliness have never be worse time . there be no help for it , however . 's happiness and she own be perforce delay a little longer , and 's proposal accept with as good a grace as she could . she be not the better pleased with he gallantry from the idea it suggest of something more . it now first struck she , that she be select from among she sister as worthy of be mistress of , and of assisting to form a quadrille table at , in the absence of more eligible visitor . the idea soon reach to conviction , as she observe he increase civility toward herself , and hear he frequent attempt at a compliment on she wit and vivacity ; and though more astonished than gratify herself by this effect of she charms , it be not long before she mother give she to understand that the probability of they marriage be extremely agreeable to she . , however , do not choose to take the hint , be well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply . might never make the offer , and till he do , it be useless to quarrel about he . if there have not be a ball to prepare for and talk of , the would have be in a very pitiable state at this time , for from the day of the invitation , to the day of the ball , there be such a succession of rain as prevent they walking to once . no aunt , no officer , no news could be seek after --- the very shoe - rose for be get by proxy . even might have find some trial of she patience in weather which totally suspend the improvement of she acquaintance with ; and nothing less than a dance on , could have make such a , , , and endurable to and . 18 enter the drawing - room at , and look in for Wickhbe among the cluster of red coat there assemble , a doubt of he be present have never occur to she . the certainty of meet he have not be check by any of those recollection that might not unreasonably have alarm she . she have dress with more than usual care , and prepare in the highest spirit for the conquest of all that remain unsubdued of he heart , truste that it be not more than might be win in the course of the evening . but in a instant arise the dreadful suspicion of he be purposely omit for 's pleasure in the 's invitation to the officer ; and though this be not exactly the case , the absolute fact of he absence be pronounce by he friend , to whom eagerly apply , and who tell they that have be oblige to go to town on business the day before , and be not yet return ; add , with a significant smile , " I do not imagine he business would have call he away just now , if he have not want to avoid a certain gentleman here . " this part of he intelligence , though unheard by , be catch by , and , as it assure she that be not less answerable for 's absence than if she first surmise have be just , every feeling of displeasure against the former be so sharpen by immediate disappointment , that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite inquiry which
which he directly afterwards approached to make . attendance , forbearance , patience with , be injury to . she be resolve against any sort of conversation with he , and turn away with a degree of ill - humour which she could not wholly surmount even in speak to , whose blind partiality provoke she . but be not form for ill - humour ; and though every prospect of she own be destroy for the evening , it could not dwell long on she spirit ; and have tell all she grief to , whom she have not see for a week , she be soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddity of she cousin , and to point he out to she particular notice . the first two dance , however , bring a return of distress ; they be dance of mortification . , awkward and solemn , apologise instead of attending , and often move wrong without be aware of it , give she all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dance can give . the moment of she release from he be ecstasy . she dance next with a officer , and have the refreshment of talking of , and of hearing that he be universally lik . when those dance be over , she return to , and be in conversation with she , when she find herself suddenly address by who take she so much by surprise in he application for she hand , that , without know what she do , she accept he . he walk away again immediately , and she be leave to fret over she own want of presence of mind ; try to conseal she : " I dare say you will find he very agreeable . " " heaven forbid ! that would be the greatest misfortune of all ! to find a man agreeable whom one be determined to hate ! do not wish I such a evil . " when the dancing recommence , however , and approached to claim she hand , could not help caution she in a whisper , not to be a simpleton , and allow she fancy for to make she appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man ten time he consequence . make no answer , and take she place in the set , amaze at the dignity to which she be arrive in be allow to stand opposite to , and read in she neighbour ' look , they equal amazement in beholde it . they stand for some time without speak a word ; and she begin to imagine that they silence be to last through the two dance , and at first be resolve not to break it ; till suddenly fancie that it would be the greater punishment to she partner to oblige he to talk , she make some slight observation on the dance . he reply , and be again silent . after a pause of some minute , she address he a second time with :--" it be you turn to say something now , . I talk about the dance , and you ought to make some sort of remark on the size of the room , or the number of couple . " he smile , and assure she that whatever she wish he to say should be say . " very well . that reply will do for the present . perhaps by and by I may observe that private ball be much pleasanter than public one . but now we may be silent . " " do you talk by rule , then , while you be dance ? " " sometimes . one must speak a little , you know . it would look odd to be entirely silent for half a hour together ; and yet for the advantage of some , conversation ink to be so arrange , as that they may have the trouble of say as little as possible . " " be you consult you own feeling in the present case , or do you imagine that you be gratify mine ? " " both , " reply archly ; " for I have always see a great similarity in the turn of we minds . we be each of a unsocial , taciturn disposition , unwill to speak , unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room , and be hand down to posterity with all the eclat of a proverb . " " this be no very striking resemblance of you own character , I be sure , " say he . " how near it may be to mine , I can not pretend to say . you think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly . " " I must not decide on my own performance . " he make no answer , and they be again silent till they have go down the dance , when he ask she if she and she sister do not very often walk to . she answer in the affirmative , and , unable to resist the temptation , add , " when you meet we there the other day , we have just be form a new acquaintance . " the effect be immediate . a deeper shade of yohauteu overspread he featur , but he say not a word , and , though blame herself for she own weakness , could not go on . at length Darcy speak , and in a constrained manner say , " be bless with such happy manners as may ensure he make friend --- whether he may be equally capable of retain they , be less certain . " " he have be so unlucky as to lose you friendship , " reply with emphasis , " and in
in a manner which he be likely to suffer from all he life . " make no answer , and seem desirous of change the subject . at that moment , appear close to they , meane to pass through the set to the other side of the room ; but on perceive , he stop with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment he on he dancing and he partner . " I have be most highly gratify indeed , my dear sir . such very superior dancing be not often see . it be evident that you belong to the first circle . allow I to say , however , that you fair partner do not disgrace you , and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeat , especially when a certain desirable event , my dear ( glance at she sister and ) shall take place . what congratulation will then flow in ! I appeal to :-- but let I not interrupt you , sir . you will not thank I for detain you from the bewitch converse of that young lady , whose bright eye be also upbraid I . " the latter part of this address be scarcely hear by ; but 's allusion to he friend seem to strike he forcibly , and he eye be direct with a very serious expression towards and , who be dance together . recovere himself , however , shortly , he turn to he partner , and say , " 's interruption have make I forget what we be talk of . " " I do not think we be speak at all . could not have interrupt two people in the room who have less to say for themselves . we have try two or three subject already without success , and what we be to talk of next I can not imagine . " " what think you of book ? " say he , smile . " book --- oh ! no . I be sure we never read the same , or not with the same feeling . " " I be sorry you think so ; but if that be the case , there can at least be no want of subject . we may compare we different opinion . " " no --- I can not talk of book in a ball - room ; my head be always full of something else . " " the present always occupy you in such scene --- do it ? " say he , with a look of doubt . " yes , always , " she reply , without know what she say , for she thought have wander far from the subject , as soon afterwards appear by she suddenly exclaim , " I remember hear you once say , , that you hardly ever forgave , that you resentment once create be unappeasable . you be very cautious , I suppose , as to its be create . " " I be , " say he , with a firm voice . " and never allow yourself to be blind by prejudice ? " " I hope not . " " it be particularly incumbent on those who never change they opinion , to be secure of judge properly at first . " " may I ask to what these question tend ? " " merely to the illustration of you character , " say she , endeavour to shake off she gravity . " I be try to make it out . " " and what be you success ? " she shook she head . " I do not get on at all . I hear such different account of you as puzzle I exceedingly . " " I can readily believe , " answer he gravely , " that report may vary greatly with respect to I ; and I could wish , , that you be not to sketch my character at the present moment , as there be reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either . " " but if I do not take you likeness now , I may never have another opportunity . " " I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours , " he coldly reply . she say no more , and they go down the other dance and part in silence ; and on each side dissatisfie , though not to a equal degree , for in 's breast there be a tolerable powerful feel towards she , which soon procure she pardon , and direct all he anger against another . they have not long separate , when come towards she , and with a expression of civil disdain accost she : " so , , I hear you be quite delighted with ! you sister have be talk to I about he , and ask I a thousand question ; and I find that the young man quite forget to tell you , among he other communication , that he be the son of old , the late 's steward . let I recommend you , however , as a friend , not to give implicit confidence to all he assertion ; for as to 's use he ill , it be perfectly false ; for , on the contrary , he have always be remarkably kind to he , though have treat in a most infamous manner . I do not know the particular , but I know very well that be not in the least to blame , that he can not bear to hear mention , and that though my brother think that he could not well avoid include he in he invitation to the officer , he be excessively glad to find that he have take himself out of the way . he
he come into the country at all be a most insolent thing , indeed , and I wonder how he could presume to do it . I pity you , , for this discovery of you favourite 's guilt ; but really , consider he descent , one could not expect much better . " " he guild and he descent appear by you account to be the same , " say angrily ; " for I have hear you accuse he of nothing worse than of be the son of 's steward , and of that , I can assure you , he inform I himself . " " I beg you pardon , " reply , turn away with a sneer . " excuse my interference --- it be kindly meant . " " Insolent girl ! " say to herself . " you be much mistaken if you expect to influence I by such a paltry attack as this . I see nothing in it but you own wilful ignorance and the malice of . " she then seek she eldest sister , who have undertake to make inquirie on the same subject of . meet she with a smile of such sweet complacency , a glow of such happy expression , as sufficiently mark how well she be satisfied with the occurrence of the evening . instantly read she feeling , and at that moment solicitude for , resentment against he enemy , and everything else , give way before the hope of 's be in the fairest way for happiness . " I want to know , " say she , with a countenance no less smiling than she sister 's , " what you have learn about . but perhaps you have be too pleasantly engage to think of any third person ; in which case you may be sure of my pardon . " " no , " reply , " I have not forget he ; but I have nothing satisfactory to tell you . do not know the whole of he history , and be quite ignorant of the circumstance which have principally offende ; but he will vouch for the good conduct , the probity , and honour of he friend , and be perfectly convinced that have deserve much less attention from than he have receive ; and I be sorry to say by he account as well as he sister 's , be by no means a respectable young man . I be afraid he have be very imprudent , and have deserve to lose 's regard . " " do not know himself ? " " no ; he never see he till the other morning at . " " this account then be what he have receive from . I be satisfied . but what do he say of the living ? " " he do not exactly recollect the circumstance , though he have hear they from more than once , but he believe that it be leave to he conditionally only . " " I have not a doubt of 's sincerity , " say warmly ; " but you must excuse my not be convince by assurance only . 's defense of he friend be a very able one , I dare say ; but since he be unacquainted with several part of the story , and have lear not the rest from that friend himself , I shall venture to still think of both gentlemen as I do before . " she then change the discourse to one more gratifying to each , and on which there could be no difference of sentiment . listen with delight to the happy , though modest hope which entertaine of 's regard , and say all in she power to heighten she confidence in it . on they be join by himself , withdraw to ; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of she last partner she have scarcely reply , before come up to they , and tell she with great exultation that he have just be so fortunate as to make a most important discovery . " I have find out , " say he , " by a singular accident , that there be now in the room a near relation of my patroness . I happen to overhear the gentleman himself mention to the young lady who do the honour of the house the name of he cousin , and of she mother . how wonderfully these sort of thing occur ! who would have think of my meeting with , perhaps , a nephew of in this assembly ! I be most thankful that the discovery be make in time for I to pay my respects to he , which I be now go to do , and trust he will excuse my not have do it before . my total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology . " " you be not go to introduce yourself to ! " " indeed I be . I shall entreat he pardon for not have do it earlier . I believe he to be 's nephew . it will be in my power to assure he that she ladyship be quite well yesterday se'nnight . " try hard to dissuade he from such a scheme , assure he that would consider he address he without introduction as a impertinent freedom , rather than a compliment to he aunt ; that it be not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side ; and that if it be , it must belong to , the superior in consequence , to begin the acquaintance . listen to she with the determined air of follow he own inclination , and , when she cease speak , reply thus : " my dear , I have the highest opinion in the
the world in you excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of you understanding ; but permit I to say , that there must be a wide difference between the establish form of ceremony amongst the laity , and those which regulate the clergy ; for , give I leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom --- provide that a proper humility of behaviour be at the same time maintain . you must therefore allow I to follow the dictate of my conscience on this occasion , which lead I to perform what I look on as a point of duty . pardon I for neglecting to profit by you advice , which on every other subject shall be my constant guide , though in the case before we I consider myself more fitte by education and habitual study to decide on what be right than a young lady like yourself . " and with a low bow he leave she to attack , whose reception of he advance she eagerly watch , and whose astonishment at be so address be very evident . she cousin preface he speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of it , she feel as if hear it all , and see in the motion of he lip the word " apology , " " , " and " . " it vex she to see he expose himself to such a man . be eyee he with unrestrained wonder , and when at last allow he time to speak , reply with a air of distant civility . , however , be not discourage from speak again , and 's contempt seem abundantly increase with the length of he second speech , and at the end of it he only make he a slight bow , and move another way . then return to . " I have no reason , I assure you , " say he , " to be dissatisfie with my reception . seem much pleased with the attention . he answer I with the utmost civility , and even pay I the compliment of say that he be so well convince of 's discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily . it be really a very handsome thought . upon the whole , I be much pleased with he . " as have no longer any interest of she own to pursue , she turn she attention almost entirely on she sister and ; and the train of agreeable reflection which she observation give birth to , make she perhaps almost as happy as . she see she in idea settle in that very house , in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow ; and she feel capable , under such circumstance , of endeavour even to like 's two sister . she mother 's thought she plainly see be bend the same way , and she determine not to venture near she , lest she might hear too much . when they sit down to supper , therefore , she consider it a most unlucky perverseness which place they within one of each other ; and deeply be she vex to find that she mother be talk to that one person ( ) freely , openly , and of nothing else but she expectation that would soon be marry to . it be a animating subject , and seem incapable of fatigue while enumerat the advantages of the match . he be such a charme young man , and so rich , and live but three mile from they , be the first point of self - gratulation ; and then it be such a comfort to think how fond the two sister be of , and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do . it be , moreover , such a promising thing for she younger daughter , as 's marry so greatly must throw they in the way of other rich man ; and lastly , it be so pleasant at she time of life to be able to consign she single daughter to the care of they sister , that she might not be oblige to go into company more than she like . it be necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure , because on such occasion it be the etiquette ; but no one be less likely than . Bennet to find comfort in stay home at any period of she life . she conclude with many good wish that might soon be equally fortunate , though evidently and triumphantly believe there be no chance of it . in vain do endeaavor to check the rapidity of she mother 's word , or persuade she to describe she felicity in a less audible whisper ; for , to she inexpressible vexation , she could perceive that the chief of it be overhear by , who sit opposite to they . she mother only scolde she for be nonsensical . " what be to I , pray , that I should be afraid of he ? I be sure we owe he no such particular civility as to be oblige to say nothing he may not like to hear . " " for heaven 's sake , madam , speak lower . what advantage can it be for you to offend ? you will never recommend yourself to he friend by so do ! " Nothe that she could say , however , have any influence . she mother would talk of she view in the same intelligible tone . blush and blush again with shame and vexation . she could not help frequently glance she eye at , though every glance
glance convince she of what she dread ; for though he be not always look at she mother , she be convinced that he attention be invariably fix by she . the expression of he face change gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady gravity . at length , however , . have no more to say ; and , who have be long yawn at the repetition of delight which she see no likelihood of sharing , be leave to the comfort of cold ham and chicken . now begin to revive . but not long be the interval of tranquillity ; for , when supper be over , singe be talk of , and she have the mortification of see , after very little entreaty , prepare to oblige the company . by many significant look and silent entreaty , do she endeavou to prevent such a proof of complaisance , but in vain ; would not understand they ; such a opportunity of exhibiting be delightful to she , and she begin she song . 's eye be fix on she with most painful sensation , and she watch she progress through the several stanza with a impatience which be very ill reward at they close ; for , on receive , amongst the thanks of the table , the hint of a hope that she might be prevail on to favour they again , after the pause of half a minute begin another . 's powers be by no means fitte for such a display ; she voice be weak , and she manner affect . be in agony . she look at , to see how she bear it ; but be very composedly talk to . she look at he two sister , and see they make sign of derision at each other , and at , who continue , however , imperturbably grave . she look at she father to entreat he interference , lest Mary should be singe all night . he take the hint , and when have finish she second song , say aloud , " that will do extremely well , child . you have delighte we long enough . let the other young lady have time to exhibit . " , though pretend not to hear , be somewhat disconcert ; and , sorry for she , and sorry for she father 's speech , be afraid she anxiety have do no good . other of the party be now apply to . " if I , " say , " be so fortunate as to be able to s , I should have great pleasure , I be sure , in oblige the company with a air ; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion , and perfectly compatible with the profession of a clergyman . I do not mean , however , to assert that we can be justifi in devote too much of we time to music , for there be certainly other thing to be attend to . the rector of a parish have much to do . in the first place , he must make such a agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not offensive to he patron . he must write he own sermon ; and the time that remain will not be too much for he parish duty , and the care and improvement of he dwelling , which he can not be excuse from make as comfortable as possible . and I do not think it of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory manner towards everybody , especially towards those to whom he owe he preferment . I can not acquit he of that duty ; nor could I think well of the man who should omit a occasion of testify he respect towards anybody connect with the family . " and with a bow to , he conclude he speech , which have be speak so loud as to be hear by half the room . many stare ---many smile ; but no one look more amused than himself , while he wife seriously commend for have spoken so sensibly , and observe in a half - whisper to , that he be a remarkably clever , good kind of young man . to it appear that , have she family make a agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening , it would have be impossible for they to play they part with more spirit or finer success ; and happy do she think it for and she sister that some of the exhibition have escape he notice , and that he feeling be not of a sort to be much distress by the folly which he must have witness . that he two sister and , however , should have such a opportunity of ridicule she relation , be bad enough , and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman , or the insolent smile of the ladie , be more intolerable . the rest of the evening bring she little amusement . she be tease by , who continue most perseveringly by she side , and though he could not prevail on she to dance with he again , put it out of she power to dance with other . in avain do she entreat he to stand up with somebody else , and offer to introduce he to any young lady in the room . he assure she , that as to dance , he be perfectly indifferent to it ; that he chief object be by delicate attention to recommend himself to she and that he should therefore make a point of remain close to she the whole evening . there be no arguing upon such a project . she owed she greatest relief to she
she friend , who often join they , and good - naturedly engage 's conversation to herself . she be at least free from the offense of 's further notice ; though often stand within a very short distance of she , quite disengage , he never come near enough to speak . she feel it to be the probable consequence of she allusion to , and rejoice in it . the party be the last of all the company to depart , and , by a manoeuvre of , have to wait for they carriage a quarter of a hour after everybody else be go , which give they time to see how heartily they be wish away by some of the family . and she sister scarcely open they mouths , except to complain of fatigue , and be evidently impatient to have the house to themselves . they repulse every attempt of Bennet at conversation , and by so do throw a languor over the whole party , which be very little relieve by the long speech of , who be compliment and he sister on the elegance of they entertainment , and the hospitality and politeness which have mark they behaviour to they guest . say nothing at all . , in equal silence , be enjoy the scene . and be stand together , a little detach from the rest , and talk only to each other . preserve as steady a silence as either or ; and even be too much fatigue to utter more than the occasional exclamation of " , how tired I be ! " accompany by a violent yawn . when at length they arise to take leave , . be most pressingly civil in she hope of see the whole family soon at , and address herself especially to , to assure he how happy he would make they by eat a family dinner with they at any time , without the ceremony of a formal invitation . be all grateful pleasure , and he readily engage for take the earliest opportunity of waiting on she , after he return from , whither he be oblige to go the next day for a short time . be perfectly satisfied , and quit the house under the delightful persuasion that , allow for the necessary preparation of settlement , new carriage , and wedding clothes , she should undoubtedly see she daughter settle at in the course of three or four month . of have another daughter marry to , she think with equal certainty , and with considerable , though not equal , pleasure . be the least dear to she of all she child ; and though the man and the match be quite good enough for she , the worth of each be eclipse by and . 19 the next day open a new scene at . make he declaration in form . have resolve to do it without loss of time , as he leave of absence extend only to the follow , and have no feeling of diffidence to make it distresse to himself even at the moment , he set about it in a very orderly manner , with all the observance , which he suppose a regular part of the business . on find , , and one of the younger girl together , soon after breakfast , he address the mother in these word : " may I hope , madam , for you interest with you fair daughter , when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with she in the course of this morning ? " before have time for anything but a blush of surprise , answer instantly , " oh dear !-- yes --- certainly . I be sure will be very happy --- I be sure she can have no objection . come , , I want you upstairs . " and , gather she work together , she be hasten away , when call out : " dear madam , do not go . I beg you will not go . must excuse I . he can have nothing to say to I that anybody need not hear . I be go away myself . " " no , no , nonsense , . I desire you to stay where you be . " and upon 's seem really , with vex and embarrass look , about to escape , she add : " Lizzy , I insist upon you staying and hear . " would not oppose such a injunction --- and a moment 's consideration make she also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible , she sit down again and try to conceal , by incessant employment the feeling which be divide between distress and diversion . and walk off , and as soon as they be go , begin . " believe I , my dear , that you modesty , so far from do you any disservice , rather add to you other perfection . you would have be less amiable in my eye have there not be this little unwillingness ; but allow I to assure you , that I have you respecte mother 's permission for this address . you can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse , however you natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble ; my attention have be too mark to be mistaken . almost as soon as I enter the house , I singl you out as the companion of my future life . but before I be run away with by my feeling on this subject , perhaps it would be advisable for I to state my reason for marry --- and , moreover , for come into with the design of select a wife , as I certainly do .
. " the idea of , with all he solemn composure , be run away with by he feeling , make so near laugh , that she could not use the short pause he allow in any attempt to stop he further , and he continue : " my reasons for marrying be , first , that I think it a right thing for every clergyman in easy circumstance ( like myself ) to set the example of matrimony in he parish ; secondly , that I be convinced that it will add very greatly to my happiness ; and thirdly --- which perhaps I ought to have mention earlier , that it be the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of call patroness . twice have she condescende to give I she opinion ( unask too ! ) on this subject ; and it be but the very night before I leave --- between we pools at quadrille , while be arrange 's footstool , that she say , ' Collins , you must marry . a clergyman like you must marry . choose properly , choose a gentlewoman for my sake ; and for you own , let she be a active , useful sort of person , not bring up high , but able to make a small income go a good way . this be my advice . find such a woman as soon as you can , bring she to , and I will visit she . ' allow I , by the way , to observe , my fair cousin , that I do not reckon the notice and kindness of as among the least of the advantages in my power to offer . you will find she manners beyond anything I can describe ; and you wit and vivacity , I think , must be acceptable to she , especially when tempere with the silence and respect which she rank will inevitably excite . thus much for my general intention in favour of matrimony ; it remain to be tell why my view be direct towards instead of my own neighbourhood , where I can assure you there be many amiable young woman . but the fact be , that be , as I be , to inherit this estate after the death of you honoured father ( who , however , may live many year longer ) , I could not satisfy myself without resolve to choose a wife from among he daughter , that the loss to they might be as little as possible , when the melancholy event take place --- which , however , as I have already say , may not be for several year . this have be my motive , my fair cousin , and I flatter myself it will not sink I in you esteem . and now nothing remain but for I but to assure you in the most animated language of the violence of my affection . to fortune I be perfectly indifferent , and shall make no demand of that nature on you father , since I be well aware that it could not be comply with ; and that one thousand pound in the four per cent , which will not be yours till after you mother 's decease , be all that you may ever be entitle to . on that head , therefore , I shall be uniformly silent ; and you may assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lip when we be marry . " it be absolutely necessary to interrupt he now . " you be too hasty , sir , " she cry . " you forget that I have make no answer . let I do it without further loss of time . accept my thanks for the compliment you be pay I . I be very sensible of the honour of you proposal , but it be impossible for I to do otherwise than to decline they . " " I be not now to learn , " reply , with a formal wave of the hand , " that it be usual with young lady to reject the address of the man whom they secretly mean to accept , when he first apply for they favour ; and that sometimes the refusal be repeat a second , or even a third time . I be therefore by no means discourage by what you have just say , and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long . " " upon my word , sir , " cry , " you hope be a rather extraordinary one after my declaration . I do assure you that I be not one of those young lady ( if such young lady there be ) who be so daring as to risk they happiness on the chance of be ask a second time . I be perfectly serious in my refusal . you could not make I happy , and I be convinced that I be the last woman in the world who could make you so . Nay , be you friend to know I , I be persuade she would find I in every respect ill qualified for the situation . " " be it certain that would think so , " say very gravely --- " but I can not imagine that she ladyship would at all disapprove of you . and you may be certain when I have the honour of see she again , I shall speak in the very highest term of you modesty , economy , and other amiable qualification . " " indeed , , all praise of I will be unnecessary . you must give I leave to judge for myself , and pay I the compliment of believe what I say . I wish
wish you very happy and very rich , and by refuse you hand , do all in my power to prevent you be otherwise . in make I the offer , you must have satisfied the delicacy of you feeling with regard to my family , and may take possession of Longbourn estate whenever it fall , without any self - reproach . this matter may be consider , therefore , as finally settle . " and rise as she thus speak , she would have quit the room , have not thus address she : " when I do myself the honour of speak to you next on the subject , I shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now give I ; though I be far from accuse you of cruelty at present , because I know it to be the establish custom of you sex to reject a man on the first application , and perhaps you have even now say as much to encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female character . " " really , , " cry with some warmth , " you puzzle I exceedingly . if what I have hithertoo say can appear to you in the form of encouragement , I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as to convince you of its be one . " " you must give I leave to flatter myself , my dear cousin , that you refusal of my address be merely word of course . my reason for believe it be briefly these : it do not appear to I that my hand be unworthy you acceptance , or that the establishment I can offer would be any other than highly desirable . my situation in life , my connections with the family of , and my relationship to you own , be circumstance highly in my favour ; and you should take it into further consideration , that in spite of you manifold attraction , it be by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be make you . you portion be unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood undue the effect of you loveliness and amiable qualification . as I must therefore conclude that you be not serious in you rejection of I , I shall choose to attribute it to you wish of increase my love by suspense , accord to the usual practice of elegant female . " " I do assure you , sir , that I have no pretension whatever to that kind of elegance which consist in torment a respectable man . I would rather be pay the compliment of be believe sincere . I thank you again and again for the honour you have do I in you proposal , but to accept they be absolutely impossible . my feeling in every respect forbid it . can I speak plainer ? do not consider I now as a elegant female , intend to plague you , but as a rational creature , speak the truth from she heart . " " you be uniformly charme ! " cry he , with a air of awkward gallantry ; " and I be persuade that when sanctio by the express authority of both you excellent parent , my proposal will not fail of be acceptable . " to such perseverance in wilful self - deception would make no reply , and immediately and in silence withdrew ; determine , if he persist in consider she repeat refusal as flatter encouragement , to apply to she father , whose negative might be utter in such a manner as to be decisive , and whose behavior at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of a elegant female . 20 be not leave long to the silent contemplation of he successful love ; for , have dawdle about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference , no sooner see open the door and with quick step pass she towards the staircase , than she enter the breakfast - room , and congratulate both he and herself in warm term on the happy prospect or they nearer connection . receive and return these felicitation with equal pleasure , and then proceed to relate the particular of they interview , with the result of which he trust he have every reason to be satisfied , since the refusal which he cousin have steadfastly give he would naturally flow from she bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of she character . this information , however , start ; she would have be glad to be equally satisfied that she daughter have mean to encourage he by protest against he proposal , but she da not believe it , and could not help say so . " but , depend upon it , , " she add , " that shall be bring to reason . I will speak to she about it directly . she be a very headstrong , foolish girl , and do not know she own interest but I will make she know it . " " pardon I for interrupt you , madam , " cry ; " but if she be really headstrong and foolish , I know not whether she would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation , who naturally look for happiness in the marriage state . if therefore she actually persist in reject my suit , perhaps it be better not to force she into accept I , because if liable to such defects of temper , she could not contribute much to my felicity . " " sir , you quite misunderstand I , " say , alarm . " be only headstrong in such matter as these . in
in everything else she be as good - nature a girl as ever liv . I will go directly to , and we shall very soon settle it with she , I be sure . " she would not give he time to reply , but hurrie instantly to she husband , call out as she enter the library , " oh ! , you be want immediately ; we be all in a uproar . you must come and make marry Collins , for she vow she will not have he , and if you do not make haste he will change he mind and not have she . " raise he eye from he book as she enter , and fix they on she face with a calm unconcern which be not in the least alte by she communication . " I have not the pleasure of understanding you , " say he , when she have finish she speech . " of what be you talk ? " " of and . Lizzy declare she will not have , and begin to say that he will not have . " " and what be I to do on the occasion ? it seem a hopeless business . " " speak to Lizzy about it yourself . tell she that you insist upon she marry he . " " let she be call down . she shall hear my opinion . " ring the bell , and be summon to the library . " come here , child , " cry she father as she appear . " I have send for you on a affair of importance . I understand that have make you a offer of marriage . be it true ? " reply that it be . " very well --- and this offer of marriage you have refuse ? " " I have , sir . " " very well . we now come to the point . you mother insist upon you accept it . be it not so , ? " " yes , or I will never see she again . " " a unhappy alternative be before you , . from this day you must be a stranger to one of you parent . you mother will never see you again if you do not marry , and I will never see you again if you do . " could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning , but . , who have persuade herself that she husband regard the affair as she wish , be excessively disappointed . " what do you mean , , in talk this way ? you promise I to insist upon she marry he . " " my dear , " reply she husband , " I have two small favour to request . first , that you will allow I the free use of my understanding on the present occasion ; and secondly , of my room . I shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be . " not yet , however , in spite of she disappointment in she husband , do . Bennet give up the point . she talk to again and again ; coax and threaten she by turn . she endeavoure to secure in she interest ; but , with all possible mildness , decline interfere ; and , sometimes with real earnestness , and sometimes with playful gaiety , reply to she attack . though she manner varied , however , she determination never do . Collins , meanwhile , be meditat in solitude on what have pass . he think too well of himself to comprehend on what motive he cousin could refuse he ; and though he pride be hurt , he suffer in no other way . he regard for she be quite imaginary ; and the possibility of she deserive she mother 's reproach prevent he feel any regret . while the family be in this confusion , come to spend the day with they . she be meet in the vestibule by , who , fly to she , cry in a half whisper , " I be glad you be come , for there be such fun here ! what do you think have happen this morning ? have make a offer to , and she will not have he . " hardly have time to answer , before they be join by , who come to tell the same news ; and no sooner have they enter the breakfast - room , where be alone , than she likewise begin on the subject , call on for she compassion , and entreat she to persuade she friend to comply with the wish of all she family . " pray do , my dear , " she add in a melancholy tone , " for nobody be on my side , nobody take part with I . I be cruelly use , nobody feel for my poor nerve . " 's reply be spare by the entrance of and . " aye , there she come , " continue , " look as unconcerned as may be , and car no more for we than if we be at , provide she can have she own way . but I tell you , --- if you take it into you head to go on refuse every offer of marriage in this way , you will never get a husband at all --- and I be sure I do not know who be to maintain you when you father be dead . I shall not be able to keep you --- and so I warn you . I have do with you from this very day . I tell you in the library , you know , that I should never speak
speak to you again , and you will find I as good as my word . I have no pleasure in talk to undutiful child . not that I have much pleasure , indeed , in talk to anybody . people who suffer as I do from nervous complaint can have no great inclination for talking . nobody can tell what I suffer ! but it be always so . those who do not complain be never pitie . " she daughter listen in silence to this effusion , sensible that any attempt to reason with she or soothey she would only increase the irritation . she talk on , therefore , without interruption from any of they , till they be join by , who enter the room with a air more stately than usual , and on perceive whom , she say to the girl , " now , I do insist upon it , that you , all of you , hold you tongue , and let I and have a little conversation together . " pass quietly out of the room , and follow , but stand she ground , determine to hear all she could ; and , detain first by the civility of , whose inquiry after herself and all she family be very minute , and then by a little curiosity , satisfy herself with walking to the window and pretend not to hear . in a doleful voice begin the project conversation : " oh ! ! " " my dear madam , " reply he , " let we be for ever silent on this point . far be it from I , " he presently continue , in a voice that mark he displeasure , " to resent the behaviour of you daughter . Resignation to inevitable evil be the evil duty of we all ; the peculiar duty of a young man who have be so fortunate as I have be in early preferment ; and I trust I be resign . perhaps not the less so from feel a doubt of my positive happiness have my fair cousin honoure I with she hand ; for I have often observe that resignation be never so perfect as when the blessing deni begin to lose somewhat of its value in we estimation . you will not , I hope , consider I as show any disrespect to you family , my dear madam , by thus withdraw my pretension to you daughter 's favour , without have pay yourself and the compliment of request you to interpose you authority in my behalf . my conduct , I fear , be objectionable in have accept my dismission from you daughter 's lip instead of you own . but we be all liable to error . I have certainly mean well through the whole affair . my object have be to secure a amiable companion for myself , with due consideration for the advantage of all you family , and if my manner have be at all reprehensible , I here beg leave to apologise . " 21 the discussion of 's offer be now nearly at a end , and have only to suffer from the uncomfortable feeling necessarily attend it , and occasionally from some peevish allusion of she mother . as for the gentleman himself , he feeling be chiefly expressed , not by embarrassment or dejection , or by try to avoid she , but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence . he scarcely ever speak to she , and the assiduous attention which he have be so sensible of himself be transfer for the rest of the day to , whose civility in listen to he be a seasonable relief to they all , and especially to she friend . the morrow produce no abatement of 's ill - humour or ill health . be also in the same state of angry pride . have hope that he resentment might shorten he visit , but he plan do not appear in the least affect by it . he be always to have go on , and to he mean to stay . after breakfast , the girl walk to to inquire if be return , and to lament over he absence from the ball . he join they on they enter the town , and attend they to they aunt 's where he regret and vexation , and the concern of everybody , be well talk over . to , however , he voluntarily acknowledge that the necessity of he absence have be self - impos . " I find , " say he , " as the time draw near that I have better not meet ; that to be in the same room , the same party with he for so many hour together , might be more than I could bear , and that scene might arise unpleasant to more than myself . " she highly approve he forbearance , and they have leisure for a full discussion of it , and for all the commendation which they civilly bestow on each other , as and another officer walk back with they to , and during the walk he particularly attend to she . he accompany they be a double advantage ; she feel all the compliment it offer to herself , and it be most acceptable as a occasion of introduce he to she father and mother . after they return , a letter be deliver to ; it come from . the envelope contain a sheet of elegant , little , hot - press paper , well cover with a lady 's fair , flow hand ; and see she sister 's countenance change as she read it , and see she dwelling intently on some particular passage . recollect herself soon , and put the letter away , try to join
join with she usual cheerfulness in the general conversation ; but feel a anxiety on the subject which draw off she attention even from ; and no sooner have he and he companion take leave , than a glance from invite she to follow she upstairs . when they have gain they own room , , take out the letter , say : " this be from ; what it contain have surprise I a good deal . the whole party have leave by this time , and be on they way to tow --- and without any intention of come back again . you shall hear what she say . " she then read the first sentence aloud , which comprise the information of they have just resolve to follow they brother to tow directly , and of they meaning to dine in , where have a house . the next be in these word : " I do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in , except you society , my dearest friend ; but we will hope , at some future period , to enjoy many return of that delightful intercourse we have know , and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence . I depend on you for that . " to these highflown expressions listen with all the insensibility of distrust ; and though the suddenness of they removal surprise she , she see nothing in it really to lament ; it be not to be suppose that they absence from would prevent 's be there ; and as to the loss of they society , she be persuade that must cease to regard it , in the enjoyment of he . " it be unlucky , " say she , after a short pause , " that you should not be able to see you friend before they leave the country . but may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which look forward may arrive earlier than she be aware , and that the delightful intercourse you have know as friend will be renew with yet greater satisfaction as sister ? will not be detain in by they . " " decidedly say that none of the party will return into this winter . I will read it to you :" " when my brother leave we yesterday , he imagine that the business which take he to might be conclude in three or four day ; but as we be certain it can not be so , and at the same time convince that when get to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again , we have determine on follow he thither , that he may not be oblige to spend he vacant hour in a comfortless hotel . many of my acquaintance be already there for the winter ; I wish that I could hear that you , my dearest friend , have any intention of make one of the crowd --- but of that I despair . I sincerely hope you in may abound in the gaiety which that season generally bring , and that you beaux will be so numerous as to prevent you feel the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you . " " it be evident by this , " add , " that he come back no more this winter . " " it be only evident that do not mean that he should . " " why will you think so ? it must be he own do . he be he own master . but you do not know all . I will read you the passage which particularly hurt I . I will have no reserve from you . " " be impatient to see he sister ; and , to confess the truth , we be scarcely less eager to meet she again . I really do not think have she equal for beauty , elegance , and accomplishment ; and the affection she inspire in and myself be heighten into something still more interesting , from the hope we dare entertain of she be hereafter we sister . I do not know whether I ever before mention to you my feeling on this subject ; but I will not leave the country without confid they , and I trust you will not esteem they unreasonable . my brother admire she greatly already ; he will have frequent opportunity now of see she on the most intimate footing ; she relation all wish the connection as much as he own ; and a sister 's partiality be not mislead I , I think , when I call Charles most capable of engage any woman 's heart . with all these circumstance to favour a attachment , and nothing to prevent it , be I wrong , my dearest , in indulge the hope of a event which will secure the happiness of so many ? " " what do you think of this sentence , my dear ? " say as she finish it . " be it not clear enough ? do it not expressly declare that neither expect nor wish I to be she sister ; that she be perfectly convinced of she brother 's indifference ; and that if she suspect the nature of my feeling for he , she mean ( most kindly ! ) to put I on my guard ? can there be any other opinion on the subject ? " " yes , there can ; for mine be totally different . will you hear it ? " " most willingly . " " you shall have it in a few word . see that she brother be in love with you , and want he to marry . she follow he to
to town in hope of keep he there , and try to persuade you that he do not care about you . " shook she head . " indeed , , you ought to believe I . no one who have ever see you together can doubt he affection . , I be sure , cannot . she be not such a simpleton . could she have see half as much love in for herself , she would have order she wedding clothes . but the case be this : we be not rich enough or grand enough for they ; and she be the more anxious to get for she brother , from the notion that when there have be one intermarriage , she may have less trouble in achieve a second ; in which there be certainly some ingenuity , and I dare say it would succeed , if be out of the way . but , my dearest , you can not seriously imagine that because tell you she brother greatly admire , he be in the smallest degree less sensible of you merit than when he take leave of you on , or that it will be in she power to persuade he that , instead of be in love with you , he be very much in love with she friend . " " if we think alike of , " reply , " you representation of all this might make I quite easy . but I know the foundation be unjust . be incapable of wilfully deceive anyone ; and all that I can hope in this case be that she be deceive herself . " " that be right . you could not have start a more happy idea , since you will not take comfort in mine . believe she to be deceive , by all means . you have now do you duty by she , and must fret no longer . " " but , my dear sister , can I be happy , even suppose the best , in accept a man whose sister and friend be all wish he to marry elsewhere ? " " you must decide for yourself , " say ; " and if , upon mature deliberation , you find that the misery of disoblige he two sister be more than equivalent to the happiness of be he wife , I advise you by all means to refuse he . " " how can you talk so ? " say , faintly smile . " you must know that though I should be exceedingly grieve at they disapprobation , I could not hesitate . " " I do not think you would ; and that be the case , I can not consider you situation with much compassion . " " but if he return no more this winter , my choice will never be require . a thousand thing may arise in six month ! " the idea of he return no more treat with the utmost contempt . it appear to she merely the suggestion of 's interested wish , and she could not for a moment suppose that those wish , however openly or artfully speak , could influence a young man so totally independent of everyone . she represent to she sister as forcibly as possible what she feel on the subject , and have soon the pleasure of see it be happy effect . 's temper be not despond , and she be gradually lead to hope , though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcome the hope , that Bingley would return to and answer every wish of she heart . they agree that . Bennet should only hear of the departure of the family , without be alarme on the score of the gentleman 's conduct ; but even this partial communication give she a great deal of concern , and she bewail it as exceedingly unlucky that the lady should happen to go away just as they be all get so intimate together . after lament it , however , at some length , she have the consolation that would be soon down again and soon dining at , and the conclusion of all be the comfortable declaration , that though he have be invite only to a family dinner , she would take care to have two full course . 22 the Bennets be engage to dine with the and again during the chief of the day be so kind as to listen to . take a opportunity of thank she . " it keep he in good humour , " say she , " and I be more oblige to you than I can express . " assure she friend of she satisfaction in be useful , and that it amply repay she for the little sacrifice of she time . this be very amiable , but 's kindness extend farther than have any conception of ; it be object be nothing else than to secure she from any return of 's address , by engage they towards herself . be 's scheme ; and appearance be so favourable , that when they parte at night , she would have feel almost secure of success if he have not be to leave so very soon . but here she do injustice to the fire and independence of he character , for it lead he to escape out of the next morning with admirable slyness , and hasten to to throw himself at she foot . he be anxious to avoid the notice of he cousin , from a conviction that if they see he depart , they could not fail to conjecture he design , and he be not willing to have the attempt know till its success might be know likewise ; for though feel almost secure , and with reason , for have be
be tolerably encourage , he be comparatively diffident since the adventure of . he reception , however , be of the most flattering kind . perceive he from a upper window as he walk towards the house , and instantly set out to meet he accidentally in the lane . but little have she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence await she there . in as short a time as 's long speech would allow , everything be settle between they to the satisfaction of both ; and as they enter the house he earnestly entreate she to name the day that be to make he the happiest of man ; and though such a solicitation must be waive for the present , the lady feel no inclination to trifle with he happiness . the stupidity with which he be favour by nature must guard he courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its continuance ; and , who accept he solely from the pure and disinterest desire of a establishment , car not how soon that establishment be gai . and be speedily apply to for they consent ; and it be bestow with a most joyful alacrity . 's present circumstance make it a most eligible match for they daughter , to whom they could give little fortune ; and he prospects of future wealth be exceedingly fair . begin directly to calculate , with more interest than the matter have ever excit before , how many year longer be likely to live ; and give it as he decide opinion , that whenever should be in possession of the estate , it would be highly expedient that both he and he wife should make they appearance at 's . the whole family , in short , be properly overjoy on the occasion . the younger girl for hope of come out a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have do ; and the boy be relieve from they apprehension of 's die a old maid . Charlotte herself be tolerably compose . she have gain she point , and have time to consider of it . she reflection be in general satisfactory . , to be sure , be neither sensible nor agreeable ; he society be irksome , and he attachment to she must be imaginary . but still he would be she husband . without think highly either of man or matrimony , marriage have always be she object ; it be the only provision for well - educated young woman of small fortune , and however uncertain of give happiness , must be they pleasantest preservative from want . this preservative she have now obtain ; and at the age of twenty - seven , without have ever be handsome , she feel all the good luck of it . the least agreeable circumstance in the business be the surprise it must occasion to , whose friendship she value beyond that of any other person . would wonder , and probably would blame she ; and though she resolution be not to be shaken , she feeling must be hurt by such a disapprobation . she resolve to give she the information herself , and therefore charge Collins , when he return to Longbourn to dinner , to drop no hint of what have pass before any of the family . a promise of secrecy be of course very dutifully give , but it could not be keep without difficulty ; for the curiosity excit by he long absence burst forth in such very direct question on he return as require some ingenuity to evade , and he be at the same time exercise great self - denial , for he be long to publish he prosperous love . as he be to begin he journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family , the ceremony of leave - taking be perform when the lady move for the night ; and , with great politeness and cordiality , say how happy they should be to see he at again , whenever he engagement might allow he to visit they . " my dear madam , " he reply , " this invitation be particularly gratifying , because it be what I have be hope to receive ; and you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as possible . " they be all astonish ; and , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , immediately say : " but be there not danger of 's disapprobation here , my good sir ? you have better neglect you relation than run the risk of offend you patroness . " " my dear sir , " reply , " I be particularly oblige to you for this friendly caution , and you may depend upon my not take so material a step without she ladyship 's concurrence . " " you can not be too much upon you guard . Risk anything rather than she displeasure ; and if you find it likely to be raise by you come to we again , which I should think exceedingly probable , stay quietly at home , and be satisfied that we shall take no offence . " " believe I , my dear sir , my gratitude be warmly excited by such affectionate attention ; and depend upon it , you will speedily receive from I a letter of thanks for this , and for every other mark of you regard during my stay in . as for my fair cousins , though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary , I shall now take the liberty of wish they health and happiness , not except my cousin . " with proper civility the lady then withdraw ; all of
of they equally surprise that he meditate a quick return . wish to understand by it that he think of pay he address to one of she younger girl , and might have be prevail on to accept he . she rate he ability much higher than any of the other ; there be a solidity in he reflection which often strike she , and though by no means so clever as herself , she think that if encourage to read and improve himself by such a example as hers , he might become a very agreeable companion . but on the follow morning , every hope of this kind be do away . call soon after breakfast , and in a private conference with relate the event of the day before . the possibility of 's fancie herself in love with she friend have once occur to within the last day or two ; but that could encourage he seem almost as far from possibility as she could encourage he herself , and she astonishment be consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum , and she could not help cry out : " engage to ! my dear Charlotte --- impossible ! " the steady countenance which have command in tell she story , give way to a momentary confusion here on receive so direct a reproach ; though , as it be no more than she expect , she soon regain she composure , and calmly reply : " why should you be surprised , my dear ? do you think it incredible that should be able to procure any woman 's good opinion , because he be not so happy as to succeed with you ? " but have now recollect herself , and make a strong effort for it , be able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of they relationship be highly grateful to she , and that she wish she all imaginable happiness . " I see what you be feel , " reply . " you must be surprised , very much surprised --- so lately as be wish to marry you . but when you have have time to think it over , I hope you will be satisfied with what I have do . I be not romantic , you know ; I never be . I ask only a comfortable home ; and consider 's character , connection , and situation in life , I be convinced that my chance of happiness with he be as fair as most people can boast on enter the marriage state . " quietly answer " undoubtedly ; " and after a awkward pause , they return to the rest of the family . do not stay much longer , and be then leave to reflect on what she have hear . it be a long time before she become at all reconcile to the idea of so unsuitable a match . the strangeness of 's make two offer of marriage within three day be nothing in comparison of he be now accept . she have always feel that 's opinion of matrimony be not exactly like she own , but she have not suppose it to be possible that , when call into action , she would have sacrifice every better feel to worldly advantage . Charlotte the wife of be a most humiliating picture ! and to the pang of a friend disgrace herself and sunk in she esteem , be add the distressing conviction that it be impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she have choose . 23 be sit with she mother and sister , reflect on what she have hear , and doubt whether she be authorise to mention it , when himself appear , send by he daughter , to announce she engagement to the family . with many compliment to they , and much self - gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the house , he unfold the matter --- to a audience not merely wonder , but incredulous ; for , with more perseverance than politeness , protest he must be entirely mistaken ; and , always unguarded and often uncivil , boisterously exclaim : " ! , how can you tell such a story ? do not you know that want to marry ? " nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne without anger such treatment ; but 's good breeding carry he through it all ; and though he beg leave to be positive as to the truth of he information , he listen to all they impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy . , feel it incumbent on she to relieve he from so unpleasant a situation , now put herself forward to confirm he account , by mention she prior knowledge of it from herself ; and endeavoure to put a stop to the exclamation of she mother and sister by the earnestness of she congratulation to , in which she be readily join by , and by make a variety of remark on the happiness that might be expect from the match , the excellent character of , and the convenient distance of from . be in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while remain ; but no sooner have he leave they than she feeling find a rapid vent . in the first place , she persist in disbelieve the whole of the matter ; secondly , she be very sure that have be take in ; thirdly , she trust that they would never be happy together ; and fourthly , that the match might be break off . two inference , however , be plainly deduce from the whole : one , that be the real cause of the mischief ; and the other that she herself have
have be barbarously misuse by they all ; and on these two point she principally dwelt during the rest of the day . nothing could conseal and nothing could appease she . do that day wear out she resentment . a week elapse before she could see without scold she , a month pass away before she could speak to or without be rude , and many month be go before she could at all forgive they daughter . 's emotion be much more tranquil on the occasion , and such as he do experience he pronounce to be of a most agreeable sort ; for it gratify he , he say , to discover that , whom he have be use to think tolerably sensible , be as foolish as he wife , and more foolish than he daughter ! confess herself a little surprised at the match ; but she say less of she astonishment than of she earnest desire for they happiness ; nor could persuade she to consider it as improbable . and be far from envy , for be only a clergyman ; and it affect they in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at . could not be insensible of triumph on be able to retort on the comfort of have a daughter well marry ; and she call at rather oftener than usual to say how happy she be , though 's sour look and ill - natured remark might have be enough to drive happiness away . and there be a restraint which keep they mutually silent on the subject ; and persuade that no real confidence could ever subsist between they again . she disappointment in make she turn with fonder regard to she sister , of whose rectitude and delicacy she be sure she opinion could never be shaken , and for whose happiness she grow daily more anxious , as Bingley have now be go a week and nothing more be heard of he return . have send a early answer to she letter , and be count the day till she might reasonably hope to hear again . the promise letter of thanks from arrive on , address to they father , and write with all the solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonth 's abode in the family might have prompt . after discharge he conscience on that head , he proceed to inform they , with many rapturous expression , of he happiness in have obtain the affection of they amiable neighbour , , and then explain that it be merely with the view of enjoy she society that he have be so ready to close with they kind wish of see he again at , whither he hope to be able to return on fortnight ; for , he add , so heartily approve he marriage , that she wish it to take place as soon as possible , which he trust would be a unanswerable argument with he amiable Charlotte to name a early day for make he the happiest of man . 's return into be no longer a matter of pleasure to . on the contrary , she be as much dispose to complain of it as she husband . it be very strange that he should come to Longbourn instead of to ; it be also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome . she hate have visitor in the house while she health be so indifferent , and lover be of all people the most disagreeable . such be the gentle murmur of , and they give way only to the greater distress of 's continue absence . neither nor be comfortable on this subject . day after day pass away without bring any other tiding of he than the report which shortly prevail in of he come no more to the whole winter ; a report which highly incense , and which she never fail to contradict as a most scandalous falsehood . even begin to fear --- not that be indifferent --- but that he sister would be successful in keep he away . Unwill as she be to admit a idea so destructive of 's happiness , and so dishonorable to the stability of she lover , she could not prevent its frequently occur . the united effort of he two unfeeling sister and of he overpowering friend , assist by the attraction of and the amusement of might be too much , she fear , for the strength of he attachment . as for , she anxiety under this suspense be , of course , more painful than 's , but whatever she feel she be desirous of concealing , and between herself and , therefore , the subject be never allude to . but as no such delicacy restrain she mother , a hour seldom pass in which she do not talk of , express she impatience for he arrival , or even require to confess that if he do not come back she would think herself very ill use . it need all 's steady mildness to bear these attack with tolerable tranquillity . Collins return most punctually on fortnight , but he reception at be not quite so gracious as it have be on he first introduction . he be too happy , however , to need much attention ; and luckily for the other , the business of love - make relieve they from a great deal of he company . the chief of every day be spend by he at , and he sometimes return to only in time to make a apology for he absence before the family go to bed . be really in a most pitiable state . the very mention of anything concern the match throw she into a agony of ill - humour , and wherever she go she be sure of hear it talk
talk of . the sight of be odious to she . as she successor in that house , she regard she with jealous abhorrence . whenever come to see they , she conclude she to be anticipate the hour of possession ; and whenever she speak in a low voice to , be convinced that they be talk of the estate , and resolve to turn herself and she daughter out of the house , as soon as be dead . she complain bitterly of all this to she husband . " indeed , , " say she , " it be very hard to think that should ever be mistress of this house , that I should be force to make way for she , and live to see she take she place in it ! " " my dear , do not give way to such gloomy thought . let we hope for better thing . let we flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor . " this be not very consol to , and therefore , instead of make any answer , she go on as before . " I can not bear to think that they should have all this estate . if it be not for the entail , I should not mind it . " " what should not you mind ? " " I should not mind anything at all . " " let we be thankful that you be preserve from a state of such insensibility . " " I never can be thankful , , for anything about the entail . how anyone could have the conscience to entail away a estate from one 's own daughter , I can not understand ; and all for the sake of too ! why should he have it more than anybody else ? " " I leave it to yourself to determine , " say . 24 's letter arrive , and put a end to doubt . the very first sentence convey the assurance of they be all settle in for the winter , and conclude with she brother 's regret at not have have time to pay he respects to he friend in Hertfordshire before he leave the country . hope be over , entirely over ; and when Jane could attend to the rest of the letter , she find little , except the professed affection of the writer , that could give she any comfort . 's praise occupy the chief of it . she many attraction be again dwelt on , and boast joyfully of they increase intimacy , and venture to predict the accomplishment of the wish which have be unfolded in she former letter . she write also with great pleasure of she brother 's be a inmate of 's house , and mention with rapture some plan of the latter with regard to new furniture . , to whom very soon communicate the chief of all this , hear it in silent indignation . she heart be divide between concern for she sister , and resentment against all other . to 's assertion of she brother 's be partial to she pay no credit . that he be really fond of , she doubt no more than she have ever do ; and much as she have always be dispose to like he , she could not think without anger , hardly without contempt , on that easiness of temper , that want of proper resolution , which now make he the slave of he designing friend , and lead he to sacrifice of he own happiness to the caprice of they inclination . have he own happiness , however , be the only sacrifice , he might have be allow to sport with it in whatever manner he think best , but she sister 's be involved in it , as she think he must be sensible himself . it be a subject , in short , on which reflection would be long indulge , and must be unavailing . she could think of nothing else ; and yet whether 's regard have really dy away , or be suppress by he friend 's interference ; whether he have be aware of 's attachment , or whether it have escape he observation ; whatever be the case , though she opinion of he must be materially affect by the difference , she sister 's situation remain the same , she peace equally wounded . a day or two pass before have courage to speak of she feeling to ; but at last , on 's leave they together , after a longer irritation than usual about and its master , she could not help say : " oh , that my dear mother have more command over herself ! she can have no idea of the pain she give I by she continual reflection on he . but I will not repine . it can not last long . he will be forget , and we shall all be as we be before . " look at she sister with incredulous solicitude , but say nothing . " you doubt I , " cry , slightly colour ; " indeed , you have no reason . he may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my acquaintance , but that be all . I have nothing either to hope or fear , and nothing to reproach he with . thank ! I have not that pain . a little time , therefore --- I shall certainly try to get the better . " with a stronger voice she soon add , " I have this comfort immediately , that it have not be more than a error of fancy on my side , and that it have do no harm to anyone but myself . " " my dear ! "
" exclaim , " you be too good . you sweetness and disinterestedness be really angelic ; I do not know what to say to you . I feel as if I have never do you justice , or love you as you deserve . " eagerly disclaim all extraordinary merit , and throw back the praise on she sister 's warm affection . " Nay , " say , " this be not fair . you wish to think all the world respectable , and be hurt if I speak ill of anybody . I only want to think you perfect , and you set yourself against it . do not be afraid of my run into any excess , of my encroaching on you privilege of universal good - will . you need not . there be few people whom I really love , and still fewer of whom I think well . the more I see of the world , the more be I dissatisfie with it ; and every day confirm my belief of the inconsistency of all human character , and of the little dependence that can be place on the appearance of merit or sense . I have meet with two instance lately , one I will not mention ; the other be 's marriage . it be unaccountable ! in every view it be unaccountable ! " " my dear Lizzy , do not give way to such feeling as these . they will ruin you happiness . you do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper . 's respectability , and be steady , prudent character . remember that she be one of a large family ; that as to fortune , it be a most eligible match ; and be ready to believe , for everybody 's sake , that she may feel something like regard and esteem for we cousin . " " to oblige you , I would try to believe almost anything , but no one else could be benefite by such a belief as this ; for be I persuade that have any regard for he , I should only think worse of she understanding than I now do of she heart . my dear , be a conceited , pompous , narrow - minded , silly man ; you know he be , as well as I do ; and you must feel , as well as I do , that the woman who marry he can not have a proper way of thinking . you shall not defend she , though it be . you shall not , for the sake of one individual , change the meaning of principle and integrity , nor endeavou to persuade yourself or I , that selfishness be prudence , and insensibility of danger security for happiness . " " I must think you language too strong in speaking of both , " reply ; " and I hope you will be convince of it by see they happy together . but enough of this . you allude to something else . you mention two instance . I can not misunderstand you , but I entreat you , dear , not to pain I by think that person to blame , and say you opinion of he be sunk . we must not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injure . we must not expect a lively young man to be always so guard and circumspect . it be very often nothing but we own vanity that deceive we . woman fancy admiration mean more than it do . " " and man take care that they should . " " if it be designedly do , they can not be justifi ; but I have no idea of there be so much design in the world as some persons imagine . " " I be far from attribute any part of 's conduct to design , " say ; " but without scheme to do wrong , or to make other unhappy , there may be error , and there may be misery . Thoughtlessness , want of attention to other people 's feeling , and want of resolution , will do the business . " " and do you impute it to either of those ? " " yes ; to the last . but if I go on , I shall displease you by say what I think of person you esteem . stop I whilst you can . " " you persist , then , in suppose he sister influence he ? " " yes , in conjunction with he friend . " " I can not believe it . why should they try to influence he ? they can only wish he happiness ; and if he be attach to I , no other woman can secure it . " " you first position be false . they may wish many thing besides he happiness ; they may wish he increase of wealth and consequence ; they may wish he to marry a girl who have all the importance of money , great connection , and pride . " " beyond a doubt , they do wish he to choose , " reply ; " but this may be from better feeling than you be suppose . they have know she much longer than they have know I ; no wonder if they love she better . but , whatever may be they own wish , it be very unlikely they should have oppose they brother 's . what sister would think herself at liberty to do it , unless there be something very objectionable ? if they believe he attach to I , they would not try to part we ; if he be so , they could not succeed . by suppose such a affection , you make everybody
everybody act unnaturally and wrong , and I most unhappy . do not distress I by the idea . I be not asham of have be mistake --- or , at least , it be light , it be nothing in comparison of what I should feel in think ill of he or he sister . let I take it in the best light , in the light in which it may be understood . " could not oppose such a wish ; and from this time 's name be scarcely ever mention between they . still continue to wonder and repine at he return no more , and though a day seldom pass in which do not account for it clearly , there be little chance of she ever consider it with less perplexity . she daughter endeavoure to convince she of what she do not believe herself , that he attention to have be merely the effect of a common and transient like , which cease when he see she no more ; but though the probability of the statement be admit at the time , she have the same story to repeat every day . 's best comfort be that must be down again in the summer . treat the matter differently . " so , , " say he one day , " you sister be cross in love , I find . I congratulate she . next to be marry , a girl like to be cross a little in love now and then . it be something to think of , and it give she a sort of distinction among she companion . when be you turn to come ? you will hardly bear to be long outdone by . now be you time . here be officer enough in to disappoind all the young lady in the country . let be you man . he be a pleasant fellow , and would jild you creditably . " " thank you , sir , but a less agreeable man would satisfy I . we must not all expect 's good fortune . " " true , " say , " but it be a comfort to think that whatever of that kind may befall you , you have a affectionate mother who will make the most of it . " 's society be of material service in dispell the gloom which the late perverse occurrence have throw on many of the family . they see he often , and to he other recommendation be now add that of general unreserve . the whole of what have already hear , he claim on , and all that he have suffer from he , be now openly acknowledge and publicly canvass ; and everybody be pleased to know how much they have always dislike before they have know anything of the matter . Bennet be the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuat circumstance in the case , unknown to the society of ; she mild and steady candour always plead for allowances , and urge the possibility of mistake --- but by everybody else be condemn as the worst of man . 25 after a week spend in profession of love and scheme of felicity , be call from he amiable Charlotte by the arrival of . the pain of separation , however , might be alleviate on he side , by preparation for the reception of he bride ; as he have reason to hope , that shortly after he return into , the day would be fix that be to make he the happiest of man . he take leave of he relation at with as much solemnity as before ; wish he fair cousins health and happiness again , and promise they father another letter of thanks . on the follow , have the pleasure of receive she brother and he wife , who come as usual to spend the at . be a sensible , gentlemanlike man , greatly superior to he sister , as well by nature as education . the lady would have have difficulty in believe that a man who live by trade , and within view of he own warehous , could have be so well - breed and agreeable . , who be several year younger than and , be a amiable , intelligent , elegant woman , and a great favourite with all she Longbourn niece . between the two eldest and herself especially , there subsist a particular regard . they have frequently be stay with she in town . the first part of 's business on she arrival be to distribute she present and describe the newest fashions . when this be do she have a less active part to play . it become she turn to listen . have many grievance to relate , and much to complain off . they have all be very ill - use since she last see she sister . two of she girl have be upon the point of marriage , and after all there be nothing in it . " I do not blame , " she continue , " for would have get if she could . but ! oh , sister ! it be very hard to think that she might have be 's wife by this time , have it not be for she own perverseness . he make she a offer in this very room , and she refuse he . the consequence of it be , that will have a daughter marry before I have , and that the Longbourn estate be just as much entail as ever . the Lucas be very artful people indeed , sister . they be all for what they can get . I be sorry to say it of they , but so it be . it make I very nervous and
and poorly , to be thwart so in my own family , and to have neighbour who think of themselves before anybody else . however , you come just at this time be the greatest of comfort , and I be very glad to hear what you tell we , of long sleeve . " , to whom the chief of this news have be give before , in the course of and 's correspondence with she , make she sister a slight answer , and , in compassion to she niece , turn the conversation . when alone with afterwards , she speak more on the subject . " it seem likely to have be a desirable match for , " say she . " I be sorry it go off . but these thing happen so often ! a young man , such as you describe , so easily fall in love with a pretty girl for a few week , and when accident separate they , so easily forget she , that these sort of inconsistency be very frequent . " " a excellent consolation in its way , " say , " but it will not do for we . we do not suffer by accident . it do not often happen that the interference of friend will persuade a young man of independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he be violently in love with only a few day before . " " but that expression of ' violently in love ' be so hackneyed , so doubtful , so indefinite , that it give I very little idea . it be as often apply to feeling which arise from a half - hour 's acquaintance , as to a real , strong attachment . pray , how violent be 's love ? " " I never see a more promising inclination ; he be grow quite inattentive to other people , and wholly engross by she . every time they meet , it be more decided and remarkable . at he own ball he offend two or three young lady , by not ask they to dance ; and I speak to he twice myself , without receive a answer . could there be finer symptom ? be not general incivility the very essence of love ? " " oh , yes !-- of that kind of love which I suppose he to have felt . poor ! I be sorry for she , because , with she disposition , she may not get over it immediately . it have better have happen to you , ; you would have laugh yourself out of it sooner . but do you think she would be prevail upon to go back with we ? change of scene might be of service --- and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything . " be exceedingly pleased with this proposal , and feel persuaded of she sister 's ready acquiescence . " I hope , " add , " that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence she . we live in so different a part of town , all we connection be so different , and , as you well know , we go out so little , that it be very improbable that they should meet at all , unless he really come to see she . " " and that be quite impossible ; for he be now in the custody of he friend , and would no more suffer he to call on in such a part of ! my dear aunt , how could you think of it ? may perhaps have heard of such a place as , but he would hardly think a month 's ablution enough to cleanse he from its impurity , be he once to enter it ; and depend upon it , never stir without he . " " so much the better . I hope they will not meet at all . but do not Jane correspond with he sister ? she will not be able to help call . " " she will drop the acquaintance entirely . " but in spite of the certainty in which affec to place this point , as well as the still more interesting one of 's be withheld from see , she feel a solicitude on the subject which convince she , on examination , that she do not consider it entirely hopeless . it be possible , and sometimes she think it probable , that he affection might be reanimate , and the influence of he friend successfully combate by the more natural influence of 's attraction . accept she aunt 's invitation with pleasure ; and the be no otherwise in she thought at the same time , than as she hope by be not live in the same house with she brother , she might occasionally spend a morning with she , without any danger of see he . the Gardiner stay a week at ; and what with the , the Lucas , and the officer , there be not a day without its engagement . have so carefully provide for the entertainment of she brother and sister , that they do not once sit down to a family dinner . when the engagement be for home , some of the officers always make part of it --- of which officer be sure to be one ; and on these occasion , , render suspicious by 's warm commendation , narrowly observe they both . without suppose they , from what she see , to be very seriously in love , they preference of each other be plain enough to make she a little uneasy ; and she resolve to speak to on the subject before she leave , and represent to she the
the imprudence of encourage such a attachment . to , have one means of affording pleasure , unconnected with he general power . about ten or a dozen year ago , before she marriage , she have spend a considerable time in that very part of to which he belong . they have , therefore , many acquaintance in common ; and though have be little there since the death of 's father , it be yet in he power to give she fresher intelligence of she former friend than she have be in the way of procuring . have see , and know the late by character perfectly well . here consequently be a inexhaustible subject of discourse . in compare she recollection of with the minute description which could give , and in bestow she tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor , she be delight both he and herself . on be make acquaint with the present 's treatment of he , she try to remember some of that gentleman 's repute disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it , and be confident at last that she recollect have hear formerly speak of as a very proud , ill - natured boy . 26 . 's caution to be punctually and kindly give on the first favourable opportunity of speak to she alone ; after honestly tell she what she think , she thus go on : " you be too sensible a girl , , to fall in love merely because you be warn against it ; and , therefore , I be not afraid of speak openly . seriously , I would have you be on you guard . do not involve yourself or endeavou to involve he in a affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent . I have nothing to say against he ; he be a most interesting young man ; and if he have the fortune he ought to have , I should think you could not do better . but as it be , you must not let you fancy run away with you . you have sense , and we all expect you to use it . you father would depend on you resolution and good conduct , I be sure . you must not disappoind you father . " " my dear aunt , this be be serious indeed . " " yes , and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise . " " well , then , you need not be under any alarm . I will take care of myself , and of too . he shall not be in love with I , if I can prevent it . " " , you be not serious now . " " I beg you pardon , I will try again . at present I be not in love with ; no , I certainly be not . but he be , beyond all comparison , the most agreeable man I ever see --- and if he become really attach to I --- I believe it will be better that he should not . I see the imprudence of it . oh ! that abominable ! my father 's opinion of I do I the greatest honour , and I should be miserable to forfeit it . my father , however , be partial to . in short , my dear aunt , I should be very sorry to be the means of make any of you unhappy ; but since we see every day that where there be affection , young people be seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from enter into engagement with each other , how can I promise to be wiser than so many of my fellow - creature if I be temp , or how be I even to know that it would be wisdom to resist ? all that I can promise you , therefore , be not to be in a hurry . I will not be in a hurry to believe myself he first object . when I be in company with he , I will not be wish . in short , I will do my best . " " perhaps it will be as well if you discourage he come here so very often . at least , you should not remind you mother of invite he . " " as I do the other day , " say with a conscious smile : " very true , it will be wise in I to refrain from that . but do not imagine that he be always here so often . it be on you account that he have be so frequently invite this week . you know my mother 's idea as to the necessity of constant company for she friend . but really , and upon my honour , I will try to do what I think to be the wisest ; and now I hope you be satisfied . " she aunt assure she that she be , and have thank she for the kindness of she hint , they part ; a wonderful instance of advice be give on such a point , without be resent . return into soon after it have be quit by the and ; but as he take up he abode with the , he arrival be no great inconvenience to . he marriage be now fast approach , and she be at length so far resign as to think it inevitable , and even repeatedly to say , in a ill - natured tone , that she " _wished_ they might be happy . " be to be the wedding day , and on pay she farewell visit ; and when she rise to take leave , , asham of she mother 's ungracious
ungracious and reluctant good wish , and sincerely affect herself , accompany she out of the room . as they go downstairs together , say : " I shall depend on hearing from you very often , . " " _That you certainly shall . " " and I have another favour to ask you . will you come and see I ? " " we shall often meet , I hope , in . " " I be not likely to leave for some time . promise I , therefore , to come to . " could not refuse , though she foresee little pleasure in the visit . " my father and be come to I in , " add , " and I hope you will consent to be of the party . indeed , , you will be as welcome as either of they . " the wedding take place ; the bride and bridegroom set off for from the church door , and everybody have as much to say , or to hear , on the subject as usual . soon hear from she friend ; and they correspondence be as regular and frequent as it have ever be ; that it should be equally unreserved be impossible . could never address she without feel that all the comfort of intimacy be over , and though determine not to slacke as a correspondent , it be for the sake of what have be , rather than what be . 's first letter be receive with a good deal of eagerness ; there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of she new home , how she would like , and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be ; though , when the letter be read , feel that express herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen . she write cheerfully , seem surround with comforts , and mention nothing which she could not praise . the house , furniture , neighbourhood , and roads , be all to she taste , and 's behaviour be most friendly and obliging . it be 's picture of and rationally soften ; and perceive that she must wait for she own visit there to know the rest . have already write a few line to she sister to announce they safe arrival in ; and when she write again , hope it would be in she power to say something of the Bingley . she impatience for this second letter be as well reward as impatience generally be . have be a week in town without either see or hear from . she account for it , however , by supposing that she last letter to she friend from have by some accident be lose . " my aunt , " she continue , " be go to - morrow into that part of the town , and I shall take the opportunity of call in . " she write again when the visit be pay , and she have see . " I do not think in spirit , " be she word , " but she be very glad to see I , and reproach I for give she no notice of my come to . I be right , therefore , my last letter have never reach she . I inquire after they brother , of course . he be well , but so much engage with that they scarcely ever see he . I find that be expect to dinner . I wish I could see she . my visit be not long , as and be go out . I dare say I shall see they soon here . " shook she head over this letter . it convince she that accident only could discover to she sister 's be in town . four week pass away , and see nothing of he . she endeavoure to persuade herself that she do not regret it ; but she could no longer be blind to miss 's inattention . after wait at home every morning for a fortnight , and invent every evening a fresh excuse for she , the visitor do at last appear ; but the shortness of she stay , and yet more , the alteration of she manner would allow to deceive herself no longer . the letter which she write on this occasion to she sister will prove what she feel . " my dearest , I be sure , be incapable of triumph in she better judgement , at my expense , when I confess myself to have be entirely deceive in 's regard for I . but , my dear sister , though the event have prove you right , do not think I obstinate if I still assert that , consider what she behaviour be , my confidence be as natural as you suspicion . I do not at all comprehend she reason for wish to be intimate with I ; but if the same circumstance be to happen again , I be sure I should be deceive again . do not return my visit till yesterday ; and not a note , not a line , do I receive in the meantime . when she do come , it be very evident that she have no pleasure in it ; she make a slight , formal apology , for not call before , say not a word of wishing to see I again , and be in every respect so alte a creature , that when she go away I be perfectly resolve to continue the acquaintance no longer . I pity , though I can not help blame she . she be very wrong in single I out as she do ; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy begin on she side .
. but I pity she , because she must feel that she have be act wrong , and because I be very sure that anxiety for she brother be the cause of it . I need not explain myself farther ; and though we know this anxiety to be quite needless , yet if she feel it , it will easily account for she behaviour to I ; and so deservedly dear as he be to he sister , whatever anxiety she must feel on he behalf be natural and amiable . I can not but wonder , however , at she have any such fear now , because , if he have at all care about I , we must have meet , long ago . he know of my be in town , I be certain , from something she say herself ; and yet it would seem , by she manner of talking , as if she want to persuade herself that he be really partial to . I can not understand it . if I be not afraid of judge harshly , I should be almost temp to say that there be a strong appearance of duplicity in all this . but I will endeaavor to banish every painful thought , and think only of what will make I happy --- you affection , and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt . let I hear from you very soon . say something of he never return to again , of give up the house , but not with any certainty . we have better not mention it . I be extremely glad that you have such pleasant account from we friend at . pray go to see they , with and . I be sure you will be very comfortable there .--- yours , etc . " this letter give some pain ; but she spirit return as she consider that would no longer be du , by the sister at least . all expectation from the brother be now absolutely over . she would not even wish for a renewal of he attention . he character sunk on every review of it ; and as a punishment for he , as well as a possible advantage to , she seriously hope he might really soon marry 's sister , as by 's account , she would make he abundantly regret what he have throw away . about this time reminde of she promise concern that gentleman , and require information ; and have such to send as might rather give contentment to she aunt than to herself . he apparent partiality have subside , he attention be over , he be the admirer of some one else . be watchful enough to see it all , but she could see it and write of it without material pain . she heart have be but slightly touche , and she vanity be satisfied with believe that she would have be he only choice , have fortune permit it . the sudden acquisition of ten thousand pound be the most remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he be now render himself agreeable ; but , less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in 's , do not quarrel with he for he wish of independence . nothing , on the contrary , could be more natural ; and while able to suppose that it cost he a few struggle to relinquish she , she be ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both , and could very sincerely wish he happy . all this be acknowledge to ; and after relate the circumstance , she thus go on : " I be now convince , my dear aunt , that I have never be much in love ; for have I really experience that pure and elevate passion , I should at present detest he very name , and wish he all manner of evil . but my feeling be not only cordial towards he ; they be even impartial towards . I can not find out that I hate she at all , or that I be in the least unwilling to think she a very good sort of girl . there can be no love in all this . my watchfulness have be effectual ; and though I certainly should be a more interesting object to all my acquaintance be I distractedly in love with he , I can not say that I regret my comparative insignificance . importance may sometimes be purchase too dearly . and take he defection much more to heart than I do . they be young in the way of the world , and not yet open to the mortify conviction that handsome young man must have something to live on as well as the plain . " 27 with no greater event than these in the family , and otherwise diversify by little beyond the walk to , sometimes dirty and sometimes cold , do and pass away . be to take to . she have not at first think very seriously of go thither ; but , she soon find , be depend on the plan and she gradually learn to consider it herself with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty . absence have increase she desire of see again , and weaken she disgust of . there be novetely in the scheme , and as , with such a mother and such uncompanionable sister , home could not be faultless , a little change be not unwelcome for its own sake . the journey would moreover give she a peep at ; and , in short , as the time draw near , she would have be very sorry for any delay . everything , however , go on smoothly , and be finally settle accord to 's first
first sketch . she be to accompany and he second daughter . the improveament of spend a night in be add in time , and the plan become perfect as plan could be . the only pain be in leave she father , who would certainly miss she , and who , when it come to the point , so little like she go , that he tell she to write to he , and almost promise to answer she letter . the farewell between herself and be perfectly friendly ; on he side even more . he present pursuit could not make he forget that have be the first to excite and to deserve he attention , the first to listen and to pity , the first to be admire ; and in he manner of bid she adieu , wish she every enjoyment , remind she of what she be to expect in , and trust they opinion of she --- they opinion of everybody --- would always coincide , there be a solicitude , a interest which she feel must ever attach she to he with a most sincere regard ; and she part from he convince that , whether marry or single , he must always be she model of the amiable and pleasing . she fellow - traveller the next day be not of a kind to make she think he less agreeable . , and he daughter , a good - humoured girl , but as empty - head as himself , have nothing to say that could be worth hearing , and be listen to with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise . love absurdity , but she have know 's too long . he could tell she nothing new of the wonder of he presentation and knighthood ; and he civility be wear out , like he information . it be a journey of only twenty - four mile , and they begin it so early as to be in by noon . as they drive to 's door , be at a drawing - room window watch they arrival ; when they enter the passage she be there to welcome they , and , look earnestly in she face , be pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever . on the stair be a troop of little boy and girl , whose eagerness for they cousin 's appearance would not allow they to wait in the drawing - room , and whose shyness , as they have not see she for a twelvemonth , prevent they come lower . all be joy and kindness . the day pass most pleasantly away ; the morning in bustle and shopping , and the evening at one of the theatre . then contrive to sit by she aunt . they first object be she sister ; and she be more grieved than astonished to hear , in reply to she minute inquiry , that though always struggle to support she spirits , there be period of dejection . it be reasonable , however , to hope that they would not continue long . give she the particular also of 's visit in , and repeat conversation occur at different time between and herself , which prove that the former have , from she heart , give up the acquaintance . then rally she niece on 's desertion , and compliment she on bear it so well . " but my dear , " she add , " what sort of girl be ? I should be sorry to think we friend mercenary . " " pray , my dear aunt , what be the difference in matrimonial affair , between the mercenary and the prudent motive ? where do discretion end , and avarice begin ? last you be afraid of he marry I , because it would be imprudent ; and now , because he be try to get a girl with only ten thousand pound , you want to find out that he be mercenary . " " if you will only tell I what sort of girl miss King be , I shall know what to think . " " she be a very good kind of girl , I believe . I know no harm of she . " " but he pay she not the smallest attention till she grandfather 's death make she mistress of this fortune . " " no --- what should he ? if it be not allowable for he to gain my affections because I have no money , what occasion could there be for make love to a girl whom he do not care about , and who be equally poor ? " " but there seem a indelicacy in direct he attention towards she so soon after this event . " " a man in distressed circumstance have not time for all those elegant decorum which other people may observe . if she do not object to it , why should we ? " " _Her not objecte do not justify he . it only show she be deficient in something herself --- sense or feel . " " well , " cry , " have it as you choose . he shall be mercenary , and she shall be foolish . " " no , , that be what I do not choose . I should be sorry , you know , to think ill of a young man who have liv so long in . " " oh ! if that be all , I have a very poor opinion of young man who live in ; and they intimate friend who live in be not much better . I be sick of they all . thank heaven ! I be go to - morrow where I shall find a man who have not one
one agreeable quality , who have neither manner nor sense to recommend he . stupid man be the only one worth know , after all . " " take care , Lizzy ; that speech savour strongly of disappointment . " before they be separate by the conclusion of the play , she have the unexpected happiness of a invitation to accompany she uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they propose take in the summer . " we have not determine how far it shall carry we , " say , " but , perhaps , to the Lakes . " no scheme could have be more agreeable to , and she acceptance of the invitation be most ready and grateful . " oh , my dear , dear aunt , " she rapturously cry , " what delight ! what felicity ! you give I fresh life and vigour . Adieu to disappointment and spleen . what be young man to rock and mountain ? oh ! what hour of transport we shall spend ! and when we do return , it shall not be like other traveller , without be able to give one accurate idea of anything . we will know where we have go --- we will recollect what we have see . Lakes , mountain , and rivers shall not be jumble together in we imagination ; nor when we attempt to describe any particular scene , will we begin quarrel about its relative situation . let we first effusion be less insupportable than those of the generality of traveller . " 28 every object in the next day 's journey be new and interesting to ; and she spirit be in a state of enjoyment ; for she have see she sister look so well as to banish all fear for she health , and the prospect of she northern tour be a constant source of delight . when they leave the high road for the lane to , every eye be in search of the Parsonage , and every turning expect to bring it in view . the paling of be they boundary on one side . smile at the recollection of all that she have hear of its inhabitant . at length the Parsonage be discernible . the garden slop to the road , the house stand in it , the green pale , and the laurel hedge , everything declare they be arrive . and appear at the door , and the carriage stop at the small gate which lead by a short gravel walk to the house , amidst the nod and smile of the whole party . in a moment they be all out of the chaise , rejoice at the sight of each other . welcome she friend with the liveliest pleasure , and be more and more satisfied with come when she find herself so affectionately receive . she see instantly that she cousin 's manners be not alte by he marriage ; he formal civility be just what it have be , and he detain she some minute at the gate to hear and satisfy he inquirie after all she family . they be then , with no other delay than he point out the neatness of the entrance , take into the house ; and as soon as they be in the parlour , he welcome they a second time , with ostentatious formality to he humble abode , and punctually repeat all he wife 's offer of refreshment . be prepared to see he in he glory ; and she could not help in fancie that in display the good proportion of the room , its aspect and its furniture , he address himself particularly to she , as if wishing to make she feel what she have lose in refuse he . but though everything seem neat and comfortable , she be not able to gratify he by any sigh of repentance , and rather look with at she friend that she could have so cheerful a air with such a companion . when say anything of which he wife might reasonably be asham , which certainly be not unseldom , she involuntarily turn she eye on . once or twice she could discern a faint blush ; but in general wisely do not hear . after sit long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room , from the sideboard to the fender , to give a account of they journey , and of all that have happene in , invite they to take a stroll in the garden , which be large and well lay out , and to the cultivation of which he attend himself . to work in this garden be one of he most respectable pleasure ; and admire the command of countenance with which talk of the healthfulness of the exercise , and own she encourage it as much as possible . here , lead the way through every walk and cross walk , and scarcely allow they a interval to utter the praise he ask for , every view be point out with a minuteness which leave beauty entirely behind . he could number the field in every direction , and could tell how many tress there be in the most distant clump . but of all the views which he garden , or which the country or kingdom could boast , none be to be compare with the prospect of Rosings , afforde by a opening in the tree that border the park nearly opposite the front of he house . it be a handsome modern building , well situate on rise ground . from he garden , would have lead they round he two meadow ; but the lady , not have shoe to encounter the remains of a white frost , turn back ; and while accompany he ,
, take she sister and friend over the house , extremely well pleased , probably , to have the opportunity of show it without she husband 's help . it be rather small , but well build and convenient ; and everything be fitte up and arrange with a neatness and consistency of which give all the credit . when could be forget , there be really a air of great comfort throughout , and by 's evident enjoyment of it , suppose he must be often forget . she have already learn that be still in the country . it be speak of again while they be at dinner , when join in , observe : " yes , , you will have the honour of see on the ensuing at church , and I need not say you will be deligh with she . she be all affability and condescension , and I doubt not but you will be honoure with some portion of she notice when service be over . I have scarcely any hesitation in say she will include you and my sister in every invitation with which she honour we during you stay here . she behaviour to my dear Charlotte be charme . we dine at twice every week , and be never allow to walk home . she ladyship 's carriage be regularly order for we . I should say , one of she ladyship 's carriage , for she have several . " " be a very respectable , sensible woman indeed , " add , " and a most attentive neighbour . " " very true , my dear , that be exactely what I say . she be the sort of woman whom one can not regard with too much deference . " the evening be spend chiefly in talk over news , and tell again what have already be write ; and when it close , , in the solitude of she chamber , have to meditate upon 's degree of contentment , to understand she address in guiding , and composure in bear with , she husband , and to acknowledge that it be all do very well . she have also to anticipate how she visit would pass , the quiet tenor of they usual employment , the vexatious interruption of , and the gaiety of they intercourse with Rosings . a lively imagination soon settle it all . about the middle of the next day , as she be in she room get ready for a walk , a sudden noise below seem to speak the whole house in confusion ; and , after listen a moment , she hear somebody run upstairs in a violent hurry , and call loudly after she . she open the door and meet in the landing place , who , breathless with agitation , cry out --- " oh , my dear ! pray make haste and come into the dining - room , for there be such a sight to be see ! I will not tell you what it be . make haste , and come down this moment . " ask question in vain ; would tell she nothing more , and down they run into the dining - room , which fronte the lane , in quest of this wonder ; it be two lady stop in a low phaeton at the garden gate . " and be this all ? " cry . " I expect at least that the pig be get into the garden , and here be nothing but and she daughter . " " ! my dear , " say , quite shocked at the mistake , " it be not Lady . the old lady be , who live with they ; the other be . only look at she . she be quite a little creature . who would have think that she could be so thin and small ? " " she be abominably rude to keep out of door in all this wind . why do she not come in ? " " oh , say she hardly ever do . it be the greatest of favour when come in . " " I like she appearance , " say , strike with other idea . " she look sickly and cross . yes , she will do for he very well . she will make he a very proper wife . " and be both stand at the gate in conversation with the ladie ; and , to 's high diversion , be station in the doorway , in earnest contemplation of the greatness before he , and constantly bow whenever look that way . at length there be nothing more to be say ; the lady drive on , and the other return into the house . no sooner see the two girl than he begin to congratulate they on they good fortune , which explain by let they know that the whole party be ask to dine at the next day . 29 's triumph , in consequence of this invitation , be complete . the power of display the grandeur of he patroness to he wonder visitor , and of let they see she civility towards himself and he wife , be exactly what he have wish for ; and that a opportunity of do it should be give so soon , be such a instance of 's condescension , as he know not how to admire enough . " I confess , " say he , " that I should not have be at all surprise by she ladyship 's ask we on to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings . I rather expect , from my knowledge of she affability , that it would happen . but who could have foreseen such a attention as this ? who could
could have imagine that we should receive a invitation to dine there ( a invitation , moreover , include the whole party ) so immediately after you arrival ! " " I be the less surprised at what have happen , " reply , " from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really be , which my situation in life have allow I to acquire . about the court , such instance of elegant breeding be not uncommon . " Scarcely anything be talk of the whole day or next morning but they visit to Rosings . be carefully instruct they in what they be to expect , that the sight of such room , so many servants , and so splendo a dinner , might not wholly overpower they . when the lady be separate for the toilette , he say to --- " do not make yourself uneasy , my dear cousin , about you apparel . be far from require that elegance of dress in we which become herself and she daughter . I would advise you merely to put on whatever of you clothes be superior to the rest --- there be no occasion for anything more . will not think the worse of you for be simply dress . she like to have the distinction of rank preserve . " while they be dress , he come two or three time to they different door , to recommend they be quick , as very much object to be keep wait for she dinner . such formidable account of she ladyship , and she manner of living , quite frightened who have be little use to company , and she look forward to she introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as she father have do to he presentation at 's . as the weather be fine , they have a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park . every park have its beauty and its prospect ; and see much to be pleased with , though she could not be in such rapture as expect the scene to inspire , and be but slightly affect by he enumeration of the window in front of the house , and he relation of what the glazing altogether have originally cost . when they ascend the step to the hall , 's alarm be every moment increase , and even do not look perfectly calm . 's courage do not fail she . she have hear nothing of Lady Catherine that speak she awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue , and the mere stateliness of money or rank she think she could witness without trepidation . from the entrance - hall , of which point out , with a rapturous air , the fine proportion and the finish ornament , they follow the servants through a ant -chamber , to the room where , she daughter , and be sitte . she ladyship , with great condescension , arise to receive they ; and as Collins have settle it with she husband that the office of introduction should be hers , it be perform in a proper manner , without any of those apology and thanks which he would have think necessary . in spite of have be at 's be so completely aw by the grandeur surround he , that he have but just courage enough to make a very low bow , and take he seat without say a word ; and he daughter , frightene almost out of she sense , sit on the edge of she chair , not know which way to look . find herself quite equal to the scene , and could observe the three lady before she composedly . be a tall , large woman , with strongly - mark feature , which might once have be handsome . she air be not conciliat , nor be she manner of receive they such as to make she visitor forget they inferior rank . she be not render formidable by silence ; but whatever she say be speak in so authoritative a tone , as mark she self - importance , and bring immediately to 's mind ; and from the observation of the day altogether , she believe to be exactly what he represent . when , after examine the mother , in whose countenance and deportment she soon find some resemblance of , she turn she eye on the daughter , she could almost have join in 's astonishment at she be so thin and so small . there be neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladie . be pale and sickly ; she feature , though not plain , be insignificant ; and she speak very little , except in a low voice , to , in whose appearance there be nothing remarkable , and who be entirely engage in listen to what she say , and place a screen in the proper direction before she eye . after sit a few minute , they be all send to one of the window to admire the view , attend they to point out its beauty , and kindly inform they that it be much better worth look at in the summer . the dinner be exceedingly handsome , and there be all the servants and all the article of plate which Collins have promise ; and , as he have likewise foretold , he take he seat at the bottom of the table , by she ladyship 's desire , and look as if he feel that life could furnish nothing greater . he carve , and ate , and praise with delighted alacrity ; and every dish be commend , first by he and then by , who be now enough recover to echo whatever he son - in - law say , in a manner which
which wonder could bear . but seem gratify by they excessive admiration , and give most gracious smile , especially when any dish on the table prove a novelty to they . the party do not supply much conversation . be ready to speak whenever there be a opening , but she be seat between and --- the former of whom be engage in listen to , and the latter say not a word to she all dinner - time . be chiefly employ in watch how little ate , press she to try some other dish , and fear she be indispose . think speak out of the question , and the gentleman do nothing but eat and admire . when the lady return to the drawing - room , there be little to be do but to hear talk , which she do without any intermission till coffee come in , deliver she opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner , as prove that she be not use to have she judgement controvert . she inquire into 's domestic concern familiarly and minutely , give she a great deal of advice as to the management of they all ; tell she how everything ought to be regulate in so small a family as hers , and instruct she as to the care of she cow and she poultry . find that nothing be beneath this great lady 's attention , which could furnish she with a occasion of dictating to other . in the interval of she discourse with , she address a variety of question to and , but especially to the latter , of whose connection she know the least , and who she observe to be a very genteel , pretty kind of girl . she ask she , at different time , how many sister she have , whether they be older or younger than herself , whether any of they be likely to be married , whether they be handsome , where they have be educated , what carriage she father keep , and what have be she mother 's maiden name ? feel all the impertinence of she question but answer they very composedly . then observ , " you father 's estate be entail on , I think . for you sake , " turn to , " I be glad of it ; but otherwise I see no occasion for entailing estate from the female line . it be not think necessary in 's family . do you play and s , ? " " a little . " " oh ! then --- some time or other we shall be happy to hear you . we instrument be a capital one , probably superior to ---- you shall try it some day . do you sister play and s ? " " one of they do . " " why do not you all learn ? you ought all to have learn . the all play , and they father have not so good a income as yours . do you dree ? " " no , not at all . " " what , none of you ? " " not one . " " that be very strange . but I suppose you have no opportunity . you mother should have take you to tow every spring for the benefit of masters . " " my mother would have have no objection , but my father hate . " " have you governess leave you ? " " we never have any governess . " " no governess ! how be that possible ? five daughter bring up at home without a governess ! I never hear of such a thing . you mother must have be quite a slave to you education . " could hardly help smile as she assure she that have not be the case . " then , who tatch you ? who attend to you ? without a governess , you must have be neglect . " " compare with some family , I believe we be ; but such of we as wish to learn never want the means . we be always encourage to read , and have all the master that be necessary . those who choose to be idle , certainly might . " " aye , no doubt ; but that be what a governess will prevent , and if I have know you mother , I should have advise she most strenuously to engage one . I always say that nothing be to be do in education without steady and regular instruction , and nobody but a governess can give it . it be wonderful how many family I have be the means of supplye in that way . I be always glad to get a young person well place out . four niece of be most delightfully situate through my means ; and it be but the other day that I recommend another young person , who be merely accidentally mention to I , and the family be quite delighted with she . , do I tell you of 's call yesterday to thank I ? she find Pope a treasure . ' , ' say she , ' you have give I a treasure . ' be any of you younger sister out , ? " " yes , ma 'am , all . " " all ! what , all five out at once ? very odd ! and you only the second . the younger one out before the elder one be marry ! you younger sister must be very young ? " " yes , my youngest be not sixteen . perhaps she be full young to be much in company . but really , ma 'am , I think it would be very hard upon younger sister ,
, that they should not have they share of society and amusement , because the elder may not have the means or inclination to marry early . the last - born have as good a right to the pleasure of youth at the first . and to be keep back on such a motive ! I think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind . " " upon my word , " say she ladyship , " you give you opinion very decidedly for so young a person . pray , what be you age ? " " with three younger sister grow up , " reply , smile , " you ladyship can hardly expect I to own it . " seem quite astonished at not receive a direct answer ; and suspect herself to be the first creature who have ever da to trifle with so much dignify impertinence . " you can not be more than twenty , I be sure , therefore you need not conceal you age . " " I be not one - and - twenty . " when the gentleman have join they , and tea be over , the card - table be place . , , and and sit down to quadrille ; and as choose to play at cassino , the two girl have the honour of assisting to make up she party . they table be superlatively stupid . Scarcely a syllable be uttere that do not relate to the game , except when express she fear of 's be too hot or too cold , or have too much or too little light . a great deal more pass at the other table . be generally speak --- state the mistakes of the three other , or relate some anecdote of herself . be employ in agree to everything she ladyship say , thanke she for every fish he win , and apologise if he think he win too many . do not say much . he be store he memory with anecdote and noble name . when and she daughter have play as long as they choose , the table be break up , the carriage be offer to , gratefully accept and immediately order . the party then gather round the fire to hear determine what weather they be to have on the morrow . from these instructions they be summon by the arrival of the coach ; and with many speech of thankfulness on 's side and as many bow on 's they depart . as soon as they have drive from the door , be call on by she cousin to give she opinion of all that she have see at , which , for 's sake , she make more favourable than it really be . but she commendation , though cost she some trouble , could by no means satisfy , and he be very soon oblige to take she ladyship 's praise into he own hand . 30 stay only a week at , but he visit be long enough to convince he of he daughter 's be most comfortably settled , and of she possesse such a husband and such a neighbour as be not often meet with . while be with they , devote he morning to drive he out in he gig , and show he the country ; but when he go away , the whole family return to they usual employment , and be thankful to find that they do not see more of she cousin by the alteration , for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner be now pass by he either at work in the garden or in reading and write , and look out of the window in he own book - room , which fronte the road . the room in which the lady sat be backwards . have at first rather wonder that should not prefer the dining - parlour for common use ; it be a better size room , and have a more pleasant aspect ; but she soon see that she friend have a excellent reason for what she do , for would undoubtedly have be much less in he own apartment , have they sit in one equally lively ; and she give credit for the arrangement . from the drawing - room they could distinguish nothing in the lane , and be indebt to for the knowledge of what carriage go along , and how often especially drive by in she phaeton , which he never fail come to inform they of , though it happen almost every day . she not unfrequently stop at the Parsonage , and have a few minute ' conversation with , but be scarcely ever prevail upon to get out . very few day pass in which do not walk to Rosings , and not many in which he wife do not think it necessary to go likewise ; and till recollect that there might be other family livings to be dispose of , she could not understand the sacrifice of so many hour . now and then they be honoure with a call from she ladyship , and nothing escape she observation that be pass in the room during these visit . she examine into they employment , look at they work , and advise they to do it differently ; find fault with the arrangement of the furniture ; or detect the housemaid in negligence ; and if she accept any refreshment , seem to do it only for the sake of find out that 's joint of meat be too large for she family . soon perceive , that though this great lady be not in commission of the peace of the county , she be a most active magistrate in she own parish , the minutest
minutest concern of which be carry to she by ; and whenever any of the cottager be dispose to be quarrelsome , discontent , or too poor , she sally forth into the village to settle they difference , silence they complaint , and scold they into harmony and plenty . the entertainment of dining at be repeat about twice a week ; and , allow for the loss of , and there be only one card - table in the evening , every such entertainment be the counterpart of the first . they other engagement be few , as the style of live in the neighbourhood in general be beyond 's reach . this , however , be no evil to , and upon the whole she spend she time comfortably enough ; there be half - hour of pleasant conversation with , and the weather be so fine for the time of year that she have often great enjoyment out of door . she favourite walk , and where she frequently go while the other be call on , be along the open grove which edge that side of the park , where there be a nice shelter path , which no one seem to value but herself , and where she feel beyond the reach of 's curiosity . in this quiet way , the first fortnight of she visit soon pass away . be approach , and the week precede it be to bring a addition to the family at , which in so small a circle must be important . have hear soon after she arrival that be expect there in the course of a few week , and though there be not many of she acquaintance whom she do not prefer , he come would furnish one comparatively new to look at in they Rosing party , and she might be amused in see how hopeless 's design on he be , by he behaviour to he cousin , for whom he be evidently destin by , who talk of he come with the greatest satisfaction , spoke of he in term of the highest admiration , and see almost angry to find that he have already be frequently see by and herself . he arrival be soon know at the Parsonage ; for be walk the whole morning within view of the lodg open into , in order to have the earliest assurance of it , and after make he bow as the carriage turn into the , hurrie home with the great intelligence . on the follow morning he hasten to to pay he respects . there be two nephew of to require they , for have bring with he a , the younger son of he uncle ----, and , to the great surprise of all the party , when return , the gentleman accompany he . have see they from she husband 's room , cross the road , and immediately run into the other , tell the girl what a honour they might expect , add : " I may thank you , , for this piece of civility . would never have come so soon to wait upon I . " have scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment , before they approach be announce by the door - bell , and shortly afterwards the three gentleman enter the room . , who lead the way , be about thirty , not handsome , but in person and address most truly the gentleman . look just as he have be use to look in --- pay he compliment , with he usual reserve , to , and whatever might be he feeling toward she friend , meet she with every appearance of composure . merely curtsey to he without say a word . enter into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well - breed man , and talk very pleasantly ; but he cousin , after have address a slight observation on the house and garden to , sit for some time without speak to anybody . at length , however , he civility be so far awaken as to inquire of after the health of she family . she answer he in the usual way , and after a moment 's pause , add : " my eldest sister have be in town these three month . have you never happen to see she there ? " she be perfectly sensible that he never have ; but she wish to see whether he would betray any consciousness of what have pass between the and , and she think he look a little confused as he answer that he have never be so fortunate as to meet . the subject be pursue no farther , and the gentleman soon afterwards go away . 31 's manners be very much admire at the Parsonage , and the lady all feel that he must add considerably to the pleasure of they engagement at Rosings . it be some day , however , before they receive any invitation thither --- for while there be visitor in the house , they could not be necessary ; and it be not till - day , almost a week after the gentleman 's arrival , that they be honoure by such a attention , and then they be merely ask on leave church to come there in the evening . for the last week they have see very little of or she daughter . have call at the Parsonage more than once during the time , but they have see only at church . the invitation be accept of course , and at a proper hour they join the party in 's drawing - room . she ladyship receive they civilly , but it be plain that they company be by no means so acceptable as when she could get
get nobody else ; and she be , in fact , almost engross by she nephew , speak to they , especially to , much more than to any other person in the room . seem really glad to see they ; anything be a welcome relief to he at Rosings ; and 's pretty friend have moreover catch he fancy very much . he now seat himself by she , and talk so agreeably of and , of travelling and stay at home , of new book and music , that have never be half so well entertaine in that room before ; and they converse with so much spirit and flow , as to draw the attention of herself , as well as of . he eye have be soon and repeatedly turn towards they with a look of curiosity ; and that she ladyship , after a while , share the feeling , be more openly acknowledge , for she do not scruple to call out : " what be that you be say , ? what be it you be talk of ? what be you tell ? let I hear what it be . " " we be speak of music , madam , " say he , when no longer able to avoid a reply . " of music ! then pray speak aloud . it be of all subject my delight . I must have my share in the conversation if you be speak of music . there be few people in , I suppose , who have more true enjoyment of music than myself , or a better natural taste . if I have ever learn , I should have be a great proficient . and so would , if she health have allow she to apply . I be confident that she would have perform delightfully . how do get on , ? " speak with affectionate praise of he sister 's proficiency . " I be very glad to hear such a good account of she , " say ; " and pray tell she from I , that she can not expect to excel if she do not practice a good deal . " " I assure you , madam , " he reply , " that she do not need such advice . she practise very constantly . " " so much the better . it can not be do too much ; and when I next write to she , I shall charge she not to neglect it on any account . I often tell young lady that no excellence in music be to be acquire without constant practice . I have tell Bennet several time , that she will never play really well unless she practise more ; and though have no instrument , she be very welcome , as I have often tell she , to come to Rosings every day , and play on the pianoforte in 's room . she would be in nobody 's way , you know , in that part of the house . " look a little ashamed of he aunt 's ill - breeding , and make no answer . when coffee be over , reminde of have promise to play to he ; and she sit down directly to the instrument . he draw a chair near she . listen to half a song , and then talk , as before , to she other nephew ; till the latter walk away from she , and make with he usual deliberation towards the pianoforte station himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer 's countenance . see what he be do , and at the first convenient pause , turn to he with a arch smile , and say : " you mean to frighten I , , by come in all this state to hear I ? I will not be alarm though you sister do play so well . there be a stubbornness about I that never can bear to be frightene at the will of other . my courage always rise at every attempt to intimidate I . " " I shall not say you be mistaken , " he reply , " because you could not really believe I to entertain any design of alarme you ; and I have have the pleasure of you acquaintance long enough to know that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinion which in fact be not you own . " laugh heartily at this picture of herself , and say to , " you cousin will give you a very pretty notion of I , and teach you not to believe a word I say . I be particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so able to expose my real character , in a part of the world where I have hope to pass myself off with some degree of credit . indeed , , it be very ungenerous in you to mention all that you know to my disadvantage in --- and , give I leave to say , very impolitic too --- for it be provoke I to retaliate , and such thing may come out as will shock you relation to hear . " " I be not afraid of you , " say he , smilingly . " pray let I hear what you have to accuse he of , " cry . " I should like to know how he behave among strangers . " " you shall hear then --- but prepare yourself for something very dreadful . the first time of my ever see he in , you must know , be at a ball --- and at this ball , what do you think he do ? he dance only four dance , though gentleman be scarce ; and , to my certain
certain knowledge , more than one young lady be sit down in want of a partner . , you can not deny the fact . " " I have not at that time the honour of know any lady in the assembly beyond my own party . " " true ; and nobody can ever be introduce in a ball - room . well , , what do I play next ? my finger wait you order . " " perhaps , " say , " I should have judge better , have I seek a introduction ; but I be ill - qualified to recommend myself to stranger . " " shall we ask you cousin the reason of this ? " say , still address . " shall we ask he why a man of sense and education , and who have live in the world , be ill qualified to recommend himself to stranger ? " " I can answer you question , " say , " without apply to he . it be because he will not give himself the trouble . " " I certainly have not the talent which some people possess , " say , " of converse easily with those I have never see before . I can not catch they tone of conversation , or appear interested in they concern , as I often see done . " " my finger , " say , " do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which I see so many woman 's do . they have not the same force or rapidity , and do not produce the same expression . but then I have always suppose it to be my own fault --- because I will not take the trouble of practising . it be not that I do not believe my finger as capable as any other woman 's of superior execution . " smile and say , " you be perfectly right . you have employ you time much better . no one admit to the privilege of hear you can think anything want . we neither of we perform to strangers . " here they be interrupt by , who call out to know what they be talk of . immediately begin play again . approach , and , after listen for a few minute , say to : " would not play at all amiss if she practise more , and could have the advantage of a master . she have a very good notion of fingering , though she taste be not equal to 's . Anne would have be a delightful performer , have she health allow she to learn . " look at to see how cordially he assent to he cousin 's praise ; but neither at that moment nor at any other could she discern any symptom of love ; and from the whole of he behaviour to she derive this comfort for , that he might have be just as likely to marry she , have she be he relation . continue she remark on 's performance , mix with they many instruction on execution and taste . receive they with all the forbearance of civility , and , at the request of the gentleman , remain at the instrument till she ladyship 's carriage be ready to take they all home . 32 be sit by herself the next morning , and write to while and be go on business into the village , when she be start by a ring at the door , the certain signal of a visitor . as she have hear no carriage , she think it not unlikely to be , and under that apprehension be put away she half - finish letter that she might escape all impertinent question , when the door open , and , to she very great surprise , , and only , enter the room . he seem astonished too on find she alone , and apologise for he intrusion by let she know that he have understood all the lady be to be within . they then sit down , and when she inquiry after Rosings be make , see in danger of sinke into total silence . it be absolutely necessary , therefore , to think of something , and in this emergence recollect when she have see he last in , and feel curiious to know what he would say on the subject of they hasty departure , she observe : " how very suddenly you all quit last , ! it must have be a most agreeable surprise to to see you all after he so soon ; for , if I recollect right , he go but the day before . he and he sister be well , I hope , when you leave ? " " perfectly so , I thank you . " she find that she be to receive no other answer , and , after a short pause add : " I think I have understood that have not much idea of ever return to again ? " " I have never hear he say so ; but it be probable that he may spend very little of he time there in the future . he have many friend , and be at a time of life when friend and engagement be continually increase . " " if he mean to be but little at , it would be better for the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely , for then we might possibly get a settled family there . but , perhaps , do not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for he own , and we must expect he to keep it or quit it on the same principle . " " I should not be surprised
surprised , " say , " if he be to give it up as soon as any eligible purchase offer . " make no answer . she be afraid of talk longer of he friend ; and , have nothing else to say , be now determined to leave the trouble of find a subject to he . he take the hint , and soon begin with , " this seem a very comfortable house . , I believe , do a great deal to it when first come to . " " I believe she do --- and I be sure she could not have bestow she kindness on a more grateful object . " " appear to be very fortunate in he choice of a wife . " " yes , indeed , he friend may well rejoice in he have meet with one of the very few sensible woman who would have accept he , or have make he happy if they have . my friend have a excellent understanding --- though I be not certain that I consider she marry as the wisest thing she ever do . she seem perfectly happy , however , and in a prudential light it be certainly a very good match for she . " " it must be very agreeable for she to be settle within so easy a distance of she own family and friend . " " a easy distance , do you call it ? it be nearly fifty mile . " " and what be fifty miles of good road ? little more than half a day 's journey . yes , I call it a very easy distance . " " I should never have consider the distance as one of the advantages of the match , " cry . " I should never have say be settle near she family . " " it be a proof of you own attachment to . anything beyond the very neighbourhood of , I suppose , would appear far . " as he speak there be a sort of smile which fancie she understood ; he must be suppose she to be think of and , and she blush as she answer : " I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settle too near she family . the far and the near must be relative , and depend on many varying circumstance . where there be fortune to make the expense of travel unimportant , distance become no evil . but that be not the case here . and have a comfortable income , but not such a one as will allow of frequent journey --- and I be persuade my friend would not call herself near she family under less than half the present distance . " draw he chair a little towards she , and say , " can not have a right to such very strong local attachment . you can not have be always at . " look surprised . the gentleman experience some change of feeling ; he draw back he chair , take a newspaper from the table , and glance over it , say , in a colder voice : " be you pleas with ? " a short dialogue on the subject of the country ensue , on either side calm and concise --- and soon put a end to by the entrance of and she sister , just return from she walk . the tete - a - tete surprise they . relate the mistake which have occasion he intruding on , and after sit a few minute longer without say much to anybody , go away . " what can be the meaning of this ? " say , as soon as he be gone . " my dear , , he must be in love with you , or he would never have call we in this familiar way . " but when tell of he silence ; it do not seem very likely , even to 's wish , to be the case ; and after various conjecture , they could at last only suppose he visit to proceed from the difficulty of find anything to do , which be the more probable from the time of year . all field sport be over . within door there be Lady Catherine , book , and a billiard - table , but gentleman can not always be within door ; and in the nearness of the Parsonage , or the pleasantness of the walk to it , or of the people who live in it , the two cousins find a temptation from this period of walk thither almost every day . they call at various time of the morning , sometimes separately , sometimes together , and now and then accompany by they aunt . it be plain to they all that come because he have pleasure in they society , a persuasion which of course recommend he still more ; and be reminde by she own satisfaction in be with he , as well as by he evident admiration of she , of she former favourite ; and though , in compare they , she see there be less captivating softness in 's manners , she believe he might have the best inform mind . but why come so often to the Parsonage , it be more difficult to understand . it could not be for society , as he frequently sit there ten minute together without open he lip ; and when he do speak , it seem the effect of necessity rather than of choice --- a sacrifice to propriety , not a pleasure to himself . he seldom appear really animated . know not what to make of he . 's occasionally laugh at he stupidity , prove that he be generally different , which she
she own knowledge of he could not have tell she ; and as she would like to have believe this change the effect of love , and the object of that love she friend , she set herself seriously to work to find it out . she watch he whenever they be at , and whenever he come to ; but without much success . he certainly look at she friend a great deal , but the expression of that look be disputable . it be a earnest , steadfast gaze , but she often doubt whether there be much admiration in it , and sometimes it seem nothing but absence of mind . she have once or twice suggest to the possibility of he be partial to she , but always laugh at the idea ; and do not think it right to press the subject , from the danger of raising expectation which might only end in disappointment ; for in she opinion it admit not of a doubt , that all she friend 's dislike would vanish , if she could suppose he to be in she power . in she kind scheme for , she sometimes plan she marry . he be beyond comparison the most pleasant man ; he certainly admire she , and he situation in life be most eligible ; but , to counterbalance these advantage , have considerable patronage in the church , and he cousin could have none at all . 33 more than once do , in she ramble within the park , unexpectedly meet . she feel all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring he where no one else be bring , and , to prevent its ever happen again , take care to inform he at first that it be a favourite haunt of hers . how it could occur a second time , therefore , be very odd ! yet it do , and even a third . it seem like wilful ill - nature , or a voluntary penance , for on these occasion it be not merely a few formal inquiry and a awkward pause and then away , but he actually think it necessary to turn back and walk with she . he never say a great deal , nor do she give herself the trouble of talking or of listen much ; but it strike she in the course of they third rencontre that he be ask some odd unconnected question --- about she pleasure in be at , she love of solitary walk , and she opinion of and 's happiness ; and that in speak of Rosings and she not perfectly understand the house , he seem to expect that whenever she come into again she would be stay there too . he word seem to imply it . could he have in he thought ? she suppose , if he mean anything , he must mean a allusion to what might arise in that quarter . it distress she a little , and she be quite glad to find herself at the gate in the pale opposite the Parsonage . she be engage one day as she walk , in peruse 's last letter , and dwell on some passage which prove that have not write in spirits , when , instead of be again surprise by , she see on look up that be meet she . put away the letter immediately and force a smile , she say : " I do not know before that you ever walk this way . " " I have be make the tour of the park , " he reply , " as I generally do every year , and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage . be you go much farther ? " " no , I should have turn in a moment . " and accordingly she do turn , and they walk towards the Parsonage together . " do you certainly leave on ? " say she . " yes --- if do not put it off again . but I be at he disposal . he arrange the business just as he please . " " and if not able to please himself in the arrangement , he have at least pleasure in the great power of choice . I do not know anybody who seem more to enjoy the power of do what he like than . " " he like to have he own way very well , " reply . " but so we all do . it be only that he have better means of have it than many other , because he be rich , and many other be poor . I speak feelingly . a younger son , you know , must be inure to self - denial and dependence . " " in my opinion , the younger son of a earl can know very little of either . now seriously , what have you ever know of self - denial and dependence ? when have you be prevent by want of money from go wherever you choose , or procure anything you have a fancy for ? " " these be home question --- and perhaps I can not say that I have experience many hardship of that nature . but in matter of greater weight , I may suffer from want of money . younger son can not marry where they like . " " unless where they like woman of fortune , which I think they very often do . " " we habits of expense make we too dependent , and there be too many in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to money . " " be this , " think , " mean for I ? " and she colour at the idea
idea ; but , recover herself , say in a lively tone , " and pray , what be the usual price of a earl 's younger son ? unless the elder brother be very sickly , I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pound . " he answer she in the same style , and the subject drop . to interrupt a silence which might make he fancy she affect with what have pass , she soon afterwards say : " I imagine you cousin bring you down with he chiefly for the sake of have someone at he disposal . I wonder he do not marry , to secure a lasting convenience of that kind . but , perhaps , he sister do as well for the present , and , as she be under he sole care , he may do what he like with she . " " no , " say , " that be a advantage which he must divide with I . I be join with he in the guardianship of . " " be you indeed ? and pray what sort of guardian do you make ? do you charge give you much trouble ? young lady of she age be sometimes a little difficult to manage , and if she have the true Darcy spirit , she may like to have she own way . " as she speak she observe he look at she earnestly ; and the manner in which he immediately ask she why she suppose likely to give they any uneasiness , convince she that she have somehow or other get pretty near the truth . she directly reply : " you need not be frightene . I never hear any harm of she ; and I dare say she be one of the most tractable creature in the world . she be a very great favourite with some lady of my acquaintance , and . I think I have hear you say that you know they . " " I know they a little . they brother be a pleasant gentlemanlike man --- he be a great friend of 's . " " oh ! yes , " say drily ; " be uncommonly kind to , and take a prodigious deal of care of he . " " care of he ! yes , I really believe do take care of he in those point where he must want care . from something that he tell I in we journey hither , I have reason to think very much indebt to he . but I ought to beg he pardon , for I have no right to suppose that be the person mean . it be all conjecture . " " what be it you mean ? " " it be a circumstance which could not wish to be generally know , because if it be to get round to the lady 's family , it would be a unpleasant thing . " " you may depend upon my not mention it . " " and remember that I have not much reason for suppose it to be . what he tell I be merely this : that he congratulate himself on have lately save a friend from the inconvenience of a most imprudent marriage , but without mention name or any other particular , and I only suspect it to be from believe he the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort , and from know they to have be together the whole of last summer . " " do give you reason for this interference ? " " I understand that there be some very strong objection against the lady . " " and what arts do he use to separate they ? " " he do not talk to I of he own art , " say , smile . " he only tell I what I have now tell you . " make no answer , and walk on , she heart swell with indignation . after watch she a little , ask she why she be so thoughtful . " I be think of what you have be tell I , " say she . " you cousin 's conduct do not suit my feeling . why be he to be the judge ? " " you be rather dispose to call he interference officious ? " " I do not see what right have to decide on the propriety of he friend 's inclination , or why , upon he own judgement alone , he be to determine and direct in what manner he friend be to be happy . but , " she continue , recollect herself , " as we know none of the particular , it be not fair to condemn he . it be not to be suppose that there be much affection in the case . " " that be not a unnatural surmise , " say , " but it be a lessening of the honour of my cousin 's triumph very sadly . " this be speak jestingly ; but it appear to she so just a picture of , that she would not trust herself with a answer , and therefore , abruptly change the conversation talk on indifferent matter until they reach the Parsonage . there , shut into she own room , as soon as they visitor leave they , she could think without interruption of all that she have hear . it be not to be suppose that any other people could be mean than those with whom she be connect . there could not exist in the world two man over whom could have such boundless influence . that he have be concerned in the measure take to separate and she have never doubt ; but she have always attribute to
to the principal design and arrangement of they . if he own vanity , however , do not mislead he , he be the cause , he pride and caprice be the cause , of all that have suffer , and still continue to suffer . he have ruin for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate , generous heart in the world ; and no one could say how last a evil he might have inflict . " there be some very strong objection against the lady , " be 's word ; and those strong objection probably be , she have one uncle who be a country attorney , and another who be in business in . " to herself , " she exclaim , " there could be no possibility of objection ; all loveliness and goodness as she be !-- she understanding excellent , she mind improve , and she manners captivat . neither could anything be urge against my father , who , though with some peculiarity , have ability himself need not disdain , and respectability which he will probably never each . " when she think of she mother , she confidence give way a little ; but she would not allow that any objection there have material weight with , whose pride , she be convinced , would receive a deeper wound from the want of importance in he friend 's connection , than from they want of sense ; and she be quite decided , at last , that he have be partly govern by this worst kind of pride , and partly by the wish of retain for he sister . the agitation and tear which the subject occasion , bring on a headache ; and it grow so much worse towards the evening , that , add to she unwillingness to see , it determine she not to attend she cousin to , where they be engage to drink tea . , see that she be really unwell , do not press she to go and as much as possible prevent she husband from press she ; but could not conceal he apprehension of 's be rather displease by she stay at home . 34 when they be gone , , as if intend to exasperate herself as much as possible against , choose for she employment the examination of all the letter which have write to she since she be in . they contain no actual complaint , nor be there any revival of past occurrence , or any communication of present suffering . but in all , and in almost every line of each , there be a want of that cheerfulness which have be use to characterise she style , and which , proceed from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly dispose towards everyone , have be scarcely ever cloude . notice every sentence convey the idea of uneasiness , with a attention which it have hardly receive on the first perusal . Darcy's shameful boast of what misery he have be able to inflict , give she a keener sense of she sister 's suffering . it be some consolation to think that he visit to be to end on the day after the next --- and , a still greater , that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with again , and enable to contribute to the recovery of she spirit , by all that affection could do . she could not think of 's leave without remember that he cousin be to go with he ; but have make it clear that he have no intentions at all , and agreeable as he be , she do not mean to be unhappy about he . while settle this point , she be suddenly rouse by the sound of the door - bell , and she spirit be a little flutter by the idea of its be himself , who have once before call late in the evening , and might now come to inquire particularly after she . but this idea be soon banish , and she spirit be very differently affect , when , to she utter amazement , she see Darcy walk into the room . in a hurried manner he immediately begin a inquiry after she health , imput he visit to a wish of hearing that she be better . she answer he with cold civility . he sit down for a few moment , and then get up , walk about the room . be surprised , but say not a word . after a silence of several minute , he come towards she in a agitated manner , and thus begin : " in vain I have struggle . it will not do . my feeling will not be repress . you must allow I to tell you how ardently I admire and love you . " 's astonishment be beyond expression . she star , colour , doubt , and be silent . this he consider sufficient encouragement ; and the avowal of all that he feel , and have long felt for she , immediately follow . he speak well ; but there be feeling besides those of the heart to be detailead ; and he be not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride . he sense of she inferiority --- of it be be a degradation --- of the family obstacle which have always opposed to inclination , be dwelt on with a warmth which see due to the consequence he be wounding , but be very unlikely to recommend he suit . in spite of she deeply - root dislike , she could not be insensible to the compliment of such a man 's affection , and though she intention do not vary for a instant , she be
be at first sorry for the pain he be to receive ; till , rouse to resentment by he subsequent language , she lose all compassion in anger . she try , however , to compose herself to answer he with patience , when he should have do . he conclude with represent to she the strength of that attachment which , in spite of all he endeavour , he have find impossible to conquer ; and with express he hope that it would now be reward by she acceptance of he hand . as he say this , she could easily see that he have no doubt of a favourable answer . he spoke of apprehension and anxiety , but he countenance express real security . such a circumstance could only exasperate farther , and , when he cease , the colour rise into she cheek , and she say : " in such case as this , it be , I believe , the establish mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiment avow , however unequally they may be return . it be natural that obligation should be feel , and if I could feel gratitude , I would now thank you . but I can not --- I have never desire you good opinion , and you have certainly bestow it most unwillingly . I be sorry to have occasion pain to anyone . it have be most unconsciously done , however , and I hope will be of short duration . the feeling which , you tell I , have long prevent the acknowledgment of you regard , can have little difficulty in overcome it after this explanation . " , who be lean against the mantelpiece with he eye fix on she face , seem to catch she word with no less resentment than surprise . he complexion become pale with anger , and the disturbance of he mind be visible in every feature . he be struggle for the appearance of composure , and would not open he lip till he believe himself to have attaine it . the pause be to 's feeling dreadful . at length , with a voice of force calmness , he say : " and this be all the reply which I be to have the honour of expecting ! I might , perhaps , wish to be inform why , with so little endeavour at civility , I be thus reject . but it be of small importance . " " I might as well inquire , " reply she , " why with so evident a desire of offending and insult I , you choose to tell I that you like I against you will , against you reason , and even against you character ? be not this some excuse for incivility , if I be uncivil ? but I have other provocation . you know I have . have not my feeling decide against you --- have they be indifferent , or have they even be favourable , do you think that any consideration would tempt I to accept the man who have be the means of ruining , perhaps for ever , the happiness of a most beloved sister ? " as she pronounce these word , change colour ; but the emotion be short , and he listen without attempt to interrupt she while she continue : " I have every reason in the world to think ill of you . no motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you act there . you dare not , you can not deny , that you have be the principal , if not the only means of divide they from each other --- of expose one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability , and the other to its derision for disappointed hope , and involve they both in misery of the acutest kind . " she pause , and see with no slight indignation that he be listen with a air which prove he wholly unmove by any feeling of remorse . he even look at she with a smile of affect incredulity . " can you deny that you have do it ? " she repeat . with assume tranquillity he then reply : " I have no wish of denying that I do everything in my power to separate my friend from you sister , or that I rejoice in my success . towards he I have be kinder than towards myself . " disdain the appearance of notice this civil reflection , but it be mean do not escape , nor be it likely to conciliate she . " but it be not merely this affair , " she continue , " on which my dislike be founde . long before it have take place my opinion of you be decide . you character be unfolded in the recital which I receive many month ago from . on this subject , what can you have to say ? in what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself ? or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon other ? " " you take a eager interest in that gentleman 's concern , " say , in a less tranquil tone , and with a heighten colour . " who that know what he misfortune have be , can help feel a interest in he ? " " he misfortune ! " repeat contemptuously ; " yes , he misfortune have be great indeed . " " and of you infliction , " cry with energy . " you have reduce he to he present state of poverty --- comparative poverty . you have withheld the advantages which you must know to have be design for he . you have deprive the best year of he life of that independence which be no
no less he due than he desert . you have do all this ! and yet you can treat the mention of he misfortune with contempt and ridicule . " " and this , " cry , as he walk with quick step across the room , " be you opinion of I ! this be the estimation in which you hold I ! I thank you for explain it so fully . my fault , accord to this calculation , be heavy indeed ! but perhaps , " add he , stop in he walk , and turn towards she , " these offense might have be overlook , have not you pride be hurt by my honest confession of the scruple that have long prevent my form any serious design . these bitter accusation might have be suppress , have I , with greater policy , conceal my struggle , and flatter you into the belief of my be impell by unqualified , unalloyed inclination ; by reason , by reflection , by everything . but disguise of every sort be my abhorrence . be I asham of the feeling I relate . they be natural and just . could you expect I to rejoice in the inferiority of you connection ? -- to congratulate myself on the hope of relation , whose condition in life be so decidedly beneath my own ? " feel herself grow more angry every moment ; yet she try to the utmost to speak with composure when she say : " you be mistaken , , if you suppose that the mode of you declaration affect I in any other way , than as it spare the concern which I might have feel in refuse you , have you behave in a more gentlemanlike manner . " she see he start at this , but he say nothing , and she continue : " you could not have make the offer of you hand in any possible way that would have temp I to accept it . " again he astonishment be obvious ; and he look at she with a expression of mingled incredulity and mortification . she go on : " from the very beginning --- from the first moment , I may almost say --- of my acquaintance with you , you manners , impress I with the fullest belief of you arrogance , you conceit , and you selfish disdain of the feeling of other , be such as to form the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeed event have build so immovable a dislike ; and I have not know you a month before I feel that you be the last man in the world whom I could ever be prevail on to marry . " " you have say quite enough , madam . I perfectly comprehend you feeling , and have now only to be asham of what my own have be . forgive I for have take up so much of you time , and accept my best wish for you health and happiness . " and with these word he hastily leave the room , and hear he the next moment open the front door and quit the house . the tumult of she mind , be now painfully great . she know not how to support herself , and from actual weakness sit down and cry for half - a - hour . she astonishment , as she reflect on what have pass , be increase by every review of it . that she should receive a offer of marriage from ! that he should have be in love with she for so many month ! so much in love as to wish to marry she in spite of all the objection which have make he prevent he friend 's marry she sister , and which must appear at least with equal force in he own case --- be almost incredible ! it be gratify to have inspire unconsciously so strong a affection . but he pride , he abominable pride --- he shameless avowal of what he have do with respect to --- he unpardonable assurance in acknowledging , though he could not justify it , and the unfeeling manner in which he have mention , he cruelty towards whom he have not attempt to deny , soon overcome the pity which the consideration of he attachment have for a moment excited . she continue in very agitated reflection till the sound of 's carriage make she feel how unequal she be to encounter 's observation , and hurrie she away to she room . 35 awoke the next morning to the same thought and meditations which have at length close she eye . she could not yet recover from the surprise of what have happen ; it be impossible to think of anything else ; and , totally indispose for employment , she resolve , soon after breakfast , to indulge herself in air and exercise . she be proceed directly to she favourite walk , when the recollection of 's sometimes come there stop she , and instead of enter the park , she turn up the lane , which lead farther from the turnpike - road . the park paling be still the boundary on one side , and she soon pass one of the gate into the ground . after walk two or three time along that part of the lane , she be temp , by the pleasantness of the morning , to stop at the gate and look into the park . the five week which she have now pass in have make a great difference in the country , and every day be add to the verdure of the early tree . she be on the point of continue she walk , when she catch a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove
grove which edge the park ; he be move that way ; and , fearful of its be , she be directly retreat . but the person who advance be now near enough to see she , and step forward with eagerness , pronounce she name . she have turn away ; but on hearing herself call , though in a voice which prove it to be , she move again towards the gate . he have by that time reach it also , and , hold out a letter , which she instinctively take , say , with a look of haughty composure , " I have be walk in the grove some time in the hope of meet you . will you do I the honour of read that letter ? " and then , with a slight bow , turn again into the plantation , and be soon out of sight . with no expectation of pleasure , but with the strongest curiosity , open the letter , and , to she still increase , perceive a envelope contain two sheet of letter - paper , write quite through , in a very close hand . the envelope itself be likewise full . pursue she way along the lane , she then begin it . it be date from , at eight o'clock in the morning , and be as follow :-- " be not alarm , madam , on receive this letter , by the apprehension of its contain any repetition of those sentiment or renewal of those offer which be last night so disgusting to you . I write without any intention of pain you , or humbl myself , by dwelling on wish which , for the happiness of both , can not be too soon forget ; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion , should have be spare , have not my character require it to be write and read . you must , therefore , pardon the freedom with which I demand you attention ; you feeling , I know , will bestow it unwillingly , but I demand it of you justice . " two offense of a very different nature , and by no means of equal magnitude , you last night lay to my charge . the first mentioned be , that , regardless of the sentiment of either , I have detach from you sister , and the other , that I have , in defiance of various claim , in defiance of honour and humanity , ruin the immediate prosperity and blast the prospects of . Wilfully and wantonly to have throw off the companion of my youth , the acknowledge favourite of my father , a young man who have scarcely any other dependence than on we patronage , and who have be bring up to expect its exertion , would be a depravity , to which the separation of two young person , whose affection could be the growth of only a few week , could bear no comparison . but from the severity of that blame which be last night so liberally bestow , respecte each circumstance , I shall hope to be in the future secure , when the follow account of my action and they motive have be read . if , in the explanation of they , which be due to myself , I be under the necessity of relate feeling which may be offensive to yours , I can only say that I be sorry . the necessity must be obey , and further apology would be absurd . " I have not be long in , before I see , in common with other , that prefer you elder sister to any other young woman in the country . but it be not till the evening of the dance at that I have any apprehension of he feeling a serious attachment . I have often see he in love before . at that ball , while I have the honour of dancing with you , I be first make acquainted , by 's accidental information , that 's attention to you sister have give rise to a general expectation of they marriage . he speak of it as a certain event , of which the time alone could be undecided . from that moment I observ my friend 's behaviour attentively ; and I could then perceive that he partiality for be beyond what I have ever witness in he . you sister I also watch . she look and manners be open , cheerful , and engage as ever , but without any symptom of peculiar regard , and I remain convinced from the evening 's scrutiny , that though she receive he attention with pleasure , she do not invite they by any participation of sentiment . if you have not be mistaken here , I must have be in error . you superior knowledge of you sister must make the latter probable . if it be so , if I have be misl by such error to inflict pain on she , you resentment have not be unreasonable . but I shall not scruple to assert , that the serenity of you sister 's countenance and air be such as might have give the most acute observer a conviction that , however amiable she temper , she heart be not likely to be easily touch . that I be desirous of believe she indifferent be certain --- but I will venture to say that my investigation and decision be not usually influence by my hope or fear . I do not believe she to be indifferent because I wish it ; I believe it on impartial conviction , as truly as I wish it in reason . my objection to the marriage be not merely those which i last
last night acknowledge to have the utmost force of passion to put aside , in my own case ; the want of connection could not be so great a evil to my friend as to I . but there be other cause of repugnance ; cause which , though still exist , and exist to a equal degree in both instance , I have myself endeavoure to forget , because they be not immediately before I . these cause must be state , though briefly . the situation of you mother 's family , though objectionable , be nothing in comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently , so almost uniformly betraye by herself , by you three younger sister , and occasionally even by you father . pardon I . it pain I to offend you . but amidst you concern for the defects of you nearest relation , and you displeasure at this representation of they , let it give you consolation to consider that , to have conduct yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure , be praise no less generally bestow on you and you elder sister , than it be honourable to the sense and disposition of both . I will only say farther that from what pass that evening , my opinion of all party be confirm , and every inducement heighten which could have lead I before , to preserve my friend from what I esteem a most unhappy connection . he leave for , on the day follow , as you , I be certain , remember , with the design of soon return . " the part which I act be now to be explain . he sister 's uneasiness have be equally excited with my own ; we coincidence of feeling be soon discover , and , alike sensible that no time be to be lose in detach they brother , we shortly resolve on join he directly in . we accordingly go --- and there I readily engage in the office of point out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice . I describe , and enforce they earnestly . but , however this remonstrance might have stagger or delay he determination , I do not suppose that it would ultimately have prevent the marriage , have it not be seconde by the assurance that I hesitate not in give , of you sister 's indifference . he have before believe she to return he affection with sincere , if not with equal regard . but have great natural modesty , with a stronger dependence on my judgement than on he own . to convince he , therefore , that he have deceive himself , be no very difficult point . to persuade he against return into , when that conviction have be give , be scarcely the work of a moment . I can not blame myself for have do thus much . there be but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not reflect with satisfaction ; it be that I condescende to adopt the measure of art so far as to conceal from he you sister 's be in town . I know it myself , as it be know to ; but she brother be even yet ignorant of it . that they might have meet without ill consequence be perhaps probable ; but he regard do not appear to I enough extinguish for he to see she without some danger . perhaps this concealment , this disguise be beneath I ; it be done , however , and it be done for the best . on this subject I have nothing more to say , no other apology to offer . if I have wound you sister 's feeling , it be unknowingly do and though the motives which govern I may to you very naturally appear insufficient , I have not yet learn to condemn they . " with respect to that other , more weighty accusation , of have injur , I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of he connection with my family . of what he have particularly accuse I I be ignorant ; but of the truth of what I shall relate , I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity . " be the son of a very respectable man , who have for many year the management of all the estate , and whose good conduct in the discharge of he trust naturally inclin my father to be of service to he ; and on , who be he godson , he kindness be therefore liberally bestow . my father support he at school , and afterwards at --- most important assistance , as he own father , always poor from the extravagance of he wife , would have be unable to give he a gentleman 's education . my father be not only fond of this young man 's society , whose manner be always engage ; he have also the highest opinion of he , and hope the church would be he profession , intend to provide for he in it . as for myself , it be many , many year since I first begin to think of he in a very different manner . the vicious propensity --- the want of principle , which he be careful to guard from the knowledge of he best friend , could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself , and who have opportunity of see he in unguarded moment , which could not have . here again shall give you pain --- to what degree you only can tell . but whatever may be the sentiment which have create , a suspicion of they nature shall not prevent
prevent I from unfolding he real character --- it add even another motive . " my excellent father die about five year ago ; and he attachment to be to the last so steady , that in he will he particularly recommend it to I , to promote he advancement in the best manner that he profession might allow --- and if he take order , desire that a valuable family living might be he as soon as it become vacant . there be also a legacy of one thousand pound . he own father do not long survive mine , and within half a year from these event , write to inform I that , have finally resolve against take order , he hope I should not think it unreasonable for he to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage , in lieu of the preferment , by which he could not be benefit . he have some intention , he add , of study law , and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pound would be a very insufficient support therein . I rather wish , than believe he to be sincere ; but , at any rate , be perfectly ready to accede to he proposal . I know that ought not to be a clergyman ; the business be therefore soon settle --- he resign all claim to assistance in the church , be it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it , and accept in return three thousand pound . all connection between we seem now dissolve . I think too ill of he to invite he to , or admit he society in town . in town I believe he chiefly liv , but he study the law be a mere pretence , and be now free from all restraint , he life be a life of idleness and dissipation . for about three year I hear little of he ; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which have be design for he , he apply to I again by letter for the presentation . he circumstance , he assure I , and I have no difficulty in believe it , be exceedingly bad . he have find the law a most unprofitable study , and be now absolutely resolve on be ordain , if I would present he to the living in question --- of which he trust there could be litle doubt , as he be well assure that I have no other person to provide for , and I could not have forget my rever father 's intention . you will hardly blame I for refuse to comply with this entreaty , or for resist every repetition to it . he resentment be in proportion to the distress of he circumstance --- and he be doubtless as violent in he abuse of I to other as in he reproach to myself . after this period every appearance of acquaintance be drop . how he liv I know not . but last summer he be again most painfully obtrude on my notice . " I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself , and which no obligation less than the present should induce I to unfold to any human being . have say thus much , I feel no doubt of you secrecy . my sister , who be more than ten year my junior , be leave to the guardianship of my mother 's nephew , , and myself . about a year ago , she be take from school , and a establishment form for she in ; and last summer she go with the lady who preside over it , to Ramsgate ; and thither also go , undoubtedly by design ; for there prove to have be a prior acquaintance between he and , in whose character we be most unhappily deceive ; and by she connivance and aid , he so far recommend himself to , whose affectionate heart retain a strong impression of he kindness to she as a child , that she be persuade to believe herself in love , and to consent to a elopement . she be then but fifteen , which must be she excuse ; and after state she imprudence , I be happy to add , that I owe the knowledge of it to herself . I join they unexpectedly a day or two before the intend elopement , and then , unable to support the idea of grieve and offend a brother whom she almost look up to as a father , acknowledge the whole to I . you may imagine what I feel and how I act . regard for my sister 's credit and feeling prevent any public exposure ; but I write to , who leave the place immediately , and be of course remove from she charge . 's chief object be unquestionably my sister 's fortune , which be thirty thousand pound ; but I can not help suppose that the hope of revenge himself on I be a strong inducement . he revenge would have be complete indeed . " this , madam , be a faithful narrative of every event in which we have be concerned together ; and if you do not absolutely reject it as false , you will , I hope , acquit I henceforth of cruelty towards . I know not in what manner , under what form of falsehood he have impos on you ; but he success be not perhaps to be wonder at . ignorant as you previously be of everything concern either , detection could not be in you power , and suspicion certainly not in you inclination . " you may possibly wonder why all this be not tell you last night ; but I be not
not then master enough of myself to know what could or ink to be reveal . for the truth of everything here relate , I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of , who , from we near relationship and constant intimacy , and , still more , as one of the executor of my father 's will , have be unavoidably acquaint with every particular of these transaction . if you abhorrence of I should make my assertion valueless , you can not be prevent by the same cause from confiding in my cousin ; and that there may be the possibility of consult he , I shall endeaavor to find some opportunity of put this letter in you hand in the course of the morning . I will only add , bless you . 36 , when give she the letter , do not expect it to contain a renewal of he offer , she have form no expectation at all of its contents . but such as they be , it may well be suppose how eagerly she go through they , and what a contrariety of emotion they excit . she feeling as she read be scarcely to be define . with amazement do she first understand that he believe any apology to be in he power ; and steadfastly be she persuade , that he could have no explanation to give , which a just sense of shame would not conceal . with a strong prejudice against everything he might say , she begin he account of what have happene at . she read with a eagerness which hardly leave she power of comprehension , and from impatience of know what the next sentence might bring , be incapable of attend to the sense of the one before she eye . he belief of she sister 's insensibility she instantly resolve to be false ; and he account of the real , the worst objection to the match , make she too angry to have any wish of do he justice . he express no regret for what he have do which satisfy she ; he style be not penitent , but haughty . it be all pride and insolence . but when this subject be succeed by he account of --- when she read with somewhat clearer attention a relation of event which , if true , must overthrow every cherish opinion of he worth , and which bear so alarme a affinity to he own history of himself --- she feeling be yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition . Astonishment , apprehension , and even horror , oppress she . she wish to discredit it entirely , repeatedly exclaim , " this must be false ! this can not be ! this must be the grossest falsehood ! " --- and when she have go through the whole letter , though scarcely know anything of the last page or two , put it hastily away , protest that she would not regard it , that she would never look in it again . in this perturbed state of mind , with thoughts that could rest on nothing , she walk on ; but it would not do ; in half a minute the letter be unfolded again , and collect herself as well as she could , she again begin the mortifying perusal of all that related to , and command herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence . the account of he connection with the family be exactly what he have relate himself ; and the kindness of the late , though she have not before know its extent , agree equally well with he own word . so far each recital confirm the other ; but when she come to the will , the difference be great . what have say of the living be fresh in she memory , and as she recal he very word , it be impossible not to feel that there be gross duplicity on one side or the other ; and , for a few moment , she flatter herself that she wish do not err . but when she read and re-read with the closest attention , the particular immediately follow of 's resign all pretension to the living , of he receive in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pound , again be she force to hesitate . she put down the letter , weigh every circumstance with what she mean to be impartiality --- deliberat on the probability of each statement --- but with little success . on both side it be only assertion . again she read on ; but every line prove more clearly that the affair , which she have believe it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render 's conduct in it less than infamous , be capable of a turn which must make he entirely blameless throughout the whole . the extravagance and general profligacy which he scruple not to lay at 's charge , exceedingly shock she ; the more so , as she could bring no proof of its injustice . she have never hear of he before he entrance into the ---- shire , in which he have engage at the persuasion of the young man who , on meet he accidentally in town , have there renew a slight acquaintance . of he former way of life nothing have be know in but what he tell himself . as to he real character , have information be in she power , she have never feel a wish of inquiring . he countenance , voice , and manner have establish he at once in the possession of every virtue . she try to recollect some instance of goodness , some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence , that might rescue he from
from the attack of ; or at least , by the predominance of virtue , atone for those casual error under which she would endeaavor to class what have describe as the idleness and vice of many year ' continuance . but no such recollection befriend she . she could see he instantly before she , in every charm of air and address ; but she could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood , and the regard which he social power have gain he in the mess . after pause on this point a considerable while , she once more continue to read . but , alas ! the story which follow , of he design on , receive some confirmation from what have pass between and herself only the morning before ; and at last she be refer for the truth of every particular to himself --- from whom she have previously receive the information of he near concern in all he cousin 's affair , and whose character she have no reason to question . at one time she have almost resolve on apply to he , but the idea be check by the awkwardness of the application , and at length wholly banish by the conviction that would never have hazard such a proposal , if he have not be well assure of he cousin 's corroboration . she perfectly remembe everything that have pass in conversation between and herself , in they first evening at 's . many of he expressions be still fresh in she memory . she be now strike with the impropriety of such communication to a stranger , and wonder it have escape she before . she see the indelicacy of put himself forward as he have do , and the inconsistency of he profession with he conduct . she remember that he have boast of have no fear of see --- that might leave the country , but that he should stand he ground ; yet he have avoid the ball the very next week . she remember also that , till the family have quit the country , he have tell he story to no one but herself ; but that after they removal it have be everywhere discuss ; that he have then no reserve , no scruple in sinking 's character , though he have assure she that respect for the father would always prevent he expose the son . how differently do everything now appear in which he be concerned ! he attention to be now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary ; and the mediocrity of she fortune prove no longer the moderation of he wish , but he eagerness to grasp at anything . he behaviour to herself could now have have no tolerable motive ; he have either be deceive with regard to she fortune , or have be gratify he vanity by encourage the preference which she believe she have most incautiously show . every linger struggle in he favour grow fainter and fainter ; and in farther justification of , she could not but allow , when question by , have long ago assert he blamelessness in the affair ; that proud and repulsive as be he manners , she have never , in the whole course of they acquaintance --- a acquaintance which have latterly bring they much together , and give she a sort of intimacy with he way --- see anything that betraye he to be unprincipled or unjust --- anything that speak he of irreligious or immoral habit ; that among he own connection he be esteem and value --- that even have allow he merit as a brother , and that she have often hear he speak so affectionately of he sister as to prove he capable of some amiable feeling ; that have he action be what represent they , so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have be conceal from the world ; and that friendship between a person capable of it , and such a amiable man as , be incomprehensible . she grow absolutely ashamed of herself . of neither nor could she think without feel she have be blind , partial , prejudiced , absurd . " how despicably I have act ! " she cry ; " I , who have pride myself on my discernment ! I , who have value myself on my ability ! who have often disdain the generous candour of my sister , and gratify my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust ! how humiliating be this discovery ! yet , how just a humiliation ! have I be in love , I could not have be more wretchedly blind ! but vanity , not love , have be my folly . please with the preference of one , and offend by the neglect of the other , on the very beginning of we acquaintance , I have court prepossession and ignorance , and drive reason away , where either be concerned . till this moment I never know myself . " from herself to --- from to , she thought be in a line which soon bring to she recollection that 's explanation there have appear very insufficient , and she read it again . Widely different be the effect of a second perusal . how could she deny that credit to he assertion in one instance , which she have be oblige to give in the other ? he declare himself to be totally unsuspicious of she sister 's attachment ; and she could not help remembere what 's opinion have always be . neither could she deny the justice of he description of . she feel that 's feeling , though fervent , be little displayed , and that there be a constant complacency in she air and manner not often unit with great
great sensibility . when she come to that part of the letter in which she family be mention in term of such mortifying , yet merit reproach , she sense of shame be severe . the justice of the charge struck she too forcibly for denial , and the circumstance to which he particularly allude as have pass at the ball , and as confirm all he first disapprobation , could not have make a stronger impression on he mind than on hers . the compliment to herself and she sister be not unfelt . it soothe , but it could not conseal she for the contempt which have thus be self - attract by the rest of she family ; and as she consider that 's disappointment have in fact be the work of she nearest relation , and reflecte how materially the credit of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct , she feel depresse beyond anything she have ever know before . after wandere along the lane for two hour , give way to every variety of think ---re -considering event , determine probability , and reconcile herself , as well as she could , to a change so sudden and so important , fatigue , and a recollection of she long absence , make she at length return home ; and she enter the house with the wish of appear cheerful as usual , and the resolution of repress such reflection as must make she unfit for conversation . she be immediately tell that the two gentleman from Rosings have each call during she absence ; , only for a few minute , to take leave --- but that have be sit with they at least a hour , hope for she return , and almost resolve to walk after she till she could be find . could but just affect concern in miss he ; she really rejoice at it . be no longer a object ; she could think only of she letter . 37 the two gentleman leave Rosings the next morning , and have be in wait near the lodg , to make they he part obeisance , be able to bring home the pleasing intelligence , of they appear in very good health , and in as tolerable spirit as could be expect , after the melancholy scene so lately go through at . to Rosing he then hasten , to conseal and she daughter ; and on he return bring back , with great satisfaction , a message from she ladyship , import that she feel herself so dull as to make she very desirous of have they all to dine with she . could not see without recollect that , have she choose it , she might by this time have be present to she as she future niece ; nor could she think , without a smile , of what she ladyship 's indignation would have be . " what would she have say ? how would she have behave ? " be question with which she amuse herself . they first subject be the diminution of the . " I assure you , I feel it exceedingly , " say ; " I believe no one feel the loss of friend so much as I do . but I be particularly attach to these young man , and know they to be so much attach to I ! they be excessively sorry to go ! but so they always be . the dear rally he spirits tolerably till just at last ; but seem to feel it most acutely , more , I think , than last year . he attachment to Rosings certainly increase . " have a compliment , and a allusion to throw in here , which be kindly smile on by the mother and daughter . observ , after dinner , that see out of spirit , and immediately account for it by herself , by suppose that she do not like to go home again so soon , she add : " but if that be the case , you must write to you mother and beg that you may stay a little longer . will be very glad of you company , I be sure . " " I be much oblige to you ladyship for you kind invitation , " reply , " but it be not in my power to accept it . I must be in town next . " " why , at that rate , you will have be here only six week . I expect you to stay two month . I tell so before you come . there can be no occasion for you go so soon . could certainly spare you for another fortnight . " " but my father cannot . he write last week to hurry my return . " " oh ! you father of course may spare you , if you mother can . daughter be never of so much consequence to a father . and if you will stay another month complete , it will be in my power to take one of you as far as , for I be go there early in , for a week ; and as do not object to the barouche - box , there will be very good room for one of you --- and indeed , if the weather should happen to be cool , I should not object to take you both , as you be neither of you large . " " you be all kindness , madam ; but I believe we must abide by we original plan . " seem resign . " Mrs . Collins , you must send a servant with they . you know I always speak my mind , and I can not bear the idea of two young woman
woman travel post by themselves . it be highly improper . you must contrive to send somebody . I have the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing . young woman should always be properly guard and attend , accord to they situation in life . when my niece go to Ramsgate last summer , I make a point of she have two man -servant go with she . , the daughter of , of , and , could not have appear with propriety in a different manner . I be excessively attentive to all those thing . you must send with the young lady , . I be glad it occur to I to mention it ; for it would really be discreditable to you to let they go alone . " " my uncle be to send a servant for we . " " oh ! you uncle ! he keep a man - servant , do he ? I be very glad you have somebody who think of these thing . where shall you change horse ? oh ! Bromley , of course . if you mention my name at the , you will be attend to . " have many other question to ask respect they journey , and as she do not answer they all herself , attention be necessary , which believe to be lucky for she ; or , with a mind so occupi , she might have forget where she be . reflection must be reserve for solitary hour ; whenever she be alone , she give way to it as the greatest relief ; and not a day go by without a solitary walk , in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollection . Darcy's letter she be in a fair way of soon know by heart . she study every sentence ; and she feeling towards its writer be at time widly different . when she remember the style of he address , she be still full of indignation ; but when she consider how unjustly she have condemn and upbraide he , she anger be turn against herself ; and he disappointed feeling become the object of compassion . he attachment excite gratitude , he general character respect ; but she could not approve he ; nor could she for a moment repent she refusal , or feel the slightest inclination ever to see he again . in she own past behaviour , there be a constant source of vexation and regret ; and in the unhappy defect of she family , a subject of yet heavier chagrin . they be hopeless of remedy . she father , contente with laugh at they , would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of he youngest daughter ; and she mother , with manners so far from right herself , be entirely insensible of the evil . have frequently united with in a endeavour to check the imprudence of and ; but while they be support by they mother 's indulgence , what chance could there be of improvement ? , weak - spirited , irritable , and completely under 's guidance , have be always affront by they advice ; and , self - willed and careless , would scarcely give they a hearing . they be ignorant , idle , and vain . while there be a officer in , they would flirt with he ; and while be within a walk of , they would be go there forever . Anxiety on 's behalf be another prevailing concern ; and 's explanation , by restore to all she former good opinion , heighten the sense of what have lose . he affection be prove to have be sincere , and he conduct clear of all blame , unless any could attach to the implicitness of he confidence in he friend . how grievous then be the think that , of a situation so desirable in every respect , so replete with advantage , so promise for happiness , have be deprive , by the folly and indecorum of she own family ! when to these recollection be add the development of 's character , it may be easily believe that the happy spirit which have seldom be depresse before , be now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for she to appear tolerably cheerful . they engagement at Rosings be as frequent during the last week of she stay as they have be at first . the very last evening be spend there ; and she ladyship again inquire minutely into the particular of they journey , give they direction as to the best method of packing , and be so urgent on the necessity of placing gown in the only right way , that think herself oblige , on she return , to undue all the work of the morning , and pack she trunk afresh . when they parte , , with great condescension , wish they a good journey , and invite they to come to again next year ; and exert herself so far as to curtsey and hold out she hand to both . 38 on morning and meet for breakfast a few minute before the other appear ; and he take the opportunity of pay the parting civility which he deem indispensably necessary . " I know not , , " say he , " whether have yet express she sense of you kindness in come to we ; but I be very certain you will not leave the house without receive she thanks for it . the favor of you company have be much feel , I assure you . we know how little there be to tempt anyone to we humble abode . we plain manner of living , we small room and few domestic , and the little
little we see of the world , must make extremely dull to a young lady like yourself ; but I hope you will believe we grateful for the condescension , and that we have do everything in we power to prevent you spend you time unpleasantly . " be eager with she thanks and assurance of happiness . she have spend six week with great enjoyment ; and the pleasure of be with , and the kind attention she have receive , must make she feel the obliged . be gratify , and with a more smiling solemnity replie : " it give I great pleasure to hear that you have pass you time not disagreeably . we have certainly do we best ; and most fortunately have it in we power to introduce you to very superior society , and , from we connection with , the frequent means of varie the humble home scene , I think we may flatter ourselves that you visit can not have be entirely irksome . we situation with regard to 's family be indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage and bless which few can boast . you see on what a footing we be . you see how continually we be engage there . in truth I must acknowledge that , with all the disadvantage of this humble parsonage , I should not think anyone abide in it a object of compassion , while they be sharer of we intimacy at Rosings . " word be insufficient for the elevation of he feeling ; and he be oblige to walk about the room , while try to unite civility and truth in a few short sentence . " you may , in fact , carry a very favourable report of we into , my dear cousin . I flatter myself at least that you will be able to do so . 's great attention to you have be a daily witness of ; and altogether I trust it do not appear that you friend have draw a unfortunate --- but on this point it will be as well to be silent . only let I assure you , my dear , that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage . my dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of thinking . there be in everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and idea between we . we seem to have be design for each other . " could safely say that it be a great happiness where that be the case , and with equal sincerity could add , that she firmly believe and rejoice in he domestic comforts . she be not sorry , however , to have the recital of they interrupt by the lady from whom they spring . poor Charlotte ! it be melancholy to leave she to such society ! but she have choose it with she eye open ; and though evidently regret that she visitor be to go , she do not seem to ask for compassion . she home and she housekeeping , she parish and she poultry , and all they dependent concern , have not yet lose they charms . at length the chaise arrive , the trunk be fasten on , the parcel place within , and it be pronounce to be ready . after a affectionate parting between the friend , be attend to the carriage by , and as they walk down the garden he be commission she with he best respects to all she family , not forget he thanks for the kindness he have receive at in the winter , and he compliment to and , though unknown . he then hande she in , follow , and the door be on the point of be close , when he suddenly remind they , with some consternation , that they have hithertoo forgotten to leave any message for the ladie at Rosings . " but , " he add , " you will of course wish to have you humble respects deliver to they , with you grateful thanks for they kindness to you while you have be here . " make no objection ; the door be then allow to be shut , and the carriage drive off . " good gracious ! " cry , after a few minute ' silence , " it seem but a day or two since we first come ! and yet how many thing have happen ! " " a great many indeed , " say she companion with a sigh . " we have dine nine time at , besides drinking tea there twice ! how much I shall have to tell ! " add privately , " and how much I shall have to conceal ! " they journey be perform without much conversation , or any alarm ; and within four hour of they leave they reach 's house , where they be to remain a few day . look well , and have little opportunity of study she spirits , amidst the various engagement which the kindness of she aunt have reserve for they . but be to go home with she , and at there would be leisure enough for observation . it be not without a effort , meanwhile , that she could wait even for , before she tell she sister of 's proposal . to know that she have the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish , and must , at the same time , so highly gratify whatever of she own vanity she have not yet be able to reason away , be such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquer but the state of indecision in which she remain as to the extent of what she should communicate ; and she fear , if she once
once enter on the subject , of be hurrie into repeat something of which might only grieve she sister further . 39 it be the second week in , in which the three young lady set out together from for the town of ---- , in ; and , as they draw near the appoint inn where 's carriage be to meet they , they quickly perceive , in token of the coachman 's punctuality , both and look out of a dining - room upstairs . these two girl have be above a hour in the place , happily employ in visit a opposite milliner , watch the sentinel on guard , and dress a salad and cucumber . after welcome they sister , they triumphantly display a table set out with such cold meat as a inn larder usually affords , exclaim , " be not this nice ? be not this a agreeable surprise ? " " and we mean to treat you all , " add , " but you must lend we the money , for we have just spend ours at the shop out there . " then , show she purchase --- " look here , I have buy this bonnet . I do not think it be very pretty ; but I think I might as well buy it as not . I shall pull it to piece as soon as I get home , and see if I can make it up any better . " and when she sister abuse it as ugly , she add , with perfect unconcern , " oh ! but there be two or three much uglier in the shop ; and when I have buy some prettier - colour satin to trim it with fresh , I think it will be very tolerable . besides , it will not much signify what one wear this summer , after the ---- shire have leave , and they be go in a fortnight . " " be they indeed ! " cry , with the greatest satisfaction . " they be go to be encamp near ; and I do so want papa to take we all there for the summer ! it would be such a delicious scheme ; and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all . would like to go too of all thing ! only think what a miserable summer else we shall have ! " " yes , " think , " _that would be a delightful scheme indeed , and completely do for we at once . good heaven ! , and a whole campful of soldier , to we , who have be overset already by one poor regiment of militia , and the monthly ball of ! " " now I have get some news for you , " say , as they sit down at table . " what do you think ? it be excellent news --- capital news --- and about a certain person we all like ! " and look at each other , and the waiter be tell he need not stay . laugh , and say : " aye , that be just like you formality and discretion . you think the waiter must not hear , as if he car ! I dare say he often hear worse thing say than I be go to say . but he be a ugly fellow ! I be glad he be gone . I never see such a long ching in my life . well , but now for my news ; it be about dear ; too good for the waiter , be it not ? there be no danger of 's marry . there be for you ! she be go down to she uncle at : go to stay . be safe . " " and be safe ! " add ; " safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune . " " she be a great fool for go away , if she like he . " " but I hope there be no strong attachment on either side , " say . " I be sure there be not on he . I will answer for it , he never care three straw about she --- who could about such a nasty little freckled thing ? " be shocked to think that , however incapable of such coarseness of expression herself , the coarseness of the sentiment be little other than she own breast have harbour and fancie liberal ! as soon as all have ate , and the elder one pay , the carriage be order ; and after some contrivance , the whole party , with all they box , work - bag , and parcel , and the unwelcome addition of 's and 's purchase , be seat in it . " how nicly we be all cramm in , " cry . " I be glad I buy my bonnet , if it be only for the fun of have another bandbox ! well , now let we be quite comfortable and snug , and talk and laugh all the way home . and in the first place , let we hear what have happene to you all since you go away . have you see any pleasant man ? have you have any flirting ? I be in great hope that one of you would have get a husband before you come back . will be quite a old maid soon , I declare . she be almost three - and - twenty ! , how asham I should be of not be marry before three - and - twenty ! my aunt want you so to get husband , you can not think . she say have better have take Collins ; but I do not think there would have
have be any fun in it . ! how I should like to be marry before any of you ; and then I would chaperon you about to all the ball . dear I ! we have such a good piece of fun the other day at 's . and I be to spend the day there , and promise to have a little dance in the evening ; ( by the bye , and I be such friend ! ) and so she ask the two Harringtons to come , but be ill , and so be force to come by herself ; and then , what do you think we do ? we dress up in woman 's clothes on purpose to pass for a lady , only think what fun ! not a soul knew of it , but and , and and I , except my aunt , for we be force to borrow one of she gown ; and you can not imagine how well he look ! when , and , and , and two or three more of the man come in , they do not know he in the least . ! how I laugh ! and so do . I think I should have die . and that make the man suspect something , and then they soon find out what be the matter . " with such kind of history of they party and good joke , do , assist by 's hint and addition , endeavou to amuse she companion all the way to Longbourn . listen as little as she could , but there be no escape the frequent mention of 's name . they reception at home be most kind . rejoice to see in undiminished beauty ; and more than once during dinner do say voluntarily to : " I be glad you be come back , . " they party in the dining - room be large , for almost all the Lucas come to meet and hear the news ; and various be the subject that occupy they : be inquire of , after the welfare and poultry of she eldest daughter ; be doubly engage , on one hand collect a account of the present fashions from , who sit some way below she , and , on the other , retail they all to the younger Lucas ; and , in a voice rather louder than any other person 's , be enumerat the various pleasure of the morning to anybody who would hear she . " oh ! , " say she , " I wish you have go with we , for we have such fun ! as we go along , and I draw up the blind , and pretend there be nobody in the coach ; and I should have go so all the way , if have not be sick ; and when we get to the , I do think we behave very handsomely , for we treat the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world , and if you would have go , we would have treat you too . and then when we come away it be such fun ! I think we never should have get into the coach . I be ready to die of laughter . and then we be so merry all the way home ! we talk and laugh so loud , that anybody might have hear we ten mile off ! " to this Mary very gravely reply , " far be it from I , my dear sister , to depreciate such pleasur ! they would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female mind . but I confess they would have no charms for _me _-- I should infinitely prefer a book . " but of this answer hear not a word . she seldom listen to anybody for more than half a minute , and never attend to at all . in the afternoon be urgent with the rest of the girl to walk to , and to see how everybody go on ; but steadily oppose the scheme . it should not be say that the could not be at home half a day before they be in pursuit of the officer . there be another reason too for she opposition . she dread see again , and be resolve to avoid it as long as possible . the comfort to she of the regiment 's approaching removal be indeed beyond expression . in a fortnight they be to go --- and once gone , she hope there could be nothing more to plague she on he account . she have not be many hour at home before she find that the scheme , of which have give they a hint at the inn , be under frequent discussion between she parent . see directly that she father have not the smallest intention of yielding ; but he answer be at the same time so vague and equivocal , that she mother , though often dishearten , have never yet despaired of succeed at last . 40 's impatience to acquaint with what have happen could no longer be overcome ; and at length , resolve to suppress every particular in which she sister be concerned , and prepare she to be surprised , she related to she the next morning the chief of the scene between and herself . 's astonishment be soon lessen by the strong sisterly partiality which make any admiration of appear perfectly natural ; and all surprise be shortly lose in other feeling . she be sorry that should have deliver he sentiment in a manner so little sui to recommend they ; but still more be she grieve for the unhappiness which she sister 's refusal must have give he . " he be so sure
sure of succeeding be wrong , " say she , " and certainly ought not to have appear ; but consider how much it must increase he disappointment ! " " indeed , " reply , " I be heartily sorry for he ; but he have other feeling , which will probably soon drive away he regard for I . you do not blame I , however , for refuse he ? " " blame you ! oh , no . " " but you blame I for have speak so warmly of ? " " no --- I do not know that you be wrong in say what you do . " " but you will know it , when I tell you what happen the very next day . " she then speak of the letter , repeat the whole of its contents as far as they concern . what a stroke be this for poor ! who would willingly have go through the world without believe that so much wickedness exist in the whole race of mankind , as be here collect in one individual . be 's vindication , though grateful to she feeling , capable of consol she for such discovery . most earnestly do she labou to prove the probability of error , and seek to clear the one without involve the other . " this will not do , " say ; " you never will be able to make both of they good for anything . take you choice , but you must be satisfied with only one . there be but such a quantity of merit between they ; just enough to make one good sort of man ; and of late it have be shift about pretty much . for my part , I be inclin to believe it all 's ; but you shall do as you choose . " it be some time , however , before a smile could be extort from . " I do not know when I have be more shocked , " say she . " Wickhbe so very bad ! it be almost past belief . and poor ! dear , only consider what he must have suffer . such a disappointment ! and with the knowledge of you ill opinion , too ! and have to relate such a thing of he sister ! it be really too distressing . I be sure you must feel it so . " " oh ! no , my regret and compassion be all do away by see you so full of both . I know you will do he such ample justice , that I be grow every moment more unconcerned and indifferent . you profusion make I save ; and if you lament over he much longer , my heart will be as light as a feather . " " poor Wickham ! there be such a expression of goodness in he countenance ! such a openness and gentleness in he manner ! " " there certainly be some great mismanagement in the education of those two young man . one have get all the goodness , and the other all the appearance of it . " " I never think so deficient in the appearance of it as you use to do . " " and yet I mean to be uncommonly clever in taking so decide a dislike to he , without any reason . it be such a spur to one 's genius , such a opening for wit , to have a dislike of that kind . one may be continually abusive without say anything just ; but one can not always be laugh at a man without now and then stumbl on something witty . " " Lizzy , when you first read that letter , I be sure you could not treat the matter as you do now . " " indeed , I could not . I be uncomfortable enough , I may say unhappy . and with no one to speak to about what I feel , no to comfort I and say that I have not be so very weak and vain and nonsensical as I know I have ! oh ! how I want you ! " " how unfortunate that you should have use such very strong expression in speaking of to Darcy , for now they do appear wholly undeserved . " " certainly . but the misfortune of speak with bitterness be a most natural consequence of the prejudice I have be encourage . there be one point on which I want you advice . I want to be tell whether I ink , or ought not , to make we acquaintance in general 's character . " pause a little , and then reply , " surely there can be no occasion for expose he so dreadfully . what be you opinion ? " " that it ought not to be attempte . have not authorise I to make he communication public . on the contrary , every particular relative to he sister be mean to be keep as much as possible to myself ; and if I endeaavor to undeceive people as to the rest of he conduct , who will believe I ? the general prejudice against be so violent , that it would be the death of half the good people in to attempt to place he in a amiable light . I be not equal to it . Wickhbe will soon be gone ; and therefore it will not signify to anyone here what he really be . some time hence it will be all find out , and then we may laugh at they stupidity in not know it before . at present I will say nothing about it . " " you be quite right . to have he error make public
public might ruin he for ever . he be now , perhaps , sorry for what he have do , and anxious to re-establish a character . we must not make he desperate . " the tumult of 's mind be allay by this conversation . she have get rid of two of the secret which have weigh on she for a fortnight , and be certain of a willing listener in , whenever she might wish to talk again of either . but there be still something lurk behind , of which prudence forbade the disclosure . she da not relate the other half of 's letter , nor explain to she sister how sincerely she have be value by she friend . here be knowledge in which no one could partake ; and she be sensible that nothing less than a perfect understanding between the party could justify she in throw off this last encumbrance of mystery . " and then , " say she , " if that very improbable event should ever take place , I shall merely be able to tell what may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself . the liberty of communication can not be mine till it have lose all its value ! " she be now , on be settle at home , at leisure to observe the real state of she sister 's spirit . be not happy . she still cherish a very tender affection for . have never even fancie herself in love before , she regard have all the warmth of first attachment , and , from she age and disposition , greater steadiness than most first attachment often boast ; and so fervently do she value he remembrance , and prefer he to every other man , that all she good sense , and all she attention to the feeling of she friend , be requisite to check the indulgence of those regret which must have be injuriious to she own health and they tranquillity . " well , , " say . Bennet one day , " what be you opinion now of this sad business of 's ? for my part , I be determined never to speak of it again to anybody . I tell my sister so the other day . but I can not find out that see anything of he in . well , he be a very undeserving young man --- and I do not suppose there be the least chance in the world of she ever get he now . there be no talk of he come to again in the summer ; and I have inquire of everybody , too , who be likely to know . " " I do not believe he will ever live at any more . " " oh well ! it be just as he choose . nobody want he to come . though I shall always say he use my daughter extremely ill ; and if I be she , I would not have put up with it . well , my comfort be , I be sure will die of a broken heart ; and then he will be sorry for what he have do . " but as could not receive comfort from any such expectation , she make no answer . " well , , " continue she mother , soon afterwards , " and so the live very comfortable , do they ? well , well , I only hope it will last . and what sort of table do they keep ? be a excellent manager , I dare say . if she be half as sharp as she mother , she be save enough . there be nothing extravagant in they housekeeping , I dare say . " " no , nothing at all . " " a great deal of good management , depend upon it . yes , yes . they will take care not to outrun they income . they will never be distress for money . well , much good may it do they ! and so , I suppose , they often talk of have when you father be dead . they look upon it as quite they own , I dare say , whenever that happen . " " it be a subject which they could not mention before I . " " no ; it would have be strange if they have ; but I make no doubt they often talk of it between themselves . well , if they can be easy with a estate that be not lawfully they own , so much the better . I should be asham of have one that be only entail on I . " 41 the first week of they return be soon gone . the second began . it be the last of the regiment 's stay in , and all the young lady in the neighbourhood be droop apace . the dejection be almost universal . the elder alone be still able to eat , drink , and sleep , and pursue the usual course of they employment . very frequently be they reproach for this insensibility by and , whose own misery be extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family . " ! what be to become of we ? what be we to do ? " would they often exclae in the bitterness of woe . " how can you be smile so , ? " they affectionate mother share all they grief ; she remember what she have herself endure on a similar occasion , five - and - twenty year ago . " I be sure , " say she , " I cry for two day together when 's regiment go away . I think I should have break my heart
heart . " " I be sure I shall break mine , " say . " if one could but go to ! " observe . " oh , yes !-- if one could but go to ! but papa be so disagreeable . " " a little sea - bathing would set I up forever . " " and my aunt be sure it would do I a great deal of good , " add . such be the kind of lamentation resoun perpetually through . try to be divert by they ; but all sense of pleasure be lose in shame . she feel anew the justice of 's objection ; and never have she be so much dispose to pardon he interference in the view of he friend . but the gloom of 's prospect be shortly clear away ; for she receive a invitation from , the wife of the colonel of the regiment , to accompany she to . this invaluable friend be a very young woman , and very lately marry . a resemblance in good humour and good spirit have recommend she and to each other , and out of they three month ' acquaintance they have be intimate two . the rapture of on this occasion , she adoration of , the delight of , and the mortification of , be scarcely to be describe . wholly inattentive to she sister 's feeling , fly about the house in restless ecstasy , call for everyone 's congratulation , and laugh and talk with more violence than ever ; whilst the luckless continue in the parlour repin at she fate in term as unreasonable as she accent be peevish . " I can not see why should not ask I as well as , " say she , " though I be not she particular friend . I have just as much right to be ask as she have , and more too , for I be two year older . " in vain do attempt to make she reasonable , and to make she resign . as for herself , this invitation be so far from excite in she the same feeling as in she mother and , that she consider it as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense for the latter ; and detestable as such a step must make she be it know , she could not help secretly advise she father not to let she go . she represent to he all the impropriety of 's general behaviour , the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a woman as , and the probability of she be yet more imprudent with such a companion at , where the temptation must be greater than at home . he hear she attentively , and then say : " will never be easy until she have expose herself in some public place or other , and we can never expect she to do it with so little expense or inconvenience to she family as under the present circumstance . " " if you be aware , " say , " of the very great disadvantage to we all which must arise from the public notice of 's unguarded and imprudent manner --- nay , which have already arisen from it , I be sure you would judge differently in the affair . " " already arisen ? " repeat . " what , have she frighten away some of you lover ? poor little ! but do not be cast down . such squeamish youths as can not bear to be connect with a little absurdity be not worth a regret . come , let I see the list of pitiful fellows who have be keep aloon by 's folly . " " indeed you be mistaken . I have no such injury to resent . it be not of particular , but of general evil , which I be now complain . we importance , we respectability in the world must be affect by the wild volatility , the assurance and disdain of all restraint which 's character . excuse I , for I must speak plainly . if you , my dear father , will not take the trouble of check she exuberant spirit , and of teaching she that she present pursuit be not to be the business of she life , she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment . she character will be fix , and she will , at sixteen , be the most determined flirt that ever make herself or she family ridiculous ; a flirt , too , in the worst and meanest degree of flirtation ; without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person ; and , from the ignorance and emptiness of she mind , wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which she rage for admiration will excite . in this danger also be comprehend . she will follow wherever lead . avain , ignorant , idle , and absolutely uncontrolled ! oh ! my dear father , can you suppose it possible that they will not be censure and despise wherever they be know , and that they sister will not be often involved in the disgrace ? " see that she whole heart be in the subject , and affectionately take she hand say in reply : " do not make yourself uneasy , my love . wherever you and be know you must be respect and value ; and you will not appear to less advantage for have a couple of --- or I may say , three --- very silly sister . we shall have no peace at if do not go to . let she go , then . be a sensible man , and will keep she out of any real mischief ; and
and she be luckily too poor to be a object of prey to anybody . at she will be of less importance even as a common flirt than she have be here . the officer will find woman better worth they notice . let we hope , therefore , that she be there may teach she she own insignificance . at any rate , she can not grow many degree worse , without authorise we to lock she up for the rest of she life . " with this answer be force to be content ; but she own opinion continue the same , and she leave he disappointed and sorry . it be not in she nature , however , to increase she vexation by dwelling on they . she be confident of have perform she duty , and to fret over unavoidable evils , or augment they by anxiety , be no part of she disposition . have and she mother know the substance of she conference with she father , they indignation would hardly have find expression in they united volubility . in 's imagination , a visit to comprise every possibility of earthly happiness . she see , with the creative eye of fancy , the street of that gay bathing - place cover with officer . she see herself the object of attention , to ten and to score of they at present unknown . she see all the glory of the camp --- its tent stretch forth in beauteous uniformity of line , crowd with the young and the gay , and dazzl with scarlet ; and , to complete the view , she see herself seat beneath a tent , tenderly flirt with at least six officer at once . have she know she sister seek to tear she from such prospect and such reality as these , what would have be she sensation ? they could have be understand only by she mother , who might have feel nearly the same . be go to be all that consol she for she melancholy conviction of she husband 's never intend to go there himself . but they be entirely ignorant of what have pass ; and they rapture continue , with little intermission , to the very day of 's leave home . be now to see for the last time . have be frequently in company with he since she return , agitation be pretty well over ; the agitation of formal partiality entirely so . she have even learnt to detect , in the very gentleness which have first deligh she , a affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary . in he present behaviour to herself , moreover , she have a fresh source of displeasure , for the inclination he soon testify of renew those intentions which have mark the early part of they acquaintance could only serve , after what have since pass , to provoke she . she lose all concern for he in find herself thus select as the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry ; and while she steadily repress it , could not but feel the reproof contain in he believe , that however long , and for whatever cause , he attention have be withdraw , she vanity would be gratify , and she preference secure at any time by they renewal . on the very last day of the regiment 's remain at , he dine , with other of the officer , at ; and so little be dispose to part from he in good humour , that on he make some inquiry as to the manner in which she time have pass at , she mention 's and 's have both spend three week at , and ask he , if he be acquaint with the former . he look surprised , displease , alarme ; but with a moment 's recollection and a return smile , reply , that he have formerly see he often ; and , after observe that he be a very gentlemanlike man , ask she how she have like he . she answer be warmly in he favour . with a air of indifference he soon afterwards add : " how long do you say he be at Rosings ? " " nearly three week . " " and you see he frequently ? " " yes , almost every day . " " he manners be very different from he cousin 's . " " yes , very different . but I think improve upon acquaintance . " " indeed ! " cry with a look which do not escape she . " and pray , may I ask ?--" but check himself , he add , in a gayer tone , " be it in address that he improve ? have he deign to add atch of civility to he ordinary style ?-- for I dare not hope , " he continue in a lower and more serious tone , " that he be improve in essential . " " oh , no ! " say . " in essential , I believe , he be very much what he ever be . " while she speak , look as if scarcely know whether to rejoice over she word , or to distrust they meaning . there be a something in she countenance which make he listen with a apprehensive and anxious attention , while she add : " when I say that he improve on acquaintance , I do not mean that he mind or he manners be in a state of improvement , but that , from know he better , he disposition be better understood . " 's alarm now appear in a heighten complexion and agitate look ; for a few minute he be silent , till , shak off he embarrassment , he turn to
to she again , and say in the gentlest of accents : " you , who so well know my feeling towards , will readily comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he be wise enough to assume even the appearance of what be right . he pride , in that direction , may be of service , if not to himself , to many other , for it must only deter he from such foul misconduct as I have suffer by . I only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you , I imagine , have be allud , be merely adopt on he visit to he aunt , of whose good opinion and judgement he stand much in awe . he fear of she have always operate , I know , when they be together ; and a good deal be to be impute to he wish of forward the match with , which I be certain he have very much at heart . " could not repress a smile at this , but she answer only by a slight inclination of the head . she see that he want to engage she on the old subject of he grievance , and she be in no humour to indulge he . the rest of the evening pass with the appearance , on he side , of usual cheerfulness , but with no further attempt to distinguish ; and they part at last with mutual civility , and possibly a mutual desire of never meet again . when the party break up , return with to , from whence they be to set out early the next morning . the separation between she and she family be rather noisy than pathetic . be the only one who shed tear ; but she do weep from vexation and envy . be diffuse in she good wish for the felicity of she daughter , and impressive in she injunction that she should not miss the opportunity of enjoy herself as much as possible --- advice which there be every reason to believe would be well attend to ; and in the clamorous happiness of herself in bidding farewell , the more gentle adieus of she sister be uttere without be hear . 42 's opinion be all draw from she own family , she could not have form a very pleasing opinion of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort . she father , captivate by youth and beauty , and that appearance of good humour which and beauty generally give , have marry a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind have very early in they marriage put a end to all real affection for she . respect , esteem , and confidence have vanish for ever ; and all he view of domestic happiness be overthrown . but be not of a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which he own imprudence have bring on , in any of those pleasure which too often conseal the unfortunate for they folly of they vice . he be fond of the country and of book ; and from these taste have arisen he principal enjoyment . to he wife he be very little otherwise indebt , than as she ignorance and folly have contribute to he amusement . this be not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to he wife ; but where other power of entertainment be want , the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as be give . , however , have never be blind to the impropriety of she father 's behaviour as a husband . she have always see it with pain ; but respecte he ability , and grateful for he affectionate treatment of herself , she endeavoure to forget what she could not overlook , and to banish from she thought that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which , in expose he wife to the contempt of she own child , be so highly reprehensible . but she have never feel so strongly as now the disadvantage which must attend the child of so unsuitable a marriage , nor ever be so fully aware of the evils arise from so ill - judge a direction of talents ; talents , which , rightly use , might at least have preserve the respectability of he daughter , even if incapable of enlarge the mind of he wife . when have rejoice over 's departure she find little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment . they party abroad be less varied than before , and at home she have a mother and sister whose constant repining at the dullness of everything around they throw a real gloom over they domestic circle ; and , though might in time regain she natural degree of sense , since the disturber of she brain be remove , she other sister , from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehend , be likely to be harden in all she folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a watering - place and a camp . upon the whole , therefore , she find , what have be sometimes be find before , that a event to which she have be look with impatient desire do not , in taking place , bring all the satisfaction she have promise herself . it be consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity --- to have some other point on which she wish and hope might be fix , and by again enjoy the pleasure of anticipation , conseal herself for the present , and prepare for another disappointment . she tour to the be now the object of she happiest thought ; it be she best consolation for all the uncomfortable hour which the discontentedness of she mother and make
make inevitable ; and could she have include in the scheme , every part of it would have be perfect . " but it be fortunate , " think she , " that I have something to wish for . be the whole arrangement complete , my disappointment would be certain . but here , by carry with I one ceaseless source of regret in my sister 's absence , I may reasonably hope to have all my expectation of pleasure realise . a scheme of which every part promise delight can never be successful ; and general disappointment be only war off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation . " when go away she promise to write very often and very minutely to she mother and ; but she letter be always long expect , and always very short . those to she mother contain little else than that they be just return from the library , where such and such officer have attend they , and where she have see such beautiful ornament as make she quite wild ; that she have a new gown , or a new parasol , which she would have describe more fully , but be obliged to leave off in a violent hurry , as call she , and they be go off to the camp ; and from she correspondence with she sister , there be still less to be learn --- for she letter to , though rather longer , were much too full of line under the word to be make public . after the first fortnight or three week of she absence , health , good humour , and cheerfulness begin to reappear at . everything wear a happier aspect . the family who have be in town for the winter come back again , and summer finery and summer engagement arose . be restore to she usual querulous serenity ; and , by the middle of , be so much recover as to be able to enter without tear ; a event of such happy promise as to make hope that by the follow she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention a officer above once a day , unless , by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the , another regiment should be quarter in . the time fix for the beginning of they northern tour be now fast approaching , and a fortnight only be wante of it , when a letter arrive from , which at once delay its commencement and curtail its extent . would be prevent by business from set out till a fortnight later in , and must be in again within a month , and as that leave too short a period for they to go so far , and see so much as they have propose , or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they have build on , they be oblige to give up the Lakes , and substitute a more contracted tour , and , accord to the present plan , be to go no farther northwards than . in that county there be enough to be see to occupy the chief of they three week ; and to it have a peculiarly strong attraction . the town where she have formerly pass some year of she life , and where they be now to spend a few day , be probably as great a object of she curiosity as all the celebrate beauty of , , , or the peak . be excessively disappointed ; she have set she heart on see the Lakes , and still think there might have be time enough . but it be she business to be satisfied --- and certainly she temper to be happy ; and all be soon right again . with the mention of there be many idea connect . it be impossible for she to see the word without think of and its owner . " but surely , " say she , " I may enter he county without impunity , and rob it of a few petrified spar without he perceive I . " the period of expectation be now double . four week be to pass away before she uncle and aunt 's arrival . but they do pass away , and and , with they four child , do at length appear at . the child , two girl of six and eight year old , and two younger boy , be to be leave under the particular care of they cousin , who be the general favourite , and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapt she for attend to they in every way --- teach they , play with they , and love they . the Gardiner stay only one night at , and set off the next morning with in pursuit of novelty and amusement . one enjoyment be certain --- that of suitableness of companion ; a suitableness which comprehend health and temper to bear inconvenience --- cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure --- and affection and intelligence , which might supply it among themselves if there be disappointment abroad . it be not the object of this work to give a description of , nor of any of the remarkable place through which they route thither lay ; , , , , , etc. be sufficiently know . a small part of be all the present concern . to the little town of , the scene of 's former residence , and where she have lately learn some acquaintance still remain , they bend they step , after have see all the principal wonder of the country ; and within five mile of , find from she aunt that be situate . it be not in they direct road , nor more than a mile or two out of
of it . in talk over they route the evening before , express a inclination to see the place again . declare he willingness , and be apply to for she approbation . " my love , should not you like to see a place of which you have hear so much ? " say she aunt ; " a place , too , with which so many of you acquaintance be connect . pass all he youth there , you know . " be distress . she feel that she have no business at , and be obliged to assume a disinclination for see it . she must own that she be tired of see great house ; after go over so many , she really have no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtain . abus she stupidity . " if it be merely a fine house richly furnish , " say she , " I should not care about it myself ; but the grounds be delightful . they have some of the finest wood in the country . " say no more --- but she mind could not acquiesce . the possibility of meeting , while viewe the place , instantly occur . it would be dreadful ! she blush at the very idea , and think it would be better to speak openly to she aunt than to run such a risk . but against this there be objection ; and she finally resolve that it could be the last resource , if she private inquirie to the absence of the family be unfavourably answer . accordingly , when she retire at night , she ask the chambermaid whether be not a very fine place ? what be the name of its proprietor ? and , with no little alarm , whether the family be down for the summer ? a most welcome negative follow the last question --- and she alarms now be remove , she be at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself ; and when the subject be revive the next morning , and she be again apply to , could readily answer , and with a proper air of indifference , that she have not really any dislike to the scheme . to , therefore , they be to go . 43 , as they drive along , watch for the first appearance of with some perturbation ; and when at length they turn in at the lodge , she spirit be in a high flutter . the park be very large , and contain great variety of ground . they enter it in one of its lowest point , and drive for some time through a beautiful wood stretch over a wide extent . 's mind be too full for conversation , but she see and admire every remarkable spot and point of view . they gradually ascend for half - a-mile , and then find themselves at the top of a considerable eminence , where the wood cease , and the eye be instantly catch by , situate on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound . it be a large , handsome stone building , stand well on rise ground , and back by a ridge of high woody hill ; and in front , a stream of some natural importance be swell into greater , but without any artificial appearance . it be bank be neither formal nor falsely adorn . be delighted . she have never see a place for which nature have do more , or where natural beauty have be so little counteract by a awkward taste . they be all of they warm in they admiration ; and at that moment she feel that to be mistress of might be something ! they descend the hill , cross the bridge , and drive to the door ; and , while examine the nearer aspect of the house , all she apprehension of meet its owner return . she dread lest the chambermaid have be mistaken . on apply to see the place , they be admit into the hall ; and , as they wait for the housekeeper , have leisure to wonder at she be where she be . the housekeeper come ; a respectable - look elderly woman , much less fine , and more civil , than she have any notion of find she . they follow she into the dining - parlour . it be a large , well proportion room , handsomely fitte up . , after slightly survey it , go to a window to enjoy its prospect . the hill , crown with wood , which they have descende , receive increase abruptness from the distance , be a beautiful object . every disposition of the ground be good ; and she look on the whole scene , the river , the tree scatter on its bank and the winding of the valley , as far as she could trace it , with delight . as they pass into other room these objects be take different position ; but from every window there be beauty to be see . the room be lofy and handsome , and they furniture suitable to the fortune of its proprietor ; but see , with admiration of he taste , that it be neither gaudy nor uselessly fine ; with less of splendour , and more real elegance , than the furniture of Rosings . " and of this place , " think she , " I might have be mistress ! with these room I might now have be familiarly acquaint ! instead of viewe they as a stranger , I might have rejoice in they as my own , and welcome to they as visitor my uncle and aunt . but no , "
" --- recollect herself --- " that could never be ; my uncle and aunt would have be lose to I ; I should not have be allow to invite they . " this be a lucky recollection --- it save she from something very like regret . she longe to inquire of the housekeeper whether she master be really absent , but have not the courage for it . at length however , the question be ask by she uncle ; and she turn away with alarm , while Mrs . Reynold reply that he be , add , " but we expect he to - morrow , with a large party of friend . " how rejoice be that they own journey have not by any circumstance be delay a day ! she aunt now call she to look at a picture . she approach and see the likeness of , suspend , amongst several other miniature , over the mantelpiece . she aunt ask she , smilingly , how she like it . the housekeeper come forward , and tell they it be a picture of a young gentleman , the son of she late master 's steward , who have be bring up by he at he own expense . " he be now go into the army , " she add ; " but I be afraid he have turn out very wild . " look at she niece with a smile , but could not return it . " and that , " say . Reynold , point to another of the miniature , " be my master --- and very like he . it be draw at the same time as the other --- about eight year ago . " " I have hear much of you master 's fine person , " say , look at the picture ; " it be a handsome face . but , Lizzy , you can tell we whether it be like or not . " Mr . Reynold respect for seem to increase on this intimation of she know she master . " do that young lady know ? " colou , and say : " a little . " " and do not you think he a very handsome gentleman , ma'am ? " " yes , very handsome . " " I be sure I know none so handsome ; but in the gallery upstairs you will see a finer , larger picture of he than this . this room be my late master 's favourite room , and these miniature be just as they use to be then . he be very fond of they . " this account to for 's be among they . then direct they attention to one of , draw when she be only eight year old . " and be as handsome as she brother ? " say . " oh ! yes --- the handsomest young lady that ever be see ; and so accomplish !-- she play and sing all day long . in the next room be a new instrument just come down for she --- a present from my master ; she come here to - morrow with he . " , whose manners be very easy and pleasant , encourage she communicativeness by he question and remark ; . Reynold , either by pride or attachment , have evidently great pleasure in talking of she master and he sister . " be you master much at in the course of the year ? " " not so much as I could wish , sir ; but I dare say he may spend half he time here ; and be always down for the summer month . " " , " think , " when she go to Ramsgate . " " if you master would marry , you might see more of he . " " yes , sir ; but I do not know when that will be . I do not know who be good enough for he . " and smile . could not help say , " it be very much to he credit , I be sure , that you should think so . " " I say no more than the truth , and everybody will say that know he , " reply the other . think this be go pretty far ; and she listen with increase astonishment as the housekeeper add , " I have never know a cross word from he in my life , and I have know he ever since he be four year old . " this be praise , of all other most extraordinary , most opposite to she idea . that he be not a good - tempered man have be she firmest opinion . she keenest attention be awaken ; she longe to hear more , and be grateful to she uncle for say : " there be very few people of whom so much can be say . you be lucky in have such a master . " " yes , sir , I know I be . if I be to go through the world , I could not meet with a better . but I have always observ , that they who be good - nature when child , be good - nature when they grow up ; and he be always the sweetest - tempered , most generous - hear boy in the world . " almost star at she . " can this be ? " thing she . " he father be a excellent man , " say . " yes , ma 'am , that he be indeed ; and he son will be just like he --- just as affable to the poor . " Elizabeth listen , wonder , doubt , and be impatient for more . could
could interest she on no other point . she relate the subject of the picture , the dimension of the room , and the price of the furniture , in vain , , highly amuse by the kind of family prejudice to which he attribute she excessive commendation of she master , soon lead again to the subject ; and she dwelt with energy on he many merit as they proceed together up the great staircase . " he be the best landlord , and the best master , " say she , " that ever liv ; not like the wild young man nowadays , who think of nothing but themselves . there be not one of he tenant or servants but will give he a good name . some people call he proud ; but I be sure I never see anything of it . to my fancy , it be only because he do not rattle away like other young man . " " in what a amiable light do this place he ! " think . " this fine account of he , " whisper she aunt as they walk , " be not quite consistent with he behaviour to we poor friend . " " perhaps we might be deceiv . " " that be not very likely ; we authority be too good . " on reach the spacious lobby above they be show into a very pretty sitting - room , lately fitte up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartment below ; and be inform that it be but just do to give pleasure to , who have take a liking to the room when last at . " he be certainly a good brother , " say , as she walk towards one of the window . anticipate 's delight , when she should enter the room . " and this be always the way with he , " she add . " whatever can give he sister any pleasure be sure to be do in a moment . there be nothing he would not do for she . " the picture - gallery , and two or three of the principal bedrooms , be all that remain to be show . in the former be many good painting ; but kknow nothing of the art ; and from such as have be already visible below , she have willingly turn to look at some drawing of 's , in crayon , whose subject be usually more interesting , and also more intelligible . in the gallery there be many family portrait , but they could have little to fix the attention of a stranger . walk in quest of the only face whose feature would be know to she . at last it arrest she --- and she beheld a strike resemblance to , with such a smile over the face as she remember to have sometimes see when he look at she . she stand several minute before the picture , in earnest contemplation , and return to it again before they quit the gallery . Mr . Reynold inform they that it have be take in he father 's lifetime . there be certainly at this moment , in 's mind , a more gentle sensation towards the original than she have ever feel at the height of they acquaintance . the commendation bestow on he by be of no trifling nature . what praise be more valuable than the praise of a intelligent servant ? as a brother , a landlord , a master , she consider how many people 's happiness be in he guardianship !-- how much of pleasure or pain be it in he power to bestow !-- how much of good or evil must be do by he ! every idea that have be bring forward by the housekeeper be favourable to he character , and as she stand before the canva on which he be represent , and fix he eye upon herself , she think of he regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it have ever raise before ; she remember its warmth , and soften its impropriety of expression . when all of the house that be open to general inspection have be see , they return downstairs , and , take leave of the housekeeper , be consign over to the gardener , who meet they at the hall - door . as they walk across the hall towards the river , turn back to look again ; she uncle and aunt stop also , and while the former be conjectur as to the date of the building , the owner of it himself suddenly come forward from the road , which lead behind it to the stable . they be within twenty yard of each other , and so abrupt be he appearance , that it be impossible to avoid he sight . they eye instantly meet , and the cheek of both be overspread with the deepest blush . he absolutely start , and for a moment seem immovable from surprise ; but shortly recover himself , advanc towards the party , and speak to , if not in term of perfect composure , at least of perfect civility . she have instinctively turn away ; but stop on he approach , receive he compliment with a embarrassment impossible to be overcome . have he first appearance , or he resemblance to the picture they have just be examine , be insufficient to assure the other two that they now see , the gardener 's expression of surprise , on behold he master , must immediately have tell it . they stand a little aloof while he be talk to they niece , who , astonished and confuse , scarcely da lift she eye to he face , and know not what answer she return
return to he civil inquirie after she family . amaze at the alteration of he manner since they last part , every sentence that he utter be increase she embarrassment ; and every idea of the impropriety of she be find there recurr to she mind , the few minute in which they continue be some of the most uncomfortable in she life . do he seem much more at ease ; when he speak , he accent have none of its usual sedateness ; and he repeat he inquirie as to the time of she have leave , and of she have stay in , so often , and in so hurrie a way , as plainly speak the distraction of he thought . at length every idea seem to fail he ; and , after stand a few moment without say a word , he suddenly recollect himself , and take leave . the other then join she , and express admiration of he figure ; but hear not a word , and wholly engross by she own feeling , follow they in silence . she be overpower by shame and vexation . she come there be the most unfortunate , the most ill - judge thing in the world ! how strange it must appear to he ! in what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man ! it might seem as if she have purposely throw herself in he way again ! oh ! why do she come ? or , why do he thus come a day before he be expect ? have they be only ten minute sooner , they should have be beyond the reach of he discrimination ; for it be plain that he be that moment arrive --- that moment alight from he horse or he carriage . she blush again and again over the perverseness of the meeting . and he behaviour , so strikingly alter --- what could it mean ? that he should even speak to she be amazing !-- but to speak with such civility , to inquire after she family ! never in she life have she see he manners so little dignified , never have he speak with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting . what a contrast do it offer to he last address in , when he put he letter into she hand ! she know not what to think , or how to account for it . they have now enter a beautiful walk by the side of the water , and every step be bring forward a nobler fall of ground , or a finer reach of the wood to which they be approach ; but it be some time before be sensible of any of it ; and , though she answer mechanically to the repeat appeal of she uncle and aunt , and seem to direct she eye to such object as they point out , she distinguished no part of the scene . she thought be all fix on that one spot of , whichever it might be , where then be . she longe to know what at the moment be pass in he mind --- in what manner he think of she , and whether , in defiance of everything , she be still dear to he . perhaps he have be civil only because he feel himself at ease ; yet there have be that in he voice which be not like ease . whether he have feel more of pain or of pleasure in see she she could not tell , but he certainly have not see she with composure . at length , however , the remark of she companion on she absence of mind arouse she , and she feel the necessity of appear more like herself . they enter the wood , and bid adieu to the river for a while , ascend some of the higher grounds ; when , in spot where the opening of the tree give the eye power to wander , be many charme view of the valley , the opposite hill , with the long range of wood overspread many , and occasionally part of the stream . express a wish of go round the whole park , but fear it might be beyond a walk . with a triumphant smile they be tell that it be ten mile round . it settle the matter ; and they pursue the accustom circuit ; which bring they again , after some time , in a descent among hang wood , to the edge of the water , and one of its narrowest part . they cross it by a simple bridge , in character with the general air of the scene ; it be a spot less adorned than any they have yet visit ; and the valley , here contract into a glen , allow room only for the stream , and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice - wood which border it . longe to explore its windings ; but when they have cross the bridge , and perceive they distance from the house , , who be not a great walker , could go no farther , and think only of return to the carriage as quickly as possible . she niece be , therefore , oblige to submit , and they take they way towards the house on the opposite side of the river , in the nearest direction ; but they progress be slow , for , though seldom able to indulge the taste , be very fond of fishing , and be so much engage in watch the occasional appearance of some trout in the water , and talk to the man about they , that he advance but little . whilst wandere on in this slow manner , they be again surprised , and
and 's astonishment be quite equal to what it have be at first , by the sight of approach they , and at no great distance . the walk here be here less shelter than on the other side , allow they to see he before they meet . , however astonished , be at least more prepared for a interview than before , and resolve to appear and to speak with calmness , if he really intend to meet they . for a few moment , indeed , she feel that he would probably strike into some other path . the idea last while a turn in the walk conceal he from they view ; the turn past , he be immediately before they . with a glance , she see that he have lose none of he recent civility ; and , to imitate he politeness , she begin , as they meet , to admire the beauty of the place ; but she have not get beyond the word " delightful , " and " charming , " when some unlucky recollection obtrude , and she fancie that praise of from she might be mischievously construe . she colour change , and she say no more . be stand a little behind ; and on she pausing , he ask she if she would do he the honour of introduce he to she friend . this be a stroke of civility for which she be quite unprepared ; and she could hardly suppress a smile at he be now seek the acquaintance of some of those very people against whom he pride have revolt in he offer to herself . " what will be he surprise , " think she , " when he know who they be ? he take they now for people of fashion . " the introduction , however , be immediately make ; and as she name they relationship to herself , she steal a sly look at he , to see how he bear it , and be not without the expectation of he decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companion . that he be surprise by the connection be evident ; he sustain it , however , with fortitude , and so far from go away , turn he back with they , and enter into conversation with . could not but be pleased , could not but triumph . it be console that he should know she have some relation for whom there be no need to blush . she listen most attentively to all that pass between they , and glory in every expression , every sentence of she uncle , which mark he intelligence , he taste , or he good manners . the conversation soon turn upon fishing ; and she hear invite he , with the greatest civility , to fish there as often as he choose while he continue in the neighbourhood , offer at the same time to supply he with fishing tackle , and point out those part of the stream where there be usually most sport . , who be walk arm - in - arm with , give she a look expressive of wonder . say nothing , but it gratify she exceedingly ; the compliment must be all for herself . she astonishment , however , be extreme , and continually be she repeat , " why be he so alte ? from what can it proceed ? it can not be for _me _-- it can not be for my sake that he manners be thus soften . my reproof at could not work such a change as this . it be impossible that he should still love I . " after walk some time in this way , the two lady in front , the two gentleman behind , on resume they place , after descende to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curiious water - plant , there chance to be a little alteration . it originate in , who , fatigue by the exercise of the morning , find 's arm inadequate to she support , and consequently prefer she husband 's . take she place by she niece , and they walk on together . after a short silence , the lady first spoke . she wish he to know that she have be assure of he absence before she come to the place , and accordingly begin by observing , that he arrival have be very unexpected --- " for you housekeeper , " she add , " inform we that you would certainly not be here till to - morrow ; and indeed , before we leave , we understand that you be not immediately expect in the country . " he acknowledge the truth of it all , and say that business with he steward have occasion he come forward a few hour before the rest of the party with whom he have be travel . " they will join I early to - morrow , " he continue , " and among they be some who will claim a acquaintance with you --- and he sister . " answer only by a slight bow . she thought be instantly drive back to the time when 's name have be the last mention between they ; and , if she might judge by he complexion , he mind be not very differently engage . " there be also one other person in the party , " he continue after a pause , " who more particularly wish to be know to you . will you allow I , or do I ask too much , to introduce my sister to you acquaintance during you stay at ? " the surprise of such a application be great indeed ; it be too great for she
she to know in what manner she acced to it . she immediately feel that whatever desire might have of be acquaint with she must be the work of she brother , and , without look farther , it be satisfactory ; it be gratify to know that he resentment have not make he think really ill of she . they now walk on in silence , each of they deep in thought . be not comfortable ; that be impossible ; but she be flatter and pleas . he wish of introduce he sister to she be a compliment of the highest kind . they soon outstrip the other , and when they have reach the carriage , and be half a quarter of a mile behind . he then ask she to walk into the house --- but she declare herself not tired , and they stand together on the lawn . at such a time much might have be say , and silence be very awkward . she want to talk , but there seem to be a embargo on every subject . at last she recollect that she have be travel , and they talk of and with great perseverance . yet time and she aunt move slowly --- and she patience and she idea be nearly wear we before the tete - a - tete be over . on and 's come up they be all press to go into the house and take some refreshment ; but this be decline , and they part on each side with utmost politeness . hand the lady into the carriage ; and when it drive off , see he walk slowly towards the house . the observation of she uncle and aunt now begin ; and each of they pronounce he to be infinitely superior to anything they have expect . " he be perfectly well behave , polite , and unassuming , " say she uncle . " there be something a little stately in he , to be sure , " reply she aunt , " but it be confine to he air , and be not unbecoming . I can now say with the housekeeper , that though some people may call he proud , I have see nothing of it . " " I be never more surprised than by he behaviour to we . it be more than civil ; it be really attentive ; and there be no necessity for such attention . he acquaintance with be very trifling . " " to be sure , , " say she aunt , " he be not so handsome as ; or , rather , he have not Wickham 's countenance , for he feature be perfectly good . but how come you to tell I that he be so disagreeable ? " excuse herself as well as she could ; say that she have like he better when they have meet in than before , and that she have never see he so pleasant as this morning . " but perhaps he may be a little whimsical in he civility , " reply she uncle . " you great man often be ; and therefore I shall not take he at he word , as he might change he mind another day , and warn I off he grounds . " feel that they have entirely misunderstood he character , but say nothing . " from what we have see of he , " continue , " I really should not have think that he could have behave in so cruel a way by anybody as he have do by poor . he have not a ill - natured look . on the contrary , there be something pleasing about he mouth when he speak . and there be something of dignity in he countenance that would not give one a unfavourable idea of he heart . but , to be sure , the good lady who show we he house do give he a most flaming character ! I could hardly help laugh aloud sometimes . but he be a liberal master , I suppose , and that in the eye of a servant comprehend every virtue . " here feel herself call on to say something in vindication of he behaviour to ; and therefore give they to understand , in as guard a manner as she could , that by what she have hear from he relation in , he action be capable of a very different construction ; and that he character be by no means so faulty , nor be so amiable , as they have be consider in . in confirmation of this , she relate the particular of all the pecuniary transaction in which they have be connect , without actually name she authority , but state it to be such as such as might be rely on . be surprised and concerned ; but as they be now approach the scene of she former pleasur , every idea give way to the charm of recollection ; and she be too much engage in point out to she husband all the interesting spot in its environ to think of anything else . Fatigue as she have be by the morning 's walk they have no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of she former acquaintance , and the evening be spend in the satisfaction of a intercourse renew after many year ' discontinuance . the occurrence of the day be too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of these new friend ; and she could do nothing but think , and think with , of 's civility , and , above all , of he wish she to be acquaint with he sister . 44 have settle it that would bring he sister to visit she the very
very day after she reach ; and be consequently resolve not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning . but she conclusion be false ; for on the very morning after they arrival at , these visitor come . they have be walk about the place with some of they new friend , and be just return to the inn to dress themselves for dining with the same family , when the sound of a carriage draw they to a window , and they see a gentleman and a lady in a curricle drive up the street . immediately recognize the livery , guess what it mean , and impart no small degree of she surprise to she relation by acquaint they with the honour which she expect . she uncle and aunt be all amazement ; and the embarrassment of she manner as she speak , join to the circumstance itself , and many of the circumstance of the preceding day , open to they a new idea on the business . nothing have ever suggest it before , but they feel that there be no other way of accounting for such attention from such a quarter than by suppose a partiality for they niece . while these newly - bear notion be pass in they head , the perturbation of 's feeling be at every moment increase . she be quite amaze at she own discomposure ; but amongst other cause of disquiet , she dread lest the partiality of the brother should have say too much in she favour ; and , more than commonly anxious to please , she naturally suspect that every power of pleasing would fail she . she retreat from the window , fearful of be see ; and as she walk up and down the room , endeavour to compose herself , see such look of inquiring surprise in she uncle and aunt as make everything worse . and she brother appear , and this formidable introduction take place . with astonishment do see that she new acquaintance be at least as much embarrassed as herself . since she be at , she have hear that be exceedingly proud ; but the observation of a very few minute convince she that she be only exceedingly shy . she find it difficult to obtain even a word from she beyond a monosyllable . be tall , and on a larger scale than ; and , though little more than sixteen , she figure be form , and she appearance womanly and graceful . she be less handsome than she brother ; but there be sense and good humour in she face , and she manners be perfectly unassuming and gentle . , who have expect to find in she as acute and unembarrass a observer as ever have be , be much relieved by discern such different feeling . they have not long be together before tell she that be also come to wait on she ; and she have barely time to express she satisfaction , and prepare for such a visitor , when 's quick step be hear on the stair , and in a moment he enter the room . all 's anger against he have be long do away ; but have she still feel any , it could hardly have stand it be ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he express himself on see she again . he inquire in a friendly , though general way , after she family , and look and speak with the same good - humoured ease that he have ever do . to and he be scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself . they have long wished to see he . the whole party before they , indeed , excite a lively attention . the suspicions which have just arisen of and they niece direct they observation towards each with a earnest though guard inquiry ; and they soon draw from those inquiry the full conviction that one of they at least know what it be to love . of the lady 's sensation they remain a little in doubt ; but that the gentleman be overflow with admiration be evident enough . , on she side , have much to do . she want to ascertain the feeling of each of she visitor ; she want to compose she own , and to make herself agreeable to all ; and in the latter object , where she fear most to fail , she be most sure of success , for those to whom she endeavoure to give pleasure be prepossess in she favour . be ready , be eager , and determine , to be pleased . in see , she thought naturally fly to she sister ; and , oh ! how ardently do she long to know whether any of he be direct in a like manner . sometimes she could fancy that he talk less than on former occasion , and once or twice please herself with the notion that , as he look at she , he be try to trace a resemblance . but , though this might be imaginary , she could not be deceive as to he behaviour to , who have be set up as a rival to . no look appear on either side that speak particular regard . nothing occur between they that could justify the hope of he sister . on this point she be soon satisfied ; and two or three little circumstance occur ere they part , which , in she anxious interpretation , denote a recollection of not untincture by tenderness , and a wish of say more that might lead to the mention of she , have he da . he observ to she , at a moment when the other be talk together , and in a
a tone which have something of real regret , that it " be a very long time since he have have the pleasure of see she ; " and , before she could reply , he add , " it be above eight month . we have not meet since the 26th of , when we be all dance together at . " be pleased to find he memory so exact ; and he afterwards take occasion to ask she , when unattended to by any of the rest , whether all she sister be at . there be not much in the question , nor in the preceding remark ; but there be a look and a manner which give they mean . it be not often that she could turn she eye on himself ; but , whenever she do catch a glimpse , she see a expression of general complaisance , and in all that he say she hear a accent so remove from hauteur or disdain of he companion , as convince she that the improvement of manners which she have yesterday witness however temporary its existence might prove , have at least outlive one day . when she see he thus seek the acquaintance and court the good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few month ago would have be a disgrace --- when she see he thus civil , not only to herself , but to the very relation whom he have openly disdained , and recollect they last lively scene in --- the difference , the change be so great , and struck so forcibly on she mind , that she could hardly restrain she astonishment from be visible . never , even in the company of he dear friend at , or he dignify relation at , have she see he so desirous to please , so free from self - consequence or unbending reserve , as now , when no importance could result from the success of he endeavour , and when even the acquaintance of those to whom he attention be address would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladie both of and . they visitor stay with they above half - a - hour ; and when they arise to depart , call on he sister to join he in express they wish of see and , and , to dinner at , before they leave the country . , though with a diffidence which mark she little in the habit of give invitation , readily obey . look at she niece , desirous of know how she , whom the invitation most concerned , felt dispose as to its acceptance , but have turn away she head . Presum however , that this study avoidance speak rather a momentary embarrassment than any dislike of the proposal , and see in she husband , who be fond of society , a perfect willingness to accept it , she venture to engage for she attendance , and the day after the next be fix on . express great pleasure in the certainty of see again , have still a great deal to say to she , and many inquiry to make after all they Hertfordshire friend . , construe all this into a wish of hear she speak of she sister , be pleased , and on this account , as well as some other , find herself , when they visitor leave they , capable of consider the last half - hour with some satisfaction , though while it be pass , the enjoyment of it have be little . to be alone , and fearful of inquiry or hint from she uncle and aunt , she stay with they only long enough to hear they favourable opinion of , and then hurrie away to dress . but she have no reason to fear and 's curiosity ; it be not they wish to force she communication . it be evident that she be much better acquaint with than they have before any idea of ; it be evident that he be very much in love with she . they see much to interest , but nothing to justify inquiry . of it be now a matter of anxiety to think well ; and , as far as they acquaintance reach , there be no fault to find . they could not be untouched by he politeness ; and have they draw he character from they own feeling and he servant 's report , without any reference to any other account , the circle in to which he be know would not have recognize it for . there be now a interest , however , in believe the housekeeper ; and they soon become sensible that the authority of a servant who have know he since he be four year old , and whose own manners indicate respectability , be not to be hastily reject . neither have anything occur in the intelligence of they Lambton friend that could materially lessen its weight . they have nothing to accuse he of but pride ; pride he probably have , and if not , it would certainly be impute by the inhabitant of a small market - town where the family do not visit . it be acknowledged , however , that he be a liberal man , and do much good among the poor . with respect to , the traveller soon find that he be not hold there in much estimation ; for though the chief of he concern with the son of he patron be imperfectly understood , it be yet a well - know fact that , on he quitting , he have leave many debt behind he , which afterwards discharge . as for , she thought be at this eve more than the last ; and the evening , though as
as it pass it seem long , be not long enough to determine she feeling towards one in that mansion ; and she lay awake two whole hour endeavour to make they out . she certainly do not hate he . no ; hatred have vanish long ago , and she have almost as long be asham of ever feel a dislike against he , that could be so call . the respect create by the conviction of he valuable quality , though at first unwillingly admit , have for some time cease to be repugnant to she feeling ; and it be now heighten into somewhat of a friendlier nature , by the testimony so highly in he favour , and bring forward he disposition in so amiable a light , which yesterday have produce . but above all , above respect and esteem , there be a motive within she of goodwill which could not be overlook . it be gratitude ; gratitude , not merely for have once love she , but for love she still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of she manner in reject he , and all the unjust accusation accompany she rejection . he who , she have be persuade , would avoid she as he greatest enemy , see , on this accidental meeting , most eager to preserve the acquaintance , and without any indelicate display of regard , or any peculiarity of manner , where they two self only be concerned , be solicite the good opinion of she friend , and bend on make she know to he sister . such a change in a man of so much pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude --- for to love , ardent love , it must be attribute ; and as such its impression on she be of a sort to be encourage , as by no means unpleasing , though it could not be exactly define . she respecte , she esteem , she be grateful to he , she feel a real interest in he welfare ; and she only want to know how far she wish that welfare to depend upon herself , and how far it would be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power , which she fancy tell she she still possess , of bring on she the renewal of he address . it have be settle in the evening between the aunt and the niece , that such a striking civility as 's in come to see they on the very day of she arrival at , for she have reach it only to a late breakfast , ought to be imitate , though it could not be equall , by some exertion of politeness on they side ; and , consequently , that it would be highly expedient to wait on she at the follow morning . they be , therefore , to go . be pleased ; though when she ask herself the reason , she have very little to say in reply . leave they soon after breakfast . the fishing scheme have be renew the day before , and a positive engagement make of he meeting some of the gentleman at before noon . 45 as now be that 's dislike of she have originate in jealousy , she could not help feel how unwelcome she appearance at must be to she , and be curiious to know with how much civility on that lady 's side the acquaintance would now be renew . on reach the house , they be show through the hall into the saloon , whose northern aspect render it delightful for summer . it be window open to the ground , admit a most refresh view of the high woody hill behind the house , and of the beautiful oak and spanish chestnut which be scatter over the intermediate lawn . in this house they be receive by , who be sit there with and , and the lady with whom she live in . 's reception of they be very civil , but attend with all the embarrassment which , though proceed from shyness and the fear of do wrong , would easily give to those who feel themselves inferior the belief of she be proud and reserve . and she niece , however , do she justice , and pitie she . by and they be notice only by a curtsey ; and , on they be seat , a pause , awkward as such pause must always be , succeed for a few moment . it be first break by , a genteel , agreeable - look woman , whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse prove she to be more truly well - breed than either of the other ; and between she and , with occasional help from , the conversation be carry on . look as if she wish for courage enough to join in it ; and sometimes do venture a short sentence when there be least danger of its be hear . soon see that she be herself closely watch by , and that she could not speak a word , especially to , without call she attention . this observation would not have prevent she from try to talk to the latter , have they not be seat at a inconvenient distance ; but she be not sorry to be spare the necessity of say much . she own thought be employ she . she expect every moment that some of the gentleman would enter the room . she wish , she fear that the master of the house might be amongst they ; and whether she wish or fear it most , she could scarcely determine . after sit in this manner a quarter of a hour without hear 's , be rouse by receive
receive from she a cold inquiry after the health of she family . she answer with equal indifference and brevity , and the other say no more . the next variation which they visit afford be produce by the entrance of servants with cold meat , cake , and a variety of all the finest fruit in season ; but this do not take place till after many a significant look and smile from to have be give , to remind she of she post . there be now employment for the whole party --- for though they could not all talk , they could all eat ; and the beautiful pyramids of grape , nectarine , and peach soon collect they round the table . while thus engage , have a fair opportunity of decide whether she must fear or wish for the appearance of , by the feeling which prevail on he enter the room ; and then , though but a moment before she have believe she wish to predominate , she begin to regret that he come . he have be some time with , who , with two or three other gentleman from the house , be engage by the river , and have leave he only on learn that the lady of the family intend a visit to that morning . no sooner do he appear than wisely resolve to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed ; a resolution the more necessary to be make , but perhaps not the more easily keep , because she see that the suspicion of the whole party be awaken against they , and that there be scarcely a eye which do not watch he behaviour when he first come into the room . in no countenance be attentive curiosity so strongly mark as in 's , in spite of the smile which overspread she face whenever she speak to one of its object ; for jealousy have not yet make she desperate , and she attention to be by no means over . , on she brother 's entrance , exert herself much more to talk , and see that he be anxious for he sister and herself to get acquainted , and forwarded as much as possible , every attempt at conversation on either side . see all this likewise ; and , in the imprudence of anger , take the first opportunity of say , with sneering civility : " , , be not the ---- shire remove from ? they must be a great loss to you family . " in 's presence she da not mention 's name ; but instantly comprehend that he be uppermost in she thought ; and the various recollection connect with he give she a moment 's distress ; but exert herself vigorously to repel the ill - natured attack , she presently answer the question in a tolerably detached tone . while she speak , a involuntary glance show she Darcy , with a heighten complexion , earnestly look at she , and he sister overcome with confusion , and unable to lift up she eye . have know what pain she be then give she beloved friend , she undoubtedly would have refrain from the hint ; but she have merely intend to discompose by bring forward the idea of a man to whom she believe she partial , to make she betray a sensibility which might injure she in 's opinion , and , perhaps , to remind the latter of all the folly and absurdity by which some part of she family be connect with that corps . not a syllable have ever reach she of 's meditate elopement . to no creature have it be reveal , where secrecy be possible , except to ; and from all 's connection she brother be particularly anxious to conceal it , from the very wish which have long ago attribute to he , of they become hereafter she own . he have certainly form such a plan , and without mean that it should effect he endeavour to separate he from , it be probable that it might add something to he lively concern for the welfare of he friend . 's collect behaviour , however , soon quiet he emotion ; and as , vex and disappoint , da not approach nearer to , also recover in time , though not enough to be able to speak any more . she brother , whose eye she fear to meet , scarcely recollect she interest in the affair , and the very circumstance which have be design to turn he thought from seem to have fix they on she more and more cheerfully . they visit do not continue long after the question and answer above mention ; and while be attend they to they carriage be vent she feeling in criticisms on 's person , behaviour , and dress . but would not join she . she brother 's recommendation be enough to ensure she favour ; he judgement could not err . and he have speak in such term of as to leave without the power of find she otherwise than lovely and amiable . when return to the saloon , could not help repeat to he some part of what she have be say to he sister . " how very ill look this morning , , " she cry ; " I never in my life see anyone so much alte as she be since the winter . she be grow so brown and coarse ! and I be agree that we should not have know she again . " however little might have like such a address , he contente himself with coolly reply that he perceive no other alteration than she be rather tan , no miraculous consequence of travelling in the summer . " for my own part , "
" she rejoin , " I must confess that I never could see any beauty in she . she face be too thin ; she complexion have no brilliancy ; and she feature be not at all handsome . she nose want character --- there be nothing mark in its line . she tooth be tolerable , but not out of the common way ; and as for she eyes , which have sometimes be call so fine , I could never see anything extraordinary in they . they have a sharp , shrewish look , which I do not like at all ; and in she air altogether there be a self - sufficiency without fashion , which be intolerable . " Persuad as be that admire , this be not the best method of recommend herself ; but angry people be not always wise ; and in see he at last look somewhat nettle , she have all the success she expect . he be resolutely silent , however , and , from a determination of make he speak , she continue : " I remember , when we first know she in , how amaze we all be to find that she be a repute beauty ; and I particularly recollect you say one night , after they have be dine at , '_ she a beauty !-- I should as soon call she mother a wit . ' but afterwards she seem to improve on you , and I believe you think she rather pretty at one time . " " yes , " reply , who could contain himself no longer , " but that be only when I first see she , for it be many month since I have consider she as one of the handsomest woman of my acquaintance . " he then go away , and be leave to all the satisfaction of have force he to say what give no one any pain but herself . and talk of all that have occur during they visit , as they return , except what have particularly interes they both . the look and behaviour of everybody they have see be discuss , except of the person who have mostly engage they attention . they talk of he sister , he friend , he house , he fruit --- of everything but himself ; yet be long to know what think of he , and . would have be highly gratify by she niece 's begin the subject . 46 have be a good deal disappointed in not find a letter from on they first arrival at ; and this disappointment have be renew on each of the morning that have now be spend there ; but on the third she repining be over , and she sister justified , by the receipt of two letter from she at once , on one of which be mark that it have be missent elsewhere . be not surprise at it , as have write the direction remarkably ill . they have just be prepare to walk as the letter come in ; and she uncle and aunt , leave she to enjoy they in quiet , set off by themselves . the one missent must first be attend to ; it have be write five day ago . the begin contain a account of all they little party and engagement , with such news as the country afforde ; but the latter half , which be date a day later , and write in evident agitation , give more important intelligence . it be to this effect : " since write the above , dearest , something have occur of a most unexpected and serious nature ; but I be afraid of alarme you --- be assure that we be all well . what I have to say relates to poor . a express come at twelve last night , just as we be all gone to bed , from , to inform we that she be go off to with one of he officer ; to own the truth , with ! imagine we surprise . to , however , it do not seem so wholly unexpected . I be very , very sorry . so imprudent a match on both side ! but I be willing to hope the best , and that he character have be misunderstood . thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe he , but this step ( and let we rejoice over it ) mark nothing bad at heart . he choice be disinterest at least , for he must know my father can give she nothing . we poor mother be sadly grieved . my father bear it better . how thankful be I that we never let they know what have be say against he ; we must forget it ourselves . they be off night about twelve , as be conjecture , but be not miss till yesterday morning at eight . the express be send off directly . my dear , they must have pass within ten mile of we . give we reason to expect he here soon . leave a few line for he wife , inform she of they intention . I must conclude , for I can not be long from my poor mother . I be afraid you will not be able to make it out , but I hardly know what I have write . " without allow herself time for consideration , and scarcely know what she feel , on finish this letter instantly seize the other , and open it with the utmost impatience , read as follow : it have be write a day later than the conclusion of the first . " by this time , my dearest sister , you have receive my hurried letter ; I wish this may be more
more intelligible , but though not confin for time , my head be so bewilder that I can not answer for be coherent . , I hardly know what I would write , but I have bad news for you , and it can not be delay . Imprudent as the marriage between and we poor would be , we be now anxious to be assure it have take place , for there be but too much reason to fear they be not go to . come yesterday , have leave Brighton the day before , not many hour after the express . though 's short letter to . give they to understand that they be go to , something be drop by express he belief that never intend to go there , or to marry at all , which be repeat to , who , instantly take the alarm , set off from intend to trace they route . he do trace they easily to , but no further ; for on enter that place , they remove into a hackney coach , and dismiss the chaise that bring they from . all that be know after this be , that they be see to continue the road . I know not what to think . after make every possible inquiry on that side , come on into , anxiously renew they at all the turnpike , and at the inns in and , but without any success --- no such people have be see to pass through . with the kindest concern he come on to , and break he apprehension to we in a manner most creditable to he heart . I be sincerely grieve for he and , but no one can throw any blame on they . we distress , my dear , be very great . my father and mother believe the worst , but I can not think so ill of he . many circumstance might make it more eligible for they to be marry privately in town than to pursue they first plan ; and even if he could form such a design against a young woman of 's connection , which be not likely , can I suppose she so lose to everything ? impossible ! I grieve to find , however , that be not dispose to depend upon they marriage ; he shook he head when I express my hope , and say he fear be not a man to be trust . my poor mother be really ill , and keep she room . could she exert herself , it would be better ; but this be not to be expect . and as to my father , I never in my life see he so affect . poor have anger for have conceal they attachment ; but as it be a matter of confidence , one can not wonder . I be truly glad , dearest , that you have be spa something of these distressing scene ; but now , as the first shock be over , shall I own that I long for you return ? I be not so selfish , however , as to press for it , if inconvenient . ! I take up my pen again to do what I have just tell you I would not ; but circumstance be such that I can not help earnestly begge you all to come here as soon as possible . I know my dear uncle and aunt so well , that I be not afraid of request it , though I have still something more to ask of the former . my father be go to with instantly , to try to discover she . what he mean to do I be sure I know not ; but he excessive distress will not allow he to pursue any measure in the best and safest way , and be oblige to be at again to - morrow evening . in such a exigence , my uncle 's advice and assistance would be everything in the world ; he will immediately comprehend what I must feel , and I rely upon he goodness . " " oh ! where , where be my uncle ? " cry , dart from she seat as she finish the letter , in eagerness to follow he , without lose a moment of the time so precious ; but as she reach the door it be open by a servant , and appear . she pale face and impetuous manner make he start , and before he could recover himself to speak , she , in whose mind every idea be supersed by 's situation , hastily exclaim , " I beg you pardon , but I must leave you . I must find Gardiner this moment , on business that can not be delay ; I have not a instant to lose . " " ! what be the matter ? " cry he , with more feeling than politeness ; then recollect himself , " I will not detain you a minute ; but let I , or let the servant go after and . you be not well enough ; you can not go yourself . " hesitate , but she knee tremble under she and she feel how little would be gain by she attempt to pursue they . call back the servant , therefore , she commission he , though in so breathless a accent as make she almost unintelligible , to fetch he master and mistress home instantly . on he quit the room she sit down , unable to support herself , and look so miserably ill , that it be impossible for to leave she , or to refrain from say , in a tone of gentleness and commiseration , " let I call you maid . be there nothing you
you could take to give you present relief ? a glass of wine ; shall I get you one ? you be very ill . " " no , I thank you , " she reply , endeavour to recover herself . " there be nothing the matter with I . I be quite well ; I be only distress by some dreadful news which I have just receive from . " she burst into tear as she allude to it , and for a few minute could not speak another word . Darcy , in wretched suspense , could only say something indistinctly of he concern , and observe she in compassionate silence . at length she speak again . " I have just have a letter from , with such dreadful news . it can not be conceal from anyone . my younger sister have leave all she friend --- have elop ; have throw herself into the power of --- of . they be go off together from . you know he too well to doubt the rest . she have no money , no connection , nothing that can tempt he to --- she be lose for ever . " be fix in astonishment . " when I consider , " she add in a yet more agitated voice , " that I might have prevent it ! I , who know what he be . have I but explain some part of it only --- some part of what I learn , to my own family ! have he character be know , this could not have happen . but it be all --- all too late now . " " I be grieve indeed , " cry ; " grieve --- shocked . but be it certain --- absolutely certain ? " " oh , yes ! they leave together on night , and be trace almost to , but not beyond ; they be certainly not go to . " " and what have be do , what have be attempt , to recover she ? " " my father be go to , and have write to beg my uncle 's immediate assistance ; and we shall be off , I hope , in half - a - hour . but nothing can be do --- I know very well that nothing can be do . how be such a man to be work on ? how be they even to be discover ? I have not the smallest hope . it be every way horrible ! " shook he head in silent acquiescence . " when my eye be open to he real character --- oh ! have I know what I ink , what I da to do ! but I know not --- I be afraid of do too much . Wretch , wretch mistake ! " make no answer . he seem scarcely to hear she , and be walk up and down the room in earnest meditation , he brow contract , he air gloomy . soon observ , and instantly understand it . she power be sinke ; everything must sink under such a proof of family weakness , such a assurance of the deepest disgrace . she could neither wonder nor condemn , but the belief of he self - conquest bring nothing consolatory to she bosom , afforde no palliation of she distress . it be , on the contrary , exactly calculate to make she understand she own wish ; and never have she so honestly feel that she could have love he , as now , when all love must be vain . but self , though it would intrude , could not engross she . --- the humiliation , the misery she be bringe on they all , soon swallow up every private care ; and cover she face with she handkerchief , be soon lose to everything else ; and , after a pause of several minute , be only recall to a sense of she situation by the voice of she companion , who , in a manner which , though it speak compassion , speak likewise restraint , say , " I be afraid you have be long desire my absence , nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my stay , but real , though unavailing concern . would to that anything could be either say or do on my part that might offer consolation to such distress ! but I will not torment you with vain wish , which may seem purposely to ask for you thanks . this unfortunate affair will , I fear , prevent my sister 's have the pleasure of see you at to - day . " " oh , yes . be so kind as to apologise for we to . say that urgent business call we home immediately . Conceal the unhappy truth as long as it be possible , I know it can not be long . " he readily assure she of he secrecy ; again express he sorrow for she distress , wish it a happier conclusion than there be at present reason to hope , and leave he compliment for she relation , with only one serious , parting look , go away . as he quit the room , feel how improbable it be that they should ever see each other again on such term of cordiality as have mark they several meeting in ; and as she throw a retrospective glance over the whole of they acquaintance , so full of contradiction and varietie , sigh at the perverseness of those feeling which would now have promote its continuance , and would formerly have rejoice in its termination . if gratitude and thesteey be good foundation of affection , 's change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty . but if
if otherwise --- if regard spring from such source be unreasonable or unnatural , in comparison of what be so often describe as arise on a first interview with its object , and even before two word have be exchange , nothing can be say in she defence , except that she have give somewhat of a trial to the latter method in she partiality for , and that its ill success might , perhaps , authorise she to seek the other less interesting mode of attachment . be that as it may , she see he go with regret ; and in this early example of what 's infamy must produce , find additional anguish as she reflect on that wretch business . never , since read 's second letter , have she entertaine a hope of 's meaning to marry she . no one but , she think , could flatter herself with such a expectation . surprise be the least of she feeling on this development . while the contents of the first letter remain in she mind , she be all surprise --- all astonishment that should marry a girl whom it be impossible he could marry for money ; and how could ever have attach he have appear incomprehensible . but now it be all too natural . for such a attachment as this she might have sufficient charms ; and though she do not suppose to be deliberately engage in a elopement without the intention of marriage , she have no difficulty in believe that neither she virtue nor she understanding would preserve she from fall a easy prey . she have never perceive , while the regiment be in , that have any partiality for he ; but she be convinced that want only encouragement to attach herself to anybody . sometimes one officer , sometimes another , have be she favourite , as they attention raise they in she opinion . she affection have continually be fluctuat but never without a object . the mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl --- oh ! how acutely do she now feel it ! she be wild to be at home --- to hear , to see , to be upon the spot to share with in the car that must now fall wholly upon she , in a family so derange , a father absent , a mother incapable of exertion , and require constant attendance ; and though almost persuade that nothing could be do for , she uncle 's interference seem of the utmost importance , and till he enter the room she impatience be severe . and have hurry back in alarm , suppose by the servant 's account that they niece be take suddenly ill ; but satisfye they instantly on that head , she eagerly communicate the cause of they summon , read the two letter aloud , and dwell on the postscript of the last with trembling energy , though have never be a favourite with they , and could not but be deeply afflict . not only , but all be concerned in it ; and after the first exclamation of surprise and horror , promise every assistance in he power . , though expect no less , thanke he with tear of gratitude ; and all three be actuate by one spirit , everything relate to they journey be speedily settled . they be to be off as soon as possible . " but what be to be do about ? " cry . " tell we be here when you send for we ; be it so ? " " yes ; and I tell he we should not be able to keep we engagement . that be all settled . " " what be all settle ? " repeat the other , as she run into she room to prepare . " and be they upon such term as for she to disclose the real truth ? oh , that I know how it be ! " but wish be vain , or at least could only serve to amuse she in the hurry and confusion of the follow hour . have be at leisure to be idle , she would have remain certain that all employment be impossible to one so wretched as herself ; but she have she share of business as well as she aunt , and amongst the rest there be note to be write to all they friend at , with false excuse for they sudden departure . a hour , however , see the whole complete ; and meanwhile have settle he account at the inn , nothing remain to be do but to go ; and , after all the misery of the morning , find herself , in a shorter space of time than she could have suppose , seat in the carriage , and on the road to . 47 " I have be think it over again , , " say she uncle , as they drive from the town ; " and really , upon serious consideration , I be much more inclined than I be to judge as you eldest sister do on the matter . it appear to I so very unlikely that any young man should from such a design against a girl who be by no means unprotected or friendless , and who be actually stay in he colonel 's family , that I be strongly inclin to hope the best . could he expect that she friend would not step forward ? could he expect to be notice again by the regiment , after such a affront to ? he temptation be not adequate to the risk ! " " do you really think so ? " cry , brighten up for a moment . " upon my word , " say , " I
I begin to be of you uncle 's opinion . it be really too great a violation of decency , honour , and interest , for he to be guilty of . I can not think so very ill of . can you yourself , , so wholly give he up , as to believe he capable of it ? " " not , perhaps , of neglect he own interest ; but of every other neglect I can believe he capable . if , indeed , it should be so ! but I dare not hope it . why should they not go on to if that have be the case ? " " in the first place , " reply , " there be no absolute proof that they be not go to . " " oh ! but they remove from the chaise into a hackney coach be such a presumption ! and , besides , no trace of they be to be find on the Barnet road . " " well , then --- suppose they to be in . they may be there , though for the purpose of concealment , for no more exceptional purpose . it be not likely that money should be very abundant on either side ; and it might strike they that they could be more economically , though less expeditiously , marry in than in . " " but why all this secrecy ? why any fear of detection ? why must they marriage be private ? oh , no , no --- this be not likely . he most particular friend , you see by 's account , be persuade of he never intend to marry she . Wickhbe will never marry a woman without some money . he can not afford it . and what claim have --- what attraction have she beyond youth , health , and good humour that could make he , for she sake , forego every chance of benefit himself by marry well ? as to what restraint the apprehension of disgrace in the corps might throw on a dishonourable elopement with she , I be not able to judge ; for I know nothing of the effect that such a step might produce . but as to you other objection , I be afraid it will hardly hold good . have no brothers to step forward ; and he might imagine , from my father 's behaviour , from he indolence and the little attention he have ever seem to give to what be go forward in he family , that he would do as little , and think as little about it , as any father could do , in such a matter . " " but can you think that be so lost to everything but love of he as to consent to live with he on any term other than marriage ? " " it do seem , and it be most shock indeed , " reply , with tear in she eye , " that a sister 's sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt . but , really , I know not what to say . perhaps I be not do she justice . but she be very young ; she have never be teach to think on serious subject ; and for the last half - year , nay , for a twelvemonth --- she have be give up to nothing but amusement and vanity . she have be allow to dispose of she time in the most idle and frivolous manner , and to adopt any opinion that come in she way . since the ---- shire be first quarter in , nothing but love , flirtation , and officer have be in she head . she have be do everything in she power by think and talk on the subject , to give greater --- what shall I call it ? susceptibility to she feeling ; which be naturally lively enough . and we all know that have every charm of person and address that can captivate a woman . " " but you see that , " say she aunt , " do not think so very ill of as to believe he capable of the attempt . " " of whom do ever think ill ? and who be there , whatever might be they former conduct , that she would think capable of such a attempt , till it be prove against they ? but know , as well as I do , what Wickhbe really be . we both know that he have be profligate in every sense of the word ; that he have neither integrity nor honour ; that he be as false and deceitful as he be insinuating . " " and do you really know all this ? " cry , whose curiosity as to the mode of she intelligence be all alive . " I do indeed , " reply , colouring . " I tell you , the other day , of he infamous behaviour to ; and you yourself , when last at , hear in what manner he speak of the man who have behave with such forbearance and liberality towards he . and there be other circumstance which I be not at liberty --- which it be not worth while to relate ; but he lie about the whole Pemberley family be endless . from what he say of I be thoroughly prepared to see a proud , reserve , disagreeable girl . yet he know to the contrary himself . he must know that she be as amiable and unpretending as we have find she . " " but do know nothing of this ? can she be ignorant of what you and seem so well to understand ? " " oh , yes
yes !-- that , that be the worst of all . I be in , and see so much both of and he relation , I be ignorant of the truth myself . and when I return home , the ---- shire be to leave in a week or fortnight 's time . as that be the case , neither , to whom I relate the whole , nor I , think it necessary to make we knowledge public ; for of what use could it apparently be to any one , that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood have of he should then be overthrown ? and even when it be settle that should go with , the necessity of open she eye to he character never occur to I . that she could be in any danger from the deception never enter my head . that such a consequence as this could ensue , you may easily believe , be far enough from my thought . " " when they all remove to , therefore , you have no reason , I suppose , to believe they fond of each other ? " " not the slightest . I can remember no symptom of affection on either side ; and have anything of the kind be perceptible , you must be aware that ours be not a family on which it could be throw away . when first he enter the corps , she be ready enough to admire he ; but so we all were . every girl in or near be out of she sense about he for the first two month ; but he never distinguished she by any particular attention ; and , consequently , after a moderate period of extravagant and wild admiration , she fancy for he give way , and other of the regiment , who treat she with more distinction , again become she favourite . " * * * * * it may be easily believe , that however little of novelty could be add to they fear , hope , and conjecture , on this interesting subject , by its repeat discussion , no other could detain they from it long , during the whole of the journey . from 's thought it be never absent . fix there by the keenest of all anguish , self - reproach , she could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness . they travel as expeditiously as possible , and , sleep one night on the road , reach by dinner time the next day . it be a comfort to to consider that could not have be weary by long expectation . the little Gardiner , attract by the sight of a chaise , be stand on the step of the house as they enter the paddock ; and , when the carriage drive up to the door , the joyful surprise that light up they face , and display itself over they whole body , in a variety of caper and frisk , be the first pleasing earnest of they welcome . jump out ; and , after give each of they a hasty kiss , hurrie into the vestibule , where , who come run down from she mother 's apartment , immediately meet she . , as she affectionately embrace she , whilst tear fill the eye of both , lose not a moment in ask whether anything have be hear of the fugitive . " not yet , " reply . " but now that my dear uncle be come , I hope everything will be well . " " be my father in town ? " " yes , he go on , as I write you word . " " and have you hear from he often ? " " we have hear only twice . he write I a few line on to say that he have arrive in safety , and to give I he direction , which I particularly beg he to do . he merely add that he should not write again till he have something of importance to mention . " " and my mother --- how be she ? how be you all ? " " my mother be tolerably well , I trust ; though she spirit be greatly shaken . she be upstairs and will have great satisfaction in see you all . she do not yet leave she dressing - room . and , thank , be quite well . " " but you --- how be you ? " cry . " you look pale . how much you must have go through ! " she sister , however , assure she of she be perfectly well ; and they conversation , which have be pass while and be engage with they child , be now put a end to by the approach of the whole party . run to she uncle and aunt , and welco and thanke they both , with alternate smile and tear . when they be all in the drawing - room , the question which have already ask be of course repeat by the other , and they soon find that have no intelligence to give . the sanguine hope of good , however , which the benevolence of she heart suggest have not yet desert she ; she still expect that it would all end well , and that every morning would bring some letter , either from or she father , to explain they proceedings , and , perhaps , announce they marriage . , to whose apartment they all repair , after a few minute ' conversation together , receive they exactly as might be expect ; with tear and lamentation of regret , invective against the villainous conduct of , and complaint of she own suffering and ill - usage ; blame everybody
everybody but the person to whose ill - judge indulgence the error of she daughter must principally be owe . " if I have be able , " say she , " to carry my point in go to , with all my family , this would not have happen ; but poor dear have nobody to take care of she . why do the Forsters ever let she go out of they sight ? I be sure there be some great neglect or other on they side , for she be not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she have be well look after . I always think they be very unfit to have the charge of she ; but I be overrule , as I always be . poor dear child ! and now here have go away , and I know he will fight , wherever he meet he and then he will be kill , and what be to become of we all ? the Collinse will turn we out before he be cold in he grave , and if you be not kind to we , brother , I do not know what we shall do . " they all exclaim against such terrific idea ; and , after general assurance of he affection for she and all she family , tell she that he mean to be in the very next day , and would assist in every endeavour for recover . " do not give way to useless alarm , " add he ; " though it be right to be prepare for the worst , there be no occasion to look on it as certain . it be not quite a week since they leave . in a few day more we may gain some news of they ; and till we know that they be not marry , and have no design of marrying , do not let we give the matter over as lose . as soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother , and make he come home with I to ; and then we may consult together as to what be to be do . " " oh ! my dear brother , " reply , " that be exactly what I could most wish for . and now do , when you get to town , find they out , wherever they may be ; and if they be not marry already , make they marry . and as for wedding clothes , do not let they wait for that , but tell she shall have as much money as she choose to buy they , after they be marry . and , above all , keep from fighting . tell he what a dreadful state I be in , that I be fright out of my wit --- and have such trembling , such fluttering , all over I --- such spasm in my side and pain in my head , and such beating at heart , that I can get no rest by night nor by day . and tell my dear not to give any direction about she clothes till she have see I , for she do not know which be the best warehous . oh , brother , how kind you be ! I know you will contrive it all . " but , though he assure she again of he earnest endeavour in the cause , could not avoid recommend moderation to she , as well in she hope as she fear ; and after talk with she in this manner till dinner be on the table , they all leave she to vent all she feeling on the housekeeper , who attend in the absence of she daughter . though she brother and sister be persuade that there be no real occasion for such a seclusion from the family , they do not attempt to oppose it , for they know that she have not prudence enough to hold she tongue before the servants , while they wait at table , and judge it better that one only of the household , and the one whom they could most trust should comprehend all she fear and solicitude on the subject . in the dining - room they be soon join by and , who have be too busily engage in they separate apartment to make they appearance before . one come from she book , and the other from she toilette . the face of both , however , be tolerably calm ; and no change be visible in either , except that the loss of she favourite sister , or the anger which she have herself incur in this business , have give more of fretfulness than usual to the accent of . as for , she be mistress enough of herself to whisper to , with a countenance of grave reflection , soon after they be seat at table : " this be a most unfortunate affair , and will probably be much talk of . but we must stem the tide of malice , and pour into the wounded bosom of each other the balm of sisterly consolation . " then , perceive in no inclination of replying , she add , " unhappy as the event must be for , we may draw from it this useful lesson : that loss of virtue in a female be irretrievable ; that one false step involve she in endless ruin ; that she reputation be no less britle than it be beautiful ; and that she can not be too much guard in she behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex . " lift up she eye in amazement , but be too much oppress to make any reply . , however , continue to conseal herself with such
such kind of moral extraction from the evil before they . in the afternoon , the two elder be able to be for half - a - hour by themselves ; and instantly avail herself of the opportunity of make any inquiry , which be equally eager to satisfy . after join in general lamentation over the dreadful sequel of this event , which consider as all but certain , and could not assert to be wholly impossible , the former continue the subject , by say , " but tell I all and everything about it which I have not already hear . give I further particular . what do say ? have they no apprehension of anything before the elopement take place ? they must have see they together for ever . " " do own that he have often suspect some partiality , especially on 's side , but nothing to give he any alarm . I be so grieve for he ! he behaviour be attentive and kind to the utmost . he be come to we , in order to assure we of he concern , before he have any idea of they not be go to : when that apprehension first get abroad , it hasten he journey . " " and be convince that would not marry ? do he know of they intending to go off ? have see himself ? " " yes ; but , when question by he , deny know anything of they plan , and would not give he real opinion about it . he do not repeat he persuasion of they not marry --- and from that , I be inclin to hope , he might have be misunderstood before . " " and till come himself , not one of you entertaine a doubt , I suppose , of they be really marry ? " " how be it possible that such a idea should enter we brain ? I feel a little uneasy --- a little fearful of my sister 's happiness with he in marriage , because I know that he conduct have not be always quite right . my father and mother know nothing of that ; they only feel how imprudent a match it must be . then own , with a very natural triumph on know more than the rest of we , that in 's last letter she have prepare she for such a step . she have know , it seem , of they be in love with each other , many week . " " but not before they go to ? " " no , I believe not . " " and do appear to think well of himself ? do he know he real character ? " " I must confess that he do not speak so well of as he formerly do . he believe he to be imprudent and extravagant . and since this sad affair have take place , it be say that he leave greatly in debt ; but I hope this may be false . " " oh , , have we be less secret , have we tell what we know of he , this could not have happen ! " " perhaps it would have be better , " reply she sister . " but to expose the former fault of any person without know what they present feeling were , seem unjustifiable . we act with the best intention . " " could repeat the particular of 's note to he wife ? " " he bring it with he for we to see . " then take it from she pocket - book , and give it to . these be the contents : " you will laugh when you know where I be go , and I can not help laugh myself at you surprise to - morrow morning , as soon as I be miss . I be go to , and if you can not guess with who , I shall think you a simpleton , for there be but one man in the world I love , and he be a angel . I should never be happy without he , so think it no harm to be off . you need not send they word at of my go , if you do not like it , for it will make the surprise the greater , when I write to they and sign my name ' . ' what a good joke it will be ! I can hardly write for laughing . pray make my excuse to Pratt for not keep my engagement , and dance with he to - night . tell he I hope he will excuse I when he know all ; and tell he I will dance with he at the next ball we meet , with great pleasure . I shall send for my clothes when I get to ; but I wish you would tell to mmend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they be pack up . good - bye . give my love to . I hope you will drink to we good journey . " you affectionate friend , " . " " oh ! thoughtless , thoughtless ! " cry when she have finish it . " what a letter be this , to be write at such a moment ! but at least it show that she be serious on the subject of they journey . whatever he might afterwards persuade she to , it be not on she side a scheme of infamy . my poor father ! how he must have feel it ! " " I never see anyone so shocked . he could not speak a word for full ten minute . my mother be take ill immediately , and the whole house
house in such confusion ! " " oh ! , " cry , " be there a servant belong to it who do not know the whole story before the end of the day ? " " I do not know . I hope there be . but to be guard at such a time be very difficult . my mother be in hysteric , and though I endeavoure to give she every assistance in my power , I be afraid I do not do so much as I might have do ! but the horror of what might possibly happen almost take from I my faculty . " " you attendance upon she have be too much for you . you do not look well . oh that I have be with you ! you have have every care and anxiety upon yourself alone . " " and have be very kind , and would have share in every fatigue , I be sure ; but I do not think it right for either of they . be slight and delicate ; and study so much , that she hour of repose should not be break in on . my aunt come to on , after my father go away ; and be so good as to stay till with I . she be of great use and comfort to we all . and have be very kind ; she walk here on morning to condeal with we , and offer she service , or any of she daughter ' , if they should be of use to we . " " she have better have stay at home , " cry ; " perhaps she mean well , but , under such a misfortune as this , one can not see too little of one 's neighbour . assistance be impossible ; condolence insufferable . let they triumph over we at a distance , and be satisfied . " she then proceed to inquire into the measure which she father have intend to pursue , while in town , for the recovery of he daughter . " he mean I believe , " reply , " to go to , the place where they last change horse , see the postilion and try if anything could be make out from they . he principal object must be to discover the number of the hackney coach which take they from . it have come with a fare from ; and as he think that the circumstance of a gentleman and lady be remove from one carriage into another might be remark he mean to make inquirie at . if he could anyhow discover at what house the coachman have before set down he fare , he determine to make inquirie there , and hope it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach . I do not know of any other design that he have form ; but he be in such a hurry to be gone , and he spirits so greatly discompose , that I have difficulty in find out even so much as this . " 48 the whole party be in hope of a letter from the next morning , but the post come in without bring a single line from he . he family know he to be , on all common occasion , a most negligent and dilatory correspondent ; but at such a time they have hope for exertion . they be force to conclude that he have no pleasing intelligence to send ; but even of that they would have be glad to be certain . have wait only for the letter before he set off . when he be gone , they be certain at least of receive constant information of what be go on , and they uncle promise , at parting , to prevail on to return to , as soon as he could , to the great consolation of he sister , who consider it as the only security for she husband be not be kill in a duel . and the child be to remain in a few day longer , as the former think she presence might be serviceable to she niece . she share in they attendance on , and be a great comfort to they in they hour of freedom . they other aunt also visit they frequently , and always , as she say , with the design of cheering and hearten they up --- though , as she never come without report some fresh instance of 's extravagance or irregularity , she seldom go away without leave they more dispirit than she find they . all seem strive to blacke the man who , but three month before , have be almost a angel of light . he be declare to be in debt to every tradesman in the place , and he intrigue , all honoure with the title of seduction , have be extend into every tradesman 's family . everybody declare that he be the wickedest young man in the world ; and everybody begin to find out that they have always distrust the appearance of he goodness . , though she do not credit above half of what be say , believe enough to make she former assurance of she sister 's ruin more certain ; and even , who believe still less of it , become almost hopeless , more especially as the time be now come when , if they have go to , which she have never before entirely despair of , they must in all probability have gain some news of they . leave on ; on he wife receive a letter from he ; it tell they that , on he arrival , he have immediately find out he brother , and persuade he to come to
to ; that have be to and , before he arrival , but without gain any satisfactory information ; and that he be now determined to inquire at all the principal hotel in town , as think it possible they might have go to one of they , on they first come to , before they procure lodging . himself do not expect any success from this measure , but as he brother be eager in it , he mean to assist he in pursue it . he add that see wholly disinclin at present to leave and promise to write again very soon . there be also a postscript to this effect : " I have write to to desire he to find out , if possible , from some of the young man 's intimate in the regiment , whether have any relation or connection who would be likely to know in what part of town he have now conceal himself . if there be anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gain such a clue as that , it might be of essential consequence . at present we have nothing to guide we . , I dare say , do everything in he power to satisfy we on this head . but , on second thought , perhaps , could tell we what relation he have now live , better than any other person . " be at no loss to understand from whence this deference to she authority proceed ; but it be not in she power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserve . she have never hear of he have have any relation , except a father and mother , both of whom have be dead many year . it be possible , however , that some of he companion in the ---- shire might be able to give more information ; and though she be not very sanguine in expect it , the application be a something to look forward to . every day at be now a day of anxiety ; but the most anxious part of each be when the post be expect . the arrival of letter be the grand object of every morning 's impatience . through letter , whatever of good or bad be to be tell would be communicate , and every succeeding day be expect to bring some news of importance . but before they hear again from , a letter arrive for they father , from a different quarter , from ; which , as have receive direction to open all that come for he in he absence , she accordingly read ; and , who know what curiosity he letter always be , look over she , and read it likewise . it be as follow : " I feel myself call upon , by we relationship , and my situation in life , to condeal with you on the grievous affliction you be now suffer under , of which we be yesterday inform by a letter from . be assure , my dear sir , that . Collins and myself sincerely sympathise with you and all you respectable family , in you present distress , which must be of the bitterest kind , because proceed from a cause which no time can remove . no argument shall be want on my part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune --- or that may comfort you , under a circumstance that must be of all other the most afflict to a parent 's mind . the death of you daughter would have be a bless in comparison of this . and it be the more to be lament , because there be reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte inform I , that this licentiousness of behaviour in you daughter have proceed from a faulty degree of indulgence ; though , at the same time , for the consolation of yourself and . , I be inclin to think that she own disposition must be naturally bad , or she could not be guilty of such a enormity , at so early a age . Howsoever that may be , you be grievously to be pitie ; in which opinion I be not only join by , but likewise by and she daughter , to whom I have relate the affair . they agree with I in apprehend that this false step in one daughter will be injuriious to the fortune of all the other ; for who , as herself condescendingly say , will connect themselves with such a family ? and this consideration lead I moreover to reflect , with augmented satisfaction , on a certain event of last ; for have it be otherwise , I must have be involved in all you sorrow and disgrace . let I then advise you , dear sir , to conseal yourself as much as possible , to throw off you unworthy child from you affection for ever , and leave she to reap the fruit of she own heinous offense .  I be , dear sir , etc. , etc.  do not write again till he have receive a answer from ; and then he have nothing of a pleasant nature to send . it be not know that have a single relationship with whom he keep up any connection , and it be certain that he have no near one liive . he former acquaintance have be numerous ; but since he have be in the militia , it do not appear that he be on term of particular friendship with any of they . there be no one , therefore , who could be point out as likely to give any news of he . and in the wretched state of he own finances , there be a very powerful motive
motive for secrecy , in addition to he fear of discovery by 's relation , for it have just transpire that he have leave game debt behind he to a very considerable amount . believe that more than a thousand pound would be necessary to clear he expense at . he owe a good deal in town , but he debt of honou be still more formidable . do not attempt to conceal these particular from the family . hear they with horror . " a gamester ! " she cry . " this be wholly unexpected . I have not a idea of it . " add in he letter , that they might expect to see they father at home on the follow day , which be . render spiritless by the ill - success of all they endeavour , he have yield to he brother - in - law 's entreaty that he would return to he family , and leave it to he to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for continue they pursuit . when be tell of this , she do not express so much satisfaction as she child expect , consider what she anxiety for he life have be before . " what , be he come home , and without poor ? " she cry . " sure he will not leave before he have find they . who be to fight , and make he marry she , if he come away ? " as begin to wish to be at home , it be settle that she and the child should go to , at the same time that come from it . the coach , therefore , take they the first stage of they journey , and bring its master back to . go away in all the perplexity about and she Derbyshire friend that have attend she from that part of the world . he name have never be voluntarily mention before they by she niece ; and the kind of half - expectation which have form , of they be follow by a letter from he , have end in nothing . have receive none since she return that could come from . the present unhappy state of the family render any other excuse for the lowness of she spirit unnecessary ; nothing , therefore , could be fairly conjecture from that , though , who be by this time tolerably well acquaint with she own feeling , be perfectly aware that , have she know nothing of , she could have borne the dread of 's infamy somewhat better . it would have spa she , she think , one sleepless night out of two . when arrive , he have all the appearance of he usual philosophic composure . he say as little as he have ever be in the habit of say ; make no mention of the business that have take he away , and it be some time before he daughter have courage to speak of it . it be not till the afternoon , when he have join they at tea , that venture to introduce the subject ; and then , on she briefly express she sorrow for what he must have endured , he reply , " say nothing of that . who should suffer but myself ? it have be my own do , and I ought to feel it . " " you must not be too severe upon yourself , " reply . " you may well warn I against such a evil . human nature be so prone to fall into it ! no , Lizzy , let I once in my life feel how much I have be to blame . I be not afraid of be overpower by the impression . it will pass away soon enough . " " do you suppose they to be in ? " " yes ; where else can they be so well conceal ? " " and use to want to go to , " add . " she be happy then , " say she father drily ; " and she residence there will probably be of some duration . " then after a short silence he continue : " Lizzy , I bear you no ill - will for be justifi in you advice to I last , which , consider the event , show some greatness of mind . " they be interrupt by , who come to fetch she mother 's tea . " this be a parade , " he cry , " which do one good ; it give such a elegance to misfortune ! another day I will do the same ; I will sit in my library , in my nightcap and powder gown , and give as much trouble as I can ; or , perhaps , I may defer it till run away . " " I be not go to run away , papa , " say fretfully . " if I should ever go to , I would behave better than . " " _you_ go to . I would not trust you so near it as for fifty pound ! no , , I have at last learnt to be cautious , and you will feel the effect of it . no officer be ever to enter into my house again , nor even to pass through the village . ball will be absolutely prohibit , unless you stand up with one of you sister . and you be never to stir out of door till you can prove that you have spend ten minute of every day in a rational manner . " , who take all these threat in a serious light , begin to cry . " well , well , " say he , " do not make
make yourself unhappy . if you be a good girl for the next ten year , I will take you to a review at the end of they . " 49 two day after 's return , as and be walk together in the shrubbery behind the house , they see the housekeeper come towards they , and , conclude that she come to call they to they mother , go forward to meet she ; but , instead of the expect summon , when they approach she , she say to , " I beg you pardon , madam , for interrupt you , but I be in hope you might have get some good news from town , so I take the liberty of come to ask . " " what do you mean , ? we have hear nothing from town . " " dear madam , " cry . , in great astonishment , " do not you know there be a express come for master from ? he have be here this half - hour , and master have have a letter . " run the girl , too eager to get in to have time for speech . they run through the vestibule into the breakfast - room ; from thence to the library ; they father be in neither ; and they be on the point of seek he upstairs with they mother , when they be meet by the butler , who say : " if you be look for my master , ma 'am , he be walk towards the little copse . " upon this information , they instantly pass through the hall once more , and run across the lawn after they father , who be deliberately pursue he way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock . , who be not so light nor so much in the habit of run as , soon lag behind , while she sister , pante for breath , come up with he , and eagerly cry out : " oh , papa , what news --- what news ? have you hear from my uncle ? " " yes I have have a letter from he by express . " " well , and what news do it bring --- good or bad ? " " what be there of good to be expect ? " say he , take the letter from he pocket . " but perhaps you would like to read it . " impatiently catch it from he hand . now come up . " read it aloud , " say they father , " for I hardly know myself what it be about . " " , , 2 . " at last I be able to send you some tiding of my niece , and such as , upon the whole , I hope it will give you satisfaction . after you leave I on , I be fortunate enough to find out in what part of they be . the particular I reserve till we meet ; it be enough to know they be discover . I have see they both --- " " then it be as I always hope , " cry ; " they be marry ! " read on : " I have see they both . they be not marry , nor can I find there be any intention of be so ; but if you be willing to perform the engagement which I have venture to make on you side , I hope it will not be long before they be . all that be require of you be , to assure to you daughter , by settlement , she equal share of the five thousand pound secure among you child after the decease of yourself and my sister ; and , moreover , to enter into a engagement of allow she , during you life , one hundred pound per annum . these be condition which , consider everything , I have no hesitation in complying with , as far as I think myself privileg , for you . I shall send this by express , that no time may be lose in bring I you answer . you will easily comprehend , from these particular , that 's circumstance be not so hopeless as they be generally believe to be . the world have be deceive in that respect ; and I be happy to say there will be some little money , even when all he debt be discharge , to settle on my niece , in addition to she own fortune . if , as I conclude will be the case , you send I full power to act in you name throughout the whole of this business , I will immediately give direction to for prepare a proper settlement . there will not be the smallest occasion for you come to town again ; therefore stay quiet at , and depend on my diligence and care . send back you answer as fast as you can , and be careful to write explicitly . we have judge it best that my niece should be marry from this house , of which I hope you will approve . she come to we to - day . I shall write again as soon as anything more be determine on . yours , etc. , " be it possible ? " cry , when she have finish . " can it be possible that he will marry she ? " " be not so undeserving , then , as we think he , " say she sister . " my dear father , I congratulate you . " " and have you answer the letter ? " cry . " no ; but it must be do soon . " most earnestly do she
she then entreaty he to lose no more time before he write . " oh ! my dear father , " she cry , " come back and write immediately . consider how important every moment be in such a case . " " let I write for you , " say , " if you dislike the trouble yourself . " " I dislike it very much , " he reply ; " but it must be done . " and so say , he turn back with they , and walk towards the house . " and may I ask --- " say ; " but the term , I suppose , must be comply with . " " Comply with ! I be only asham of he ask so little . " " and they must marry ! yet he be such a man ! " " yes , yes , they must marry . there be nothing else to be do . but there be two thing that I want very much to know ; one be , how much money you uncle have lay down to bring it about ; and the other , how be I ever to pay he . " " money ! my uncle ! " cry , " what do you mean , sy ? " " I mean , that no man in he sense would marry on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year during my life , and fifty after I be go . " " that be very true , " say ; " though it have not occur to I before . he debt to be discharge , and something still to remain ! oh ! it must be my uncle 's doings ! generous , good man , I be afraid he have distress himself . a small sum could not do all this . " " no , " say she father ; " be a fool if he take she with a farthing less than ten thousand pound . I should be sorry to think so ill of he , in the very beginning of we relationship . " " ten thousand pound ! heaven forbid ! how be half such a sum to be repay ? " make no answer , and each of they , deep in thought , continue silent till they reach the house . they father then go on to the library to write , and the girl walk into the breakfast - room . " and they be really to be marry ! " cry , as soon as they be by themselves . " how strange this be ! and for this we be to be thankful . that they should marry , small as be they chance of happiness , and wretch as be he character , we be force to rejoice . oh , ! " " I comfort myself with thinking , " reply , " that he certainly would not marry if he have not a real regard for she . though we kind uncle have do something towards clear he , I can not believe that ten thousand pound , or anything like it , have be advance . he have child of he own , and may have more . how could he spare half ten thousand pound ? " " if he be ever able to learn what 's debt have be , " say , " and how much be settle on he side on we sister , we shall exactly know what have do for they , because have not sixpence of he own . the kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requit . they take she home , and afforde she they personal protection and countenance , be such a sacrifice to she advantage as year of gratitude can not enough acknowledge . by this time she be actually with they ! if such goodness do not make she miserable now , she will never deserve to be happy ! what a meeting for she , when she first see my aunt ! " " we must endeaavor to forget all that have pass on either side , " say : " I hope and trust they will yet be happy . he consent to marry she be a proof , I will believe , that he be come to a right way of thinking . they mutual affection will steady they ; and I flatter myself they will settle so quietly , and live in so rational a manner , as may in time make they past imprudence forgote . " " they conduct have be such , " reply , " as neither you , nor I , nor anybody can ever forget . it be useless to talk of it . " it now occur to the girl that they mother be in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what have happen . they go to the library , therefore , and ask they father whether he would not wish they to make it know to she . he be write and , without raise he head , coolly reply : " just as you please . " " may we take my uncle 's letter to read to she ? " " take whatever you like , and get away . " take the letter from he writing - table , and they go upstairs together . and be both with : one communication would , therefore , do for all . after a slight preparation for good news , the letter be read aloud . could hardly contain herself . as soon as have read 's hope of 's be soon marry , she joy burst forth , and every follow sentence add to its exuberance . she be now in a irritation as violent from delight
delight , as she have ever be fidgety from alarm and vexation . to know that she daughter would be marry be enough . she be disturb by no fear for she felicity , nor humble by any remembrance of she misconduct . " my dear , dear ! " she cry . " this be delightful indeed ! she will be marry ! I shall see she again ! she will be marry at sixteen ! my good , kind brother ! I know how it would be . I know he would manage everything ! how I long to see she ! and to see dear too ! but the clothes , the wedding clothe ! I will write to my sister Gardiner about they directly . Lizzy , my dear , run down to you father , and ask he how much he will give she . stay , stay , I will go myself . ring the bell , , for . I will put on my thing in a moment . my dear , dear ! how merry we shall be together when we meet ! " she eldest daughter endeavoure to give some relief to the violence of these transport , by lead she thought to the obligation which 's behaviour lay they all under . " for we must attribute this happy conclusion , " she add , " in a great measure to he kindness . we be persuade that he have pledge himself to assist with money . " " well , " cry she mother , " it be all very right ; who should do it but she own uncle ? if he have not have a family of he own , I and my child must have have all he money , you know ; and it be the first time we have ever have anything from he , except a few present . well ! I be so happy ! in a short time I shall have a daughter marry . ! how well it sound ! and she be only sixteen last . my dear , I be in such a flutter , that I be sure I can not write ; so I will dictate , and you write for I . we will settle with you father about the money afterwards ; but the thing should be order immediately . " she be then proceed to all the particular of calico , muslin , and cambric , and would shortly have dictate some very plentiful order , have not , though with some difficulty , persuade she to wait till she father be at leisure to be consult . one day 's delay , she observ , would be of small importance ; and she mother be too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual . other scheme , too , come into she head . " I will go to , " say she , " as soon as I be dress , and tell the good , good news to my sister Philips . and as I come back , I can call on and . , run down and order the carriage . a airing would do I a great deal of good , I be sure . girls , can I do anything for you in ? oh ! here come ! my dear , have you hear the good news ? be go to be marry ; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at she wedding . " . begin instantly to express she joy . receive she congratulation amongst the rest , and then , sick of this folly , take refuge in she own room , that she might think with freedom . 's situation must , at best , be bad enough ; but that it be no worse , she have need to be thankful . she feel it so ; and though , in look forward , neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could be justly expect for she sister , in look back to what they have fear , only two hour ago , she feel all the advantages of what they have gai . 50 have very often wish before this period of he life that , instead of spend he whole income , he have lay by a annual sum for the better provision of he child , and of he wife , if she survive he . he now wish it more than ever . have he do he duty in that respect , need not have be indebt to she uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchase for she . the satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young man in Great to be she husband might then have rest in it be proper place . he be seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone should be forward at the sole expense of he brother - in - law , and he be determined , if possible , to find out the extent of he assistance , and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could . when first have marry , economy be hold to be perfectly useless , for , of course , they be to have a son . the son be to join in cutting off the entail , as soon as he should be of age , and the widow and younger child would by that mean be provide for . five daughter successively enter the world , but yet the son be to come ; and , for many year after 's birth , have be certain that he would . this event have at last be despaire of , but it be then too late to be save . have no turn for economy ,
, and she husband 's love of independence have alone prevent they exceed they income . five thousand pound be settle by marriage article on and the child . but in what proportion it should be divide amongst the latter depend on the will of the parent . this be one point , with regard to , at least , which be now to be settle , and could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before he . in term of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of he brother , though express most concisely , he then deliver on paper he perfect approbation of all that be do , and he willingness to fulfil the engagement that have be make for he . he have never before suppose that , could be prevail on to marry he daughter , it would be do with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present arrangement . he would scarcely be ten pound a year the loser by the hundr that be to be pay they ; for , what with she board and pocket allowance , and the continual present in money which pass to she through she mother 's hand , 's expense have be very little within that sum . that it would be do with such trifl exertion on he side , too , be another very welcome surprise ; for he wish at present be to have as little trouble in the business as possible . when the first transport of rage which have produce he activity in seek she be over , he naturally return to all he former indolence . he letter be soon dispatch ; for , though dilatory in undertaking business , he be quick in its execution . he beg to know further particular of what he be indebt to he brother , but be too angry with to send any message to she . the good news spread quickly through the house , and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood . it be borne in the latter with decent philosophy . to be sure , it would have be more for the advantage of conversation have come upon the town ; or , as the happiest alternative , be seclude from the world , in some distant farmhouse . but there be much to be talk of in marry she ; and the good - natured wish for she well - do which have proceed before from all the spiteful old lady in lose but a little of they spirit in this change of circumstance , because with such a husband she misery be consider certain . it be a fortnight since have be downstairs ; but on this happy day she again take she seat at the head of she table , and in spirits oppressively high . no sentiment of shame give a damp to she triumph . the marriage of a daughter , which have be the first object of she wish since be sixteen , be now on the point of accomplishment , and she thought and she word run wholly on those attendant of elegant nuptial , fine muslin , new carriage , and servants . she be busily search through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for she daughter , and , without know or consider what they income might be , reject many as deficient in size and importance . " might do , " say she , " if the Goulding could quit it --- or the great house at , if the drawing - room be larger ; but be too far off ! I could not bear to have she ten mile from I ; and as for , the attic be dreadful . " she husband allow she to talk on without interruption while the servants remain . but when they have withdrawn , he say to she : " . , before you take any or all of these house for you son and daughter , let we come to a right understanding . into one house in this neighbourhood they shall never have admittance . I will not encourage the impudence of either , by receive they at . " a long dispute follow this declaration ; but be firm . it soon lead to another ; and find , with amazement and horror , that she husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for he daughter . he protest that she should receive from he no mark of affection whatever on the occasion . could hardly comprehend it . that he anger could be carry to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse he daughter a privilege without which she marriage would scarcely seem valid , exceed all she could believe possible . she be more alive to the disgrace which she want of new clothes must reflect on she daughter 's nuptial , than to any sense of shame at she eloping and live with a fortnight before they take place . be now most heartily sorry that she have , from the distress of the moment , be lead to make acquaint with they fear for she sister ; for since she marriage would so shortly give the proper termination to the elopement , they might hope to conceal its unfavourable beginning from all those who be not immediately on the spot . she have no fear of its spreading farther through he means . there be few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depend ; but , at the same time , there be no one whose knowledge of a sister 's frailty would have mortify she so much --- not , however , from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to herself , for , at any rate , there seem a gulf impassable between they . have 's marriage be conclude on the
the most honourable term , it be not to be suppose that would connect himself with a family where , to every other objection , would now be add a alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with a man whom he so justly scorn . from such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink . the wish of procure she regard , which she have assure herself of he feeling in , could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this . she be humble , she be grieve ; she repent , though she hardly know of what . she become jealous of he esteem , when she could no longer hope to be benefite by it . she want to hear of he , when there seem the least chance of gain intelligence . she be convince that she could have be happy with he , when it be no longer likely they should meet . what a triumph for he , as she often think , could he know that the proposal which she have proudly spur only four month ago , would now have be most gladly and gratefully receive ! he be as generous , she doubt not , as the most generous of he sex ; but while he be mortal , there must be a triumph . she begin now to comprehend that he be exactly the man who , in disposition and talents , would most suit she . he understanding and temper , though unlike she own , would have answer all she wish . it be a union that must have be to the advantage of both ; by she ease and liveliness , he mind might have be soften , he manners improve ; and from he judgement , information , and knowledge of the world , she must have receive benefit of greater importance . but no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what connubial felicity really be . a union of a different tendency , and preclud the possibility of the other , be soon to be form in they family . how and be to be support in tolerable independence , she could not imagine . but how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who be only bring together because they passion be stronger than they virtue , she could easily conjecture . * * * * * soon write again to he brother . to 's acknowledgment he brieinitely reply , with assurance of he eagerness to promote the welfare of any of he family ; and conclude with entreaty that the subject might never be mention to he again . the principal purport of he letter be to inform they that have resolve on quit the militia . " it be greatly my wish that he should do so , " he add , " as soon as he marriage be fix on . and I think you will agree with I , in consider the removal from that corps as highly advisable , both on he account and my niece 's . it be 's intention to go into the regular ; and among he former friend , there be still some who be able and willing to assist he in the army . he have the promise of a ensigncy in ---- 's regiment , now quarter in the . it be a advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom . he promise fairly ; and I hope among different people , where they may each have a character to preserve , they will both be more prudent . I have write to , to inform he of we present arrangement , and to request that he will satisfy the various creditor of in and near , with assurance of speedy payment , for which I have pledge myself . and will you give yourself the trouble of carry similar assurance to he creditor in , of whom I shall subjoin a list accord to he information ? he have give in all he debt ; I hope at least he have not deceive we . have we direction , and all will be complete in a week . they will then join he regiment , unless they be first invite to ; and I understand from , that my niece be very desirous of see you all before she leave the South . she be well , and beg to be dutifully remember to you and you mother .--- yours , etc. , and he daughter see all the advantages of 's removal from the ---- shire as clearly as could do . but be not so well please with it . 's be settle in the , just when she have expect most pleasure and pride in she company , for she have by no means give up she plan of they residing in , be a severe disappointment ; and , besides , it be such a pity that should be take from a regiment where she be acquaint with everybody , and have so many favourite . " she be so fond of , " say she , " it will be quite shock to send she away ! and there be several of the young man , too , that she like very much . the officer may not be so pleasant in ---- 's regiment . " he daughter 's request , for such it might be consider , of be admit into she family again before she set off for the , receive at first a absolute negative . but and , who agree in wishing , for the sake of they sister 's feeling and consequence , that she should be notice on she marriage by she parent , urge he so earnestly yet so rationally and so
so mildly , to receive she and she husband at , as soon as they be married , that he be prevail on to think as they think , and act as they wish . and they mother have the satisfaction of know that she would be able to show she marry daughter in the neighbourhood before she be banish to the . when write again to he brother , therefore , he send he permission for they to come ; and it be settled , that as soon as the ceremony be over , they should proceed to Longbourn . be surprised , however , that should consent to such a scheme , and have she consult only she own inclination , any meeting with he would have be the last object of she wish . chapter 51 they sister 's wedding day arrive ; and and feel for she probably more than she feel for herself . the carriage be send to meet they at ----, and they be to return in it by dinner - time . they arrival be dread by the elder , and more especially , who give Lydia the feeling which would have attend herself , have she be the culprit , and be wretch in the thought of what she sister must endure . they come . the family be assemble in the breakfast room to receive they . Smile deck the face of as the carriage drive up to the door ; she husband look impenetrably grave ; she daughter , alarm , anxious , uneasy . 's voice be hear in the vestibule ; the door be thrown open , and she run into the room . she mother step forwards , embrace she , and welcome she with rapture ; give she hand , with a affectionate smile , to , who follow he lady ; and wish they both joy with a alacrity which shew no doubt of they happiness . they reception from , to whom they then turn , be not quite so cordial . he countenance rather gain in austerity ; and he scarcely open he lip . the easy assurance of the young couple , indeed , be enough to provoke he . be disgust , and even be shocked . be still ; untamed , unabashed , wild , noisy , and fearless . she turn from sister to sister , demand they congratulation ; and when at length they all sit down , look eagerly round the room , take notice of some little alteration in it , and observe , with a laugh , that it be a great while since she have be there . be not at all more distressed than herself , but he manners be always so pleasing , that have he character and he marriage be exactly what they ought , he smile and he easy address , while he claim they relationship , would have deligh they all . have not before believe he quite equal to such assurance ; but she sit down , resolve within herself to draw no limit in future to the impudence of a impudent man . she blush , and blush ; but the cheek of the two who cause they confusion suffer no variation of colour . there be no want of discourse . the bride and she mother could neither of they talk fast enough ; and , who happen to sit near , begin inquire after he acquaintance in that neighbourhood , with a good humoured ease which she feel very unable to equal in she reply . they seem each of they to have the happiest memory in the world . nothing of the past be recollect with pain ; and lead voluntarily to subject which she sister would not have allude to for the world . " only think of its be three month , " she cry , " since I go away ; it seem but a fortnight I declare ; and yet there have be thing enough happene in the time . good gracious ! when I go away , I be sure I have no more idea of be marry till I come back again ! though I think it would be very good fun if I be . " she father lift up he eye . be distress . look expressively at ; but she , who never hear nor see anything of which she choose to be insensible , gaily continue , " oh ! mamma , do the people hereabout know I be marry to - day ? I be afraid they might not ; and we overtake in he curricle , so I be determine he should know it , and so I let down the side - glass next to he , and take off my glove , and let my hand just rest upon the window frame , so that he might see the ring , and then I bow and smile like anything . " could bear it no longer . she get up , and run out of the room ; and return no more , till she hear they pass through the hall to the dining parlour . she then join they soon enough to see , with anxious parade , walk up to she mother 's right hand , and hear she say to she eldest sister , " ah ! , I take you place now , and you must go lower , because I be a married woman . " it be not to be suppose that time would give that embarrassment from which she have be so wholly free at first . she ease and good spirit increase . she longe to see , the Lucas , and all they other neighbour , and to hear herself call " . " by each of they ; and in
in the mean time , she go after dinner to show she ring , and boast of be marry , to and the two housemaid . " well , mamma , " say she , when they be all return to the breakfast room , " and what do you think of my husband ? be not he a charme man ? I be sure my sister must all envy I . I only hope they may have half my good luck . they must all go to . that be the place to get husband . what a pity it be , mamma , we do not all go . " " very true ; and if I have my will , we should . but my dear , I do not at all like you go such a way off . must it be so ? " " oh , lord ! yes ; -- there be nothing in that . I shall like it of all thing . you and papa , and my sister , must come down and see we . we shall be at all the winter , and I dare say there will be some ball , and I will take care to get good partner for they all . " " I should like it beyond anything ! " say she mother . " and then when you go away , you may leave one or two of my sister behind you ; and I dare say I shall get husband for they before the winter be over . " " I thank you for my share of the favour , " say ; " but I do not particularly like you way of get husband . " they visitor be not to remain above ten day with they . have receive he commission before he leave , and he be to join he regiment at the end of a fortnight . no one but Mrs . regrett that they stay would be so short ; and she make the most of the time by visit about with she daughter , and have very frequent party at home . these party be acceptable to all ; to avoid a family circle be even more desirable to such as do think , than such as do not . 's affection for be just what have expect to find it ; not equal to 's for he . she have scarcely need she present observation to be satisfied , from the reason of thing , that they elopement have be bring on by the strength of she love , rather than by he ; and she would have wonder why , without violently care for she , he choose to elope with she at all , have she not feel certain that he flight be render necessary by distress of circumstance ; and if that be the case , he be not the young man to resist a opportunity of have a companion . be exceedingly fond of he . he be she dear Wickham on every occasion ; no one be to be put in competition with he . he do every thing best in the world ; and she be sure he would kill more bird on the first of , than any body else in the country . one morning , soon after they arrival , as she be sit with she two elder sister , she say to : " Lizzy , I never give you a account of my wedding , I believe . you be not by , when I tell and the other all about it . be not you curious to hear how it be manage ? " " no really , " reply ; " I think there can not be too little say on the subject . " " ! you be so strange ! but I must tell you how it go off . we be marry , you know , at . Clement 's , because 's lodging be in that parish . and it be settle that we should all be there by eleven o'clock . my uncle and aunt and I be to go together ; and the other be to meet we at the church . well , morning come , and I be in such a fuss ! I be so afraid , you know , that something would happen to put it off , and then I should have go quite distracted . and there be my aunt , all the time I be dress , preach and talk away just as if she be read a sermon . however , I do not hear above one word in ten , for I be think , you may suppose , of my dear Wickham . I longe to know whether he would be marry in he blue coat . " " well , and so we breakfaste at ten as usual ; I think it would never be over ; for , by the bye , you be to understand , that my uncle and aunt be horrid unpleasant all the time I be with they . if you will believe I , I do not once put my foot out of door , though I be there a fortnight . not one party , or scheme , or anything . to be sure be rather thin , but , however , the be open . well , and so just as the carriage come to the door , my uncle be call away upon business to that horrid man . and then , you know , when once they get together , there be no end of it . well , I be so frightened I do not know what to do , for my uncle be to give I away ; and if we be beyond
beyond the hour , we could not be marry all day . but , luckily , he come back again in ten minute ' time , and then we all set out . however , I recollect afterwards that if he have be prevent go , the wedding need not be put off , for might have do as well . " " ! " repeat , in utter amazement . " oh , yes !-- he be to come there with , you know . but gracious I ! I quite forget ! I ought not to have say a word about it . I promise they so faithfully ! what will say ? it be to be such a secret ! " " if it be to be secret , " say , " say not another word on the subject . you may depend upon my seek no further . " " oh ! certainly , " say , though burn with curiosity ; " we will ask you no question . " " thank you , " say , " for if you do , I should certainly tell you all , and then would be angry . " on such encouragement to ask , be force to put it out of she power , by run away . but to live in ignorance on such a point be impossible ; or at least it be impossible not to try for information . have be at she sister 's wedding . it be exactly a scene , and exactly among people , where he have apparently least to do , and least temptation to go . Conjecture as to the meaning of it , rapid and wild , hurrie into she brain ; but she be satisfied with none . those that best please she , as place he conduct in the noblest light , see most improbable . she could not bear such suspense ; and hastily seize a sheet of paper , write a short letter to she aunt , to request a explanation of what have dropt , if it be compatible with the secrecy which have be intend . " you may readily comprehend , " she add , " what my curiosity must be to know how a person unconnecte with any of we , and ( comparatively speak ) a stranger to we family , should have be amongst you at such a time . pray write instantly , and let I understand it --- unless it be , for very cogent reason , to remain in the secrecy which seem to think necessary ; and then I must endeaavor to be satisfied with ignorance . " " not that I shall , though , " she add to herself , as she finish the letter ; " and my dear aunt , if you do not tell I in a honourable manner , I shall certainly be reduce to trick and stratagem to find it out . " 's delicate sense of honou would not allow she to speak to privately of what have let fall ; be glad of it ;-- till it appear whether she inquiry would receive any satisfaction , she have rather be without a confidante . 52 have the satisfaction of receive a answer to she letter as soon as she possibly wcould . she be no sooner in possession of it than , hurrie into the little copse , where she be least likely to be interrupt , she sit down on one of the bench and prepare to be happy ; for the length of the letter convince she that it do not contain a denial . " Gracechurch street , . 6 . " I have just receive you letter , and shall devote this whole morning to answer it , as I foresee that a little writing will not comprise what I have to tell you . I must confess myself surprise by you application ; I do not expect it from you . do not think I angry , however , for I only mean to let you know that I have not imagine such inquiry to be necessary on you side . if you do not choose to understand I , forgive my impertinence . you uncle be as much surprise as I be --- and nothing but the belief of you be a party concern would have allow he to act as he have do . but if you be really innocent and ignorant , I must be more explicit . " on the very day of my come home from , you uncle have a most unexpected visitor . call , and be shut up with he several hour . it be all over before I arrive ; so my curiosity be not so dreadfully rack as you be seem to have be . he come to tell that he have find out where you sister and , and that he have see and talk with they both ; repeatedly , once . from what I can collect , he leave only one day after ourselves , and come to town with the resolution of hunting for they . the motive profess be he conviction of its be owe to himself that 's worthlessness have not be so well know as to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide in he . he generously impute the whole to he mistaken pride , and confess that he have before think it beneath he to lay he private action open to the world . he character be to speak for itself . he call it , therefore , he duty to step forward , and endeavou to remedy a evil which have be bring on by himself . if he have another motive , I be sure it would never disgrace he .
. he have be some day in town , before he be able to discover they ; but he have something to direct he search , which be more than we have ; and the consciousness of this be another reason for he resolving to follow we . " there be a lady , it seem , a , who be some time ago governess to , and be dismiss from she charge on some cause of disapprobation , though he do not say what . she then take a large house in - street , and have since maintain herself by letting lodging . this be , he know , intimately acquaint with ; and he go to she for intelligence of he as soon as he get to town . but it be two or three day before he could get from she what he want . she would not betray she trust , I suppose , without bribery and corruption , for she really do know where she friend be to be find . Wickhbe indeed have go to she on they first arrival in , and have she be able to receive they into she house , they would have take up they abode with she . at length , however , we kind friend procure the wish - for direction . they be in ---- street . he see , and afterwards insist on see . he first object with she , he acknowledge , have be to persuade she to quit she present disgraceful situation , and return to she friend as soon as they could be prevail on to receive she , offer he assistance , as far as it would go . but he find absolutely resolve on remain where she be . she care for none of she friend ; she want no help of he ; she would not hear of leave . she be sure they should be marry some time or other , and it do not much signify when . since such be she feeling , it only remain , he think , to secure and expedite a marriage , which , in he very first conversation with , he easily lear not have never be he design . he confess himself oblige to leave the regiment , on account of some debt of honour , which be very pressing ; and scruple not to lay all the ill - consequence of 's flight on she own folly alone . he mean to resign he commission immediately ; and as to he future situation , he could conjecture very little about it . he must go somewhere , but he do not know where , and he know he should have nothing to live on . " ask he why he have not marry you sister at once . though be not imagine to be very rich , he would have be able to do something for he , and he situation must have be benefite by marriage . but he find , in reply to this question , that still cherish the hope of more effectually make he fortune by marriage in some other country . under such circumstance , however , he be not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief . " they meet several time , for there be much to be discuss . Wickhbe of course want more than he could get ; but at length be reduce to be reasonable . " every thing be settle between they , 's next step be to make you uncle acquaint with it , and he first call in street the evening before I come home . but could not be see , and find , on further inquiry , that you father be still with he , but would quit town the next morning . he do not judge you father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as you uncle , and therefore readily postpone see he till after the departure of the former . he do not leave he name , and till the next day it be only know that a gentleman have call on business . " on he come again . you father be go , you uncle at home , and , as I say before , they have a great deal of talk together . " they meet again on , and then I see he too . it be not all settle before : as soon as it be , the express be send off to . but we visitor be very obstinate . I fancy , , that obstinacy be the real defect of he character , after all . he have be accuse of many fault at different time , but this be the true one . nothing be to be do that he do not do himself ; though I be sure ( and I do not speak it to be thanke , therefore say nothing about it ) , you uncle would most readily have settle the whole . " they battle it together for a long time , which be more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserv . but at last you uncle be force to yield , and instead of be allow to be of use to he niece , be force to put up with only have the probable credit of it , which go sorely against the grain ; and I really believe you letter this morning give he great pleasure , because it require a explanation that would rob he of he borrowed feather , and give the praise where it be due . but , , this must go no farther than yourself , or at most . " you know pretty well , I suppose , what have be do for the young people .
. he debt be to be pay , amount , I believe , to considerably more than a thousand pound , another thousand in addition to she own settle upon she , and he commission purchase . the reason why all this be to be do by he alone , be such as I have give above . it be owe to he , to he reserve and want of proper consideration , that 's character have be so misunderstood , and consequently that he have be receive and notice as he be . perhaps there be some truth in this ; though I doubt whether he reserve , or anybody be reserve , can be answerable for the event . but in spite of all this fine talk , my dear , you may rest perfectly assure that you uncle would never have yield , if we have not give he credit for another interest in the affair . " when all this be resolve on , he return again to he friend , who be still stay at ; but it be agree that he should be in once more when the wedding take place , and all money matter be then to receive the last finish . " I believe I have now tell you every thing . it be a relation which you tell I be to give you great surprise ; I hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure . come to we ; and have constant admission to the house . he be exactely what he have be , when I know he in ; but I would not tell you how little I be satisfied with she behaviour while she stay with we , if I have not perceive , by 's letter last , that she conduct on come home be exactly of a piece with it , and therefore what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain . I talk to she repeatedly in the most serious manner , represent to she all the wickedness of what she have do , and all the unhappiness she have bring on she family . if she hear I , it be by good luck , for I be sure she do not listen . I be sometimes quite provoke , but then I recollect my dear and , and for they sake have patience with she . " be punctual in he return , and as inform you , attend the wedding . he dine with we the next day , and be to leave town again on or . will you be very angry with I , my dear , if I take this opportunity of say ( what I be never bold enough to say before ) how much I like he . he behaviour to we have , in every respect , be as pleasing as when we be in . he understanding and opinion all please I ; he want nothing but a little more liveliness , and that , if he marry prudently , he wife may teach he . I think he very sly ; -- he hardly ever mention you name . but slyness seem the fashion . " pray forgive I if I have be very presuming , or at least do not punish I so far as to exclude I from p . I shall never be quite happy till I have be all round the park . a low phaeton , with a nice little pair of poney , would be the very thing . " but I must write no more . the child have be want I this half hour . " yours , very sincerely , " . " the contents of this letter throw into a flutter of spirit , in which it be difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bear the greatest share . the vague and unsettled suspicion which uncertainty have produce of what might have be do to forward she sister 's match , which she have fear to encourage as a exertion of goodness too great to be probable , and at the same time dread to be just , from the pain of obligation , be prove beyond they greatest extent to be true ! he have follow they purposely to town , he have take on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research ; in which supplication have be necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and despise , and where he be reduce to meet , frequently meet , reason with , persuade , and finally bribe , the man whom he always most wish to avoid , and whose very name it be punishment to he to pronounce . he have do all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem . she heart do whisper that he have do it for she . but it be a hope shortly check by other consideration , and she soon feel that even she vanity be insufficient , when require to depend on he affection for she --- for a woman who have already refuse he --- as able to overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with . brother - in - law of ! every kind of pride must revolt from the connection . he have , to be sure , do much . she be asham to think how much . but he have give a reason for he interference , which ask no extraordinary stretch of belief . it be reasonable that he should feel he have be wrong ; he have liberality , and he have the means of exercise it ; and though she would not place herself as he principal inducement , she could , perhaps , believe that remain partiality for she might assist he endeavour in a cause
cause where she peace of mind must be materially concerned . it be painful , exceedingly painful , to know that they be under obligation to a person who could never receive a return . they owe the restoration of , she character , every thing , to he . oh ! how heartily do she grieve over every ungracious sensation she have ever encourage , every saucy speech she have ever direct towards he . for herself she be humble ; but she be proud of he . proud that in a cause of compassion and honour , he have be able to get the better of himself . she read over she aunt 's commendation of he again and again . it be hardly enough ; but it please she . she be even sensible of some pleasure , though mix with regret , on find how steadfastly both she and she uncle have be persuade that affection and confidence subsist between and herself . she be rouse from she seat , and she reflection , by some one 's approach ; and before she could strike into another path , she be overtake by . " I be afraid I interrupt you solitary ramble , my dear sister ? " say he , as he join she . " you certainly do , " she reply with a smile ; " but it do not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome . " " I should be sorry indeed , if it be . we be always good friend ; and now we be better . " " true . be the other come out ? " " I do not know . and be go in the carriage to . and so , my dear sister , I find , from we uncle and aunt , that you have actually see . " she reply in the affirmative . " I almost envy you the pleasure , and yet I believe it would be too much for I , or else I could take it in my way to . and you see the old housekeeper , I suppose ? poor Reynold , she be always very fond of I . but of course she do not mention my name to you . " " yes , she do . " " and what do she say ? " " that you be go into the army , and she be afraid have --- not turn out well . at such a distance as that , you know , thing be strangely misrepresent . " " certainly , " he reply , bite he lip . hope she have silence he ; but he soon afterwards say : " I be surprised to see in town last month . we pass each other several time . I wonder what he can be do there . " " perhaps prepare for he marriage with , " say . " it must be something particular , to take he there at this time of year . " " undoubtedly . do you see he while you be at ? I think I understand from the Gardiner that you have . " " yes ; he introduce we to he sister . " " and do you like she ? " " very much . " " I have hear , indeed , that she be uncommonly improve within this year or two . when I last see she , she be not very promising . I be very glad you like she . I hope she will turn out well . " " I dare say she will ; she have get over the most try age . " " do you go by the village of ? " " I do not recollect that we do . " " I mention it , because it be the living which I ought to have have . a most delightful place !-- excellent ! it would have suite I in every respect . " " how should you have like make sermon ? " " Exceedingly well . I should have consider it as part of my duty , and the exertion would soon have be nothing . one ought not to repine ; -- but , to be sure , it would have be such a thing for I ! the quiet , the retirement of such a life would have answer all my idea of happiness ! but it be not to be . do you ever hear mention the circumstance , when you be in ? " " I have hear from authority , which I think as good , that it be leave you conditionally only , and at the will of the present patron . " " you have . yes , there be something in that ; I tell you so from the first , you may remember . " " I do hear , too , that there be a time , when sermon - making be not so palatable to you as it seem to be at present ; that you actually declare you resolution of never take order , and that the business have be compromise accordingly . " " you do ! and it be not wholly without foundation . you may remember what I tell you on that point , when first we talk of it . " they be now almost at the door of the house , for she have walk fast to get rid of he ; and unwilling , for she sister 's sake , to provoke he , she only say in reply , with a good -humoured smile : " come , , we be brother and sister , you know . do not let we quarrel about the past . in future , I hope we shall be always of one
one mind . " she hold out she hand ; he kiss it with affectionate gallantry , though he hardly know how to look , and they enter the house . 53 be so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that he never again distress himself , or provoke he dear sister , by introduce the subject of it ; and she be pleased to find that she have say enough to keep he quiet . the day of he and 's departure soon come , and be force to submit to a separation , which , as she husband by no means enter into she scheme of they all go to , be likely to continue at least a twelvemonth . " oh ! my dear , " she cry , " when shall we meet again ? " " oh , lord ! I do not know . not these two or three year , perhaps . " " write to I very often , my dear . " " as often as I can . but you know married woman have never much time for writing . my sister may write to I . they will have nothing else to do . " 's adieus be much more affectionate than he wife 's . he smile , look handsome , and say many pretty thing . " he be as fine a fellow , " say , as soon as they be out of the house , " as ever I see . he simper , and smirk , and make love to we all . I be prodigiously proud of he . I defy even himself to produce a more valuable son - in - law . " the loss of she daughter make very dull for several day . " I often think , " say she , " that there be nothing so bad as part with one 's friend . one seem so forlorn without they . " " this be the consequence , you see , Madam , of marry a daughter , " say . " it must make you better satisfi that you other four be single . " " it be no such thing . do not leave I because she be married , but only because she husband 's regiment happen to be so far off . if that have be nearer , she would not have go so soon . " but the spiritless condition which this event throw she into be shortly relieved , and she mind open again to the agitation of hope , by a article of news which then begin to be in circulation . the housekeeper at have receive order to prepare for the arrival of she master , who be come down in a day or two , to shoot there for several week . be quite in the fidget . she look at , and smile and shake she head by turn . " well , well , and so be come down , sister , " ( for first bring she the news ) . " well , so much the better . not that I care about it , though . he be nothing to we , you know , and I be sure I never want to see he again . but , however , he be very welcome to come to , if he like it . and who know what may happen ? but that be nothing to we . you know , sister , we agree long ago never to mention a word about it . and so , be it quite certain he be come ? " " you may depend on it , " reply the other , " for . be in last night ; I see she pass by , and go out myself on purpose to know the truth of it ; and she tell I that it be certain true . he come down on at the latest , very likely on . she be go to the butcher 's , she tell I , on purpose to order in some meat on , and she have get three couple of duck just fit to be kill . " have not be able to hear of he come without change colour . it be many month since she have mention he name to ; but now , as soon as they be alone together , she say : " I see you look at I to - day , , when my aunt tell we of the present report ; and I know I appear distressed . but do not imagine it be from any silly cause . I be only confused for the moment , because I feel that I should be look at . I do assure you that the news do not affect I either with pleasure or pain . I be glad of one thing , that he come alone ; because we shall see the less of he . not that I be afraid of myself , but I dread other people 's remark . " do not know what to make of it . have she not see he in , she might have suppose he capable of come there with no other view than what be acknowledge ; but she still think he partial to , and she wave as to the greater probability of he come there with he friend 's permission , or be bold enough to come without it . " yet it be hard , " she sometimes think , " that this poor man can not come to a house which he have legally hire , without raise all this speculation ! I will leave he to himself . " in spite of what she sister declare , and really believe to be she feeling in the expectation
expectation of he arrival , could easily perceive that she spirit be affect by it . they be more disturbed , more unequal , than she have often see they . the subject which have be so warmly canvass between they parent , about a twelvemonth ago , be now bring forward again . " as soon as ever come , my dear , " say , " you will wait on he of course . " " no , no . you force I into visit he last year , and promise , if I go to see he , he should marry one of my daughter . but it end in nothing , and I will not be send on a fool 's errand again . " he wife represent to he how absolutely necessary such a attention would be from all the neighbour gentleman , on he return to . " ' a etiquette I despise , " say he . " if he want we society , let he seek it . he know where we live . I will not spend my hour in run after my neighbour every time they go away and come back again . " " well , all I know is , that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait on he . but , however , that sha not prevent my ask he to dine here , I be determine . we must have . and the Goulding soon . that will make thirteen with ourselves , so there will be just room at table for he . " Console by this resolution , she be the better able to bear she husband 's incivility ; though it be very mortifying to know that she neighbour might all see , in consequence of it , before they do . as the day of he arrival drew near : " I begin to be sorry that he come at all , " say to she sister . " it would be nothing ; I could see he with perfect indifference , but I can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talk of . my mother mean well ; but she do not know , no one can know , how much I suffer from what she say . happy shall I be , when he stay at be over ! " " I wish I could say anything to comfort you , " reply ; " but it be wholly out of my power . you must feel it ; and the usual satisfaction of preach patience to a sufferer be deny I , because you have always so much . " arrive . , through the assistance of servant , contrive to have the earliest tiding of it , that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on she side might be as long as it could . she count the day that must intervene before they invitation could be send ; hopeless of see he before . but on the third morning after he arrival in , she see he , from she dressing - room window , enter the paddock and ride towards the house . she daughter be eagerly call to partake of she joy . resolutely keep she place at the table ; but , to satisfy she mother , go to the window --- she look , -- she see with he , and sit down again by she sister . " there be a gentleman with he , mamma , " say ; " who can it be ? " " some acquaintance or other , my dear , I suppose ; I be sure I do not know . " " ! " reply , " it look just like that man that use to be with he before . what 's - he - name . that tall , proud man . " " good gracious ! !-- and so it do , I vow . well , any friend of 's will always be welcome here , to be sure ; but else I must say that I hate the very sight of he . " look at with surprise and concern . she know but little of they meeting in , and therefore feel for the awkwardness which must attend she sister , in see he almost for the first time after receive he explanatory letter . both sister be uncomfortable enough . each felt for the other , and of course for themselves ; and they mother talk on , of she dislike of , and she resolution to be civil to he only as 's friend , without be hear by either of they . but have source of uneasiness which could not be suspect by , to whom she have never yet have courage to show 's letter , or to relate she own change of sentiment towards he . to , he could be only a man whose proposal she have refuse , and whose merit she have undervalue ; but to she own more extensive information , he be the person to whom the whole family be indebt for the first of benefit , and whom she regard herself with a interest , if not quite so tender , at least as reasonable and just as what feel for . she astonishment at he come --- at he come to , to , and voluntarily seek she again , be almost equal to what she have know on first witnessing he alte behaviour in . the colour which have be drive from she face , return for half a minute with a additional glow , and a smile of delight add lustre to she eye , as she think for that space of time that he affection and wish must still be unshaken . but she would not be secure . "
" let I first see how he behave , " say she ; " it will then be early enough for expectation . " she sit intently at work , strive to be compose , and without daring to lift up she eye , till anxious curiosity carry they to the face of she sister as the servant be approach the door . look a little paler than usual , but more sedate than have expect . on the gentleman 's appear , she colour increase ; yet she receive they with tolerable ease , and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance . say as little to either as civility would allow , and sit down again to she work , with a eagerness which it do not often command . she have venture only one glance at . he look serious , as usual ; and , she think , more as he have be use to look in , than as she have see he at . but , perhaps he could not in she mother 's presence be what he be before she uncle and aunt . it be a painful , but not a improbable , conjecture . Bingley , she have likewise see for a instant , and in that short period see he look both pleased and embarrassed . he be receive by with a degree of civility which make she two daughter asham , especially when contrast with the cold and ceremonious politeness of she curtsey and address to he friend . , particularly , who know that she mother owed to the latter the preservation of she favourite daughter from irremediable infamy , be hurt and distress to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill apply . , after inquire of she how and do , a question which she could not answer without confusion , say scarcely anything . he be not seat by she ; perhaps that be the reason of he silence ; but it have not be so in . there he have talk to she friend , when he could not to herself . but now several minute elapse without bring the sound of he voice ; and when occasionally , unable to resist the impulse of curiosity , she raise he eye to he face , she as often find he look at as at herself , and frequently on no object but the ground . more thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please , than when they last met , be plainly express . she be disappointed , and angry with herself for be so . " could I expect it to be otherwise ! " say she . " yet why do he come ? " she be in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself ; and to he she have hardly courage to speak . she inquire after he sister , but could do no more . " it be a long time , , since you go away , " say . he readily agree to it . " I begin to be afraid you would never come back again . people do say you mean to quit the place entirely at ; but , however , I hope it be not true . a great many change have happen in the neighbourhood , since you go away . be married and settled . and one of my own daughter . I suppose you have hear of it ; indeed , you must have see it in the papers . it be in the and the Courier , I know ; though it be not put in as it ought to be . it be only say , ' lately , , to , ' without there be a syllable said of she father , or the place where she liv , or anything . it be my brother 's draw up too , and I wonder how he come to make such a awkward business of it . do you see it ? " reply that he do , and make he congratulation . da not lift up she eye . how look , therefore , she could not tell . " it be a delightful thing , to be sure , to have a daughter well married , " continue she mother , " but at the same time , , it be very hard to have she take such a way from I . they be go down to , a place quite northward , it seem , and there they be to stay I do not know how long . he regiment be there ; for I suppose you have hear of he leave the ---- shire , and of he be go into the regular . thank heaven ! he have some friend , though perhaps not so many as he deserfe . " , who know this to be level at , be in such misery of shame , that she could hardly keep she seat . it draw from she , however , the exertion of speak , which nothing else have so effectually do before ; and she ask whether he mean to make any stay in the country at present . a few week , he believe . " when you have kill all you own bird , , " say she mother , " I beg you will come here , and shoot as many as you please on 's manor . I be sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you , and will save all the best of the covie for you . " 's misery increase , at such unnecessary , such officious attention ! be the same fair prospect to arise at present as have flatter they a year ago , every thing , she
she be persuade , would be hasten to the same vexatious conclusion . at that instant , she feel that year of happiness could not make or herself amend for moment of such painful confusion . " the first wish of my heart , " say she to herself , " be never more to be in company with either of they . they society can afford no pleasure that will ato for such wretchedness as this ! let I never see either one or the other again ! " yet the misery , for which year of happiness be to offer no compensation , receive soon afterwards material relief , from observe how much the beauty of she sister re-kindle the admiration of she former lover . when first he come in , he have speak to she but little ; but every five minute seem to be give she more of he attention . he find she as handsome as she have be last year ; as good natured , and as unaffected , though not quite so chatty . be anxious that no difference should be perceive in she at all , and be really persuade that she talk as much as ever . but she mind be so busily engage , that she do not always know when she be silent . when the gentleman rise to go away , . be mindful of she intend civility , and they be invite and engage to dine at in a few day time . " you be quite a visit in my debt , , " she add , " for when you go to town last winter , you promise to take a family dinner with we , as soon as you return . I have not forget , you see ; and I assure you , I be very much disappointed that you do not come back and keep you engagement . " look a little silly at this reflection , and say something of he concern at have be prevent by business . they then go away . have be strongly inclin to ask they to stay and dine there that day ; but , though she always keep a very good table , she do not think anything less than two course could be good enough for a man on whom she have such anxious design , or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who have ten thousand a year . 54 as soon as they be gone , walk out to recover she spirits ; or in other word , to dwell without interruption on those subject that must deae they more . Darcy's behaviour astonish and vex she . " why , if he come only to be silent , grave , and indifferent , " say she , " do he come at all ? " she could settle it in no way that give she pleasure . " he could be still amiable , still please , to my uncle and aunt , when he be in town ; and why not to I ? if he fear I , why come hither ? if he no longer care for I , why silent ? Tease , tease , man ! I will think no more about he . " she resolution be for a short time involuntarily keep by the approach of she sister , who join she with a cheerful look , which show she better satisfied with they visitor , than . " now , " say she , " that this first meeting be over , I feel perfectly easy . I know my own strength , and I shall never be embarrass again by he come . I be glad he dine here on . it will then be publicly see that , on both side , we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance . " " yes , very indifferent indeed , " say , laughingly . " oh , , take care . " " my dear Lizzy , you can not think I so weak , as to be in danger now ? " " I think you be in very great danger of make he as much in love with you as ever . " * * * * * they do not see the gentleman again till ; and , in the meanwhile , be give way to all the happy scheme , which the good humour and common politeness of , in half a hour 's visit , have revive . on there be a large party assemble at ; and the two who be most anxiously expect , to the credit of they punctuality as sportsman , be in very good time . when they repair to the dining - room , eagerly watch to see whether Bingley would take the place , which , in all they former party , have belong to he , by she sister . she prudent mother , occupy by the same idea , forbore to invite he to sit by herself . on enter the room , he seem to hesitate ; but happen to look round , and happen to smile : it be decide . he place himself by she . , with a triumphant sensation , look towards he friend . he bear it with noble indifference , and she would have imagine that have receive he sanction to be happy , have she not see he eye likewise turn towards , with a expression of half - laugh alarm . he behaviour to she sister be such , during dinner time , as show a admiration of she , which , though more guarded than formerly , persuade , that if leave wholly to himself , 's happiness , and he own , would be speedily secure . though she da not depend upon the
the consequence , she yet receive pleasure from observe he behaviour . it give she all the animation that she spirit could boast ; for she be in no cheerful humour . be almost as far from she as the table could divide they . he be on one side of she mother . she know how little such a situation would give pleasure to either , or make either appear to advantage . she be not near enough to hear any of they discourse , but she could see how seldom they speak to each other , and how formal and cold be they manner whenever they do . she mother 's ungraciousness , make the sense of what they owed he more painful to 's mind ; and she would , at time , have give anything to be privileged to tell he that he kindness be neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family . she be in hope that the evening would afford some opportunity of bring they together ; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enable they to enter into something more of conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attend he entrance . anxious and uneasy , the period which pass in the drawing - room , before the gentleman come , be wearisome and dull to a degree that almost make she uncivil . she look forward to they entrance as the point on which all she chance of pleasure for the evening must depend . " if he do not come to I , then , " say she , " I shall give he up for ever . " the gentleman come ; and she think he look as if he would have answer she hope ; but , alas ! the lady have crowd round the table , where be make tea , and pour out the coffee , in so close a confederacy that there be not a single vacancy near she which would admit of a chair . and on the gentleman 's approaching , one of the girl move closer to she than ever , and say , in a whisper : " the man sha not come and part we , I be determine . we want none of they ; do we ? " have walk away to another part of the room . she follow he with she eye , envy everyone to whom he speak , have scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee ; and then be enrage against herself for be so silly ! " a man who have once be refuse ! how could I ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of he love ? be there one among the sex , who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman ? there be no indignity so abhorrent to they feeling ! " she be a little revived , however , by he bring back he coffee cup himself ; and she seize the opportunity of say : " be you sister at still ? " " yes , she will remain there till . " " and quite alone ? have all she friend leave she ? " " . be with she . the other have be go on to , these three week . " she could think of nothing more to say ; but if he wish to converse with she , he might have better success . he stand by she , however , for some minute , in silence ; and , at last , on the young lady 's whispering to again , he walk away . when the tea - thing be remove , and the card - table place , the lady all rose , and be then hope to be soon join by he , when all she view be overthrown by see he fall a victim to she mother 's rapacity for whist player , and in a few moment after seat with the rest of the party . she now lose every expectation of pleasure . they be confine for the evening at different table , and she have nothing to hope , but that he eye be so often turn towards she side of the room , as to make he play as unsuccessfully as herself . have desig to keep the two Netherfield gentleman to supper ; but they carriage be unluckily order before any of the other , and she have no opportunity of detain they . " well girl , " say she , as soon as they be leave to themselves , " what say you to the day ? I think every thing have pass off uncommonly well , I assure you . the dinner be as well dress as any I ever see . the venison be roast to a turn --- and everybody say they never see so fat a haunch . the soup be fifty time better than what we have at the ' last week ; and even acknowledge , that the partridge be remarkably well do ; and I suppose he have two or three french cook at least . and , my dear , I never see you look in greater beauty . . say so too , for I ask she whether you do not . and what do you think she say besides ? 'Ah ! , we shall have she at at last . ' she do indeed . I do think . long be as good a creature as ever liv --- and she niece be very pretty behave girl , and not at all handsome : I like they prodigiously . " , in short , be in very great spirit ; she have see enough of 's behaviour to , to be convince that she
she would get he at last ; and she expectation of advantage to she family , when in a happy humour , be so far beyond reason , that she be quite disappointed at not see he there again the next day , to make he proposal . " it have be a very agreeable day , " say to . " the party seem so well select , so suitable one with the other . I hope we may often meet again . " smile . " Lizzy , you must not do so . you must not suspect I . it mortify I . I assure you that I have now learn to enjoy he conversation as a agreeable and sensible young man , without have a wish beyond it . I be perfectly satisfied , from what he manners now be , that he never have any design of engage my affection . it be only that he be bless with greater sweetness of address , and a stronger desire of generally pleasing , than any other man . " " you be very cruel , " say she sister , " you will not let I smile , and be provoke I to it every moment . " " how hard it be in some case to be believe ! " " and how impossible in other ! " " but why should you wish to persuade I that I feel more than I acknowledge ? " " that be a question which I hardly know how to answer . we all love to instruct , though we can teach only what be not worth know . forgive I ; and if you persist in indifference , do not make I you confidante . " chapter 55 a few day after this visit , call again , and alone . he friend have leave he that morning for , but be to return home in ten day time . he sit with they above a hour , and be in remarkably good spirit . invite he to dine with they ; but , with many expression of concern , he confess himself engage elsewhere . " next time you call , " say she , " I hope we shall be more lucky . " he should be particularly happy at any time , etc. etc. ; and if she would give he leave , would take a early opportunity of wait on they . " can you come to - morrow ? " yes , he have no engagement at all for to - morrow ; and she invitation be accept with alacrity . he come , and in such very good time that the lady be none of they dress . in ran . Bennet to she daughter 's room , in she dressing gow , and with she hair half finish , cry out : " my dear , make haste and hurry down . he be come --- be come . he be , indeed . make haste , make haste . here , , come to this moment , and help she on with she gown . never mind 's hair . " " we will be down as soon as we can , " say ; " but I dare say be forwarder than either of we , for she go up stairs half a hour ago . " " oh ! hang ! what have she to do with it ? come be quick , be quick ! where be you sash , my dear ? " but when she mother be gone , would not be prevail on to go down without one of she sister . the same anxiety to get they by themselves be visible again in the evening . after tea , retir to the library , as be he custom , and go up stair to she instrument . two obstacle of the five be thus remove , sit look and wink at and for a considerable time , without make any impression on they . would not observe she ; and when at last do , she very innocently say , " what be the matter mamma ? what do you keep wink at I for ? what be I to do ? " " nothing child , nothing . I do not wink at you . " she then sit still five minute longer ; but unable to waste such a precious occasion , she suddenly get up , and say to , " come here , my love , I want to speak to you , " take she out of the room . instantly give a look at which speak she distress at such premeditation , and she entreaty that she would not give in to it . in a few minute , Bennet half - open the door and call out : " Lizzy , my dear , I want to speak with you . " be force to go . " we may as well leave they by themselves you know ; " say she mother , as soon as she be in the hall . " and I be go upstairs to sit in my dressing - room . " make no attempt to reason with she mother , but remain quietly in the hall , till she and be out of sight , then return into the drawing - room . 's scheme for this day be ineffectual . be every thing that be charme , except the professed lover of she daughter . he ease and cheerfulness render he a most agreeable addition to they evening party ; and he bear with the ill - judge officiousness of the mother , and hear all she silly remark with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter . he scarcely need a invitation to
to stay supper ; and before he go away , a engagement be form , chiefly through he own and 's mean , for he come next morning to shoot with she husband . after this day , say no more of she indifference . not a word pass between the sister concern ; but go to be in the happy belief that all must speedily be conclude , unless return within the state time . seriously , however , she feel tolerably persuade that all this must have take place with that gentleman 's concurrence . be punctual to he appointment ; and he and spend the morning together , as have be agree on . the latter be much more agreeable than he companion expect . there be nothing of presumption or folly in that could provoke he ridicule , or disgust he into silence ; and he be more communicative , and less eccentric , than the other have ever see he . of course return with he to dinner ; and in the evening 's invention be again at work to get every body away from he and she daughter . , who have a letter to write , go into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea ; for as the other be all go to sit down to card , she could not be want to counteract she mother 's scheme . but on return to the draw - room , when she letter be finish , she see , to she infinite surprise , there be reason to fear that she mother have be too ingenious for she . on open the door , she perceive she sister and stand together over the hearth , as if engage in earnest conversation ; and have this le to no suspicion , the face of both , as they hastily turn round and move away from each other , would have tell it all . they situation be awkward enough ; but she be she thought be still worse . not a syllable be uttere by either ; and be on the point of go away again , when , who as well as the other have sit down , suddenly rise , and whisper a few word to she sister , run out of the room . Jane could have no reserve from , where confidence would give pleasure ; and instantly embrace she , acknowledge , with the liveliest emotion , that she be the happiest creature in the world . " ' too much ! " she add , " by far too much . I do not deserve it . oh ! why be not everybody as happy ? " 's congratulation be give with a sincerity , a warmth , a delight , which word could but poorly express . every sentence of kindness be a fresh source of happiness to . but she would not allow herself to stay with she sister , or say half that remain to be say for the present . " I must go instantly to my mother ; " she cry . " I would not on any account trifle with she affectionate solicitude ; or allow she to hear it from anyone but myself . he be go to my father already . oh ! , to know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear family ! how shall I bear so much happiness ! " she then hasten away to she mother , who have purposely break up the card party , and be sit up stair with . , who be leave by herself , now smile at the rapidity and ease with which a affair be finally settled , that have give they so many previous month of suspense and vexation . " and this , " say she , " be the end of all he friend 's anxious circumspection ! of all he sister 's falsehood and contrivance ! the happiest , wisest , most reasonable end ! " in a few minute she be join by , whose conference with she father have be short and to the purpose . " where be you sister ? " say he hastily , as he open the door . " with my mother up stair . she will be down in a moment , I dare say . " he then shut the door , and , come up to she , claim the good wish and affection of a sister . honestly and heartily express she delight in the prospect of they relationship . they shook hand with great cordiality ; and then , till she sister come down , she have to listen to all he have to say of he own happiness , and of 's perfection ; and in spite of he be a lover , really believe all he expectation of felicity to be rationally foun , because they have for basis the excellent understanding , and super- excellent disposition of , and a general similarity of feeling and taste between she and himself . it be a evening of no common delight to they all ; the satisfaction of 's mind give a glow of such sweet animation to she face , as make she look handsomer than ever . simper and smile , and hope she turn be come soon . could not give she consent or speak she approbation in term warm enough to satisfy she feeling , though she talk to of nothing else for half a hour ; and when join they at supper , he voice and manner plainly show how really happy he be . not a word , however , pass he lip in allusion to it , till they visitor take he leave for the night ; but as soon as he be go , he
he turn to he daughter , and say : " , I congratulate you . you will be a very happy woman . " go to he instantly , kiss he , and thanke he for he goodness . " you be a good girl ; " he reply , " and I have great pleasure in think you will be so happily settle . I have not a doubt of you do very well together . you temper be by no means unlike . you be each of you so comply , that nothing will ever be resolve on ; so easy , that every servant will cheat you ; and so generous , that you will always exceed you income . " " I hope not so . Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matter would be unpardonable in I . " " exceed they income ! my dear , " cry he wife , " what be you talk of ? why , he have four or five thousand a year , and very likely more . " then address she daughter , " oh ! my dear , dear , I be so happy ! I be sure I sha not get a wink of sleep all night . I know how it would be . I always say it must be so , at last . I be sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing ! I remember , as soon as ever I see he , when he first come into last year , I think how likely it be that you should come together . oh ! he be the handsomest young man that ever be see ! " , , be all forget . be beyond competition she favourite child . at that moment , she care for no other . she younger sister soon begin to make interest with she for object of happiness which she might in future be able to dispense . petition for the use of the library at ; and beg very hard for a few ball there every winter . Bingley , from this time , be of course a daily visitor at ; come frequently before breakfast , and always remain till after supper ; unless when some barbarous neighbour , who could not be enough detest , have give he a invitation to dinner which he think himself oblige to accept . have now but little time for conversation with she sister ; for while he be present , have no attention to bestow on anyone else ; but she find herself considerably useful to both of they in those hour of separation that must sometimes occur . in the absence of , he always attach himself to , for the pleasure of talk of she ; and when be go , constantly seek the same means of relief . " he have make I so happy , " say she , one evening , " by tell I that he be totally ignorant of my be in town last spring ! I have not believe it possible . " " I suspect as much , " reply . " but how do he account for it ? " " it must have be he sister 's do . they be certainly no friend to he acquaintance with I , which I can not wonder at , since he might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects . but when they see , as I trust they will , that they brother be happy with I , they will learn to be contente , and we shall be on good term again ; though we can never be what we once be to each other . " " that be the most unforgiving speech , " say , " that I ever hear you utter . good girl ! it would vex I , indeed , to see you again the dupe of 's pretend regard . " " would you believe it , , that when he go to town last , he really love I , and nothing but a persuasion of my be indifferent would have prevent he come down again ! " " he make a little mistake to be sure ; but it be to the credit of he modesty . " this naturally introduce a panegyric from on he diffidence , and the little value he put on he own good quality . be pleased to find that he have not betraye the interference of he friend ; for , though have the most generous and forgive heart in the world , she know it be a circumstance which must prejudice she against he . " I be certainly the most fortunate creature that ever exist ! " cry . " oh ! Lizzy , why be I thus single from my family , and bless above they all ! if I could but see you as happy ! if there be but such another man for you ! " " if you be to give I forty such man , I never could be so happy as you . I have you disposition , you goodness , I never can have you happiness . no , no , let I shift for myself ; and , perhaps , if I have very good luck , I may meet with another in time . " the situation of affair in the Longbourn family could not be long a secret . be privilege to whisper it to , and she venture , without any permission , to do the same by all she neighbour in . the be speedily pronounce to be the luckiest family in the world , though only a few week before , when have first run away , they have be generally prove to be mark out for misfortune . 56 one morning
morning , about a week after 's engagement with have be form , as he and the female of the family be sit together in the dining - room , they attention be suddenly draw to the window , by the sound of a carriage ; and they perceive a chaise and four drive up the lawn . it be too early in the morning for visitor , and besides , the equipage do not answer to that of any of they neighbour . the horse be post ; and neither the carriage , nor the livery of the servant who proceed it , be familiar to they . as it be certain , however , that somebody be come , instantly prevail on to avoid the confinement of such a intrusion , and walk away with he into the shrubbery . they both set off , and the conjecture of the remaining three continue , though with little satisfaction , till the door be thrown open and they visitor enter . it be . they be of course all intend to be surprised ; but they astonishment be beyond they expectation ; and on the part of and , though she be perfectly unknown to they , even inferior to what feel . she enter the room with a air more than usually ungracious , make no other reply to 's salutation than a slight inclination of the head , and sit down without say a word . have mention she name to she mother on she ladyship 's entrance , though no request of introduction have be make . , all amazement , though flatter by have a guest of such high importance , receive she with the utmost politeness . after sit for a moment in silence , she say very stifinitely to , " I hope you be well , . that lady , I suppose , be you mother . " reply very concisely that she be . " and that I suppose be one of you sister . " " yes , madam , " say , delighte to speak to a . " she be my youngest girl but one . my youngest of all be lately married , and my eldest be somewhere about the grounds , walk with a young man who , I believe , will soon become a part of the family . " " you have a very small park here , " return after a short silence . " it be nothing in comparison of , my lady , I dare say ; but I assure you it be much larger than 's . " " this must be a most inconvenient sit room for the evening , in summer ; the window be full west . " assure she that they never sit there after dinner , and then add : " may I take the liberty of ask you ladyship whether you leave and well . " " yes , very well . I see they the night before last . " now expect that she would produce a letter for she from , as it see the only probable motive for she calling . but no letter appear , and she be completely puzzl . , with great civility , beg she ladyship to take some refreshment ; but very resolutely , and not very politely , decline eat anything ; and then , rise up , say to , " , there seem to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of you lawn . I should be glad to take a turn in it , if you will favour I with you company . " " go , my dear , " cry she mother , " and show she ladyship about the different walk . I think she will be pleased with the hermitage . " obey , and run into she own room for she parasol , attend she noble guest downstairs . as they pass through the hall , open the door into the dining - parlour and draw - room , and pronounce they , after a short survey , to be decent look room , walk on . she carriage remain at the door , and see that she waiting - woman be in it . they proceed in silence along the gravel walk that lead to the copse ; be determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman who be now more than usually insolent and disagreeable . " how could I ever think she like she nephew ? " say she , as she look in she face . as soon as they enter the copse , begin in the follow manner :-- " you can be at no loss , , to understand the reason of my journey hither . you own heart , you own conscience , must tell you why I come . " look with unaffected astonishment . " indeed , you be mistaken , Madam . I have not be at all able to account for the honour of see you here . " " , " reply she ladyship , in a angry tone , " you ought to know , that I be not to be trifle with . but however insincere you may choose to be , you shall not find I so . my character have ever be celebrate for its sincerity and frankness , and in a cause of such moment as this , I shall certainly not depart from it . a report of a most alarming nature reach I two day ago . I be tell that not only you sister be on the point of be most advantageously married , but that you , that , would , in all likelihood , be soon afterwards united to my nephew , my own nephew , . though I
I know it must be a scandalous falsehood , though I would not injure he so much as to suppose the truth of it possible , I instantly resolve on set off for this place , that I might make my sentiment know to you . " " if you believe it impossible to be true , " say , colour with astonishment and disdain , " I wonder you take the trouble of come so far . what could you ladyship propose by it ? " " at once to insist upon have such a report universally contradict . " " you come to , to see I and my family , " say coolly , " will be rather a confirmation of it ; if , indeed , such a report be in existence . " " if ! do you then pretend to be ignorant of it ? have it not be industriously circulate by yourselves ? do you not know that such a report be spread abroad ? " " I never hear that it be . " " and can you likewise declare , that there be no foundation for it ? " " I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with you ladyship . you may ask question which I shall not choose to answer . " " this be not to be borne . , I insist on be satisfied . have he , have my nephew , make you a offer of marriage ? " " you ladyship have declare it to be impossible . " " it ought to be so ; it must be so , while he retain the use of he reason . but you art and allurement may , in a moment of infatuation , have make he forget what he owe to himself and to all he family . you may have draw he in . " " if I have , I shall be the last person to confess it . " " , do you know who I be ? I have not be accustom to such language as this . I be almost the nearest relation he have in the world , and be entitled to know all he dearest concern . " " but you be not entitle to know mine ; nor will such behaviour as this , ever induce I to be explicit . " " let I be rightly understand . this match , to which you have the presumption to aspire , can never take place . no , never . be engage to my daughter . now what have you to say ? " " only this ; that if he be so , you can have no reason to suppose he will make a offer to I . " hesitat for a moment , and then reply : " the engagement between they be of a peculiar kind . from they infancy , they have be intend for each other . it be the favourite wish of he mother , as well as of she 's . while in they cradle , we plan the union : and now , at the moment when the wish of both sister would be accomplish in they marriage , to be prevent by a young woman of inferior birth , of no importance in the world , and wholly unallied to the family ! do you pay no regard to the wish of he friend ? to he tacit engagement with ? be you lose to every feeling of propriety and delicacy ? have you not hear I say that from he earliest hour he be destin for he cousin ? " " yes , and I have hear it before . but what be that to I ? if there be no other objection to my marry you nephew , I shall certainly not be keep from it by know that he mother and aunt wish he to marry . you both do as much as you could in plan the marriage . it be completion depend on other . if be neither by honour nor inclination confin to he cousin , why be not he to make another choice ? and if I be that choice , why may not I accept he ? " " because honour , decorum , prudence , nay , interest , forbid it . yes , , interest ; for do not expect to be notice by he family or friend , if you wilfully act against the inclination of all . you will be censure , slighte , and despise , by everyone connect with he . you alliance will be a disgrace ; you name will never even be mention by any of we . " " these be heavy misfortune , " reply . " but the wife of must have such extraordinary source of happiness necessarily attach to she situation , that she could , upon the whole , have no cause to repine . " " Obstinate , headstrong girl ! I be asham of you ! be this you gratitude for my attention to you last spring ? be nothing due to I on that score ? let we sit down . you be to understand , , that I come here with the determined resolution of carry my purpose ; nor will I be dissuad from it . I have not be use to submit to any person 's whim . I have not be in the habit of brook disappointment . " " _That will make you ladyship 's situation at present more pitiable ; but it will have no effect on I . " " I will not be interrupt . hear I in silence . my daughter and my nephew be form for each other . they be descend , on the maternal side , from the same noble line ;
; and , on the father 's , from respectable , honourable , and ancient --- though untitled --- family . they fortune on both side be splendid . they be destin for each other by the voice of every member of they respective house ; and what be to divide they ? the upstart pretension of a young woman without family , connection , or fortune . be this to be endure ! but it must not , shall not be . if you be sensible of you own good , you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you have be bring up . " " in marry you nephew , I should not consider myself as quit that sphere . he be a gentleman ; I be a gentleman 's daughter ; so far we be equal . " " true . you be a gentleman 's daughter . but who be you mother ? who be you uncle and aunt ? do not imagine I ignorant of they condition . " " whatever my connection may be , " say , " if you nephew do not object to they , they can be nothing to you . " " tell I once for all , be you engage to he ? " though would not , for the mere purpose of obliging , have answer this question , she could not but say , after a moment 's deliberation : " I be not . " seem pleased . " and will you promise I , never to enter into such a engagement ? " " I will make no promise of the kind . " " I be shocke and astonished . I expect to find a more reasonable young woman . but do not deceive yourself into a belief that I will ever recede . I shall not go away till you have give I the assurance I require . " " and I certainly never shall give it . I be not to be intimidate into anything so wholly unreasonable . you ladyship want to marry you daughter ; but would my give you the wish - for promise make they marriage at all more probable ? Suppose he to be attach to I , would my refuse to accept he hand make he wish to bestow it on he cousin ? allow I to say , , that the argument with which you have support this extraordinary application have be as frivolous as the application be ill - judge . you have widely mistaken my character , if you think I can be work on by such persuasion as these . how far you nephew might approve of you interference in he affair , I can not tell ; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine . I must beg , therefore , to be importune no farther on the subject . " " not so hasty , if you please . I have by no means do . to all the objection I have already urge , I have still another to add . I be no stranger to the particular of you youngest sister 's infamous elopement . I know it all ; that the young man 's marry she be a patch - up business , at the expence of you father and uncles . and be such a girl to be my nephew 's sister ? be she husband , be the son of he late father 's steward , to be he brother ? and !-- of what be you think ? be the shade of to be thus pollute ? " " you can now have nothing further to say , " she resentfully answer . " you have insult I in every possible method . I must beg to return to the house . " and she rise as she speak . rise also , and they turn back . she ladyship be highly incense . " you have no regard , then , for the honour and credit of my nephew ! Unfeeling , selfish girl ! do you not consider that a connection with you must disgrase he in the eyes of everybody ? " " , I have nothing further to say . you know my sentiment . " " you be then resolve to have he ? " " I have say no such thing . I be only resolve to act in that manner , which will , in my own opinion , constitute my happiness , without reference to you , or to any person so wholly unconnected with I . " " it be well . you refuse , then , to oblige I . you refuse to obey the claim of duty , honour , and gratitude . you be determined to ruin he in the opinion of all he friend , and make he the contempt of the world . " " neither duty , nor honour , nor gratitude , " reply , " have any possible claim on I , in the present instance . no principle of either would be violate by my marriage with . and with regard to the resentment of he family , or the indignation of the world , if the former be excite by he marry I , it would not give I one moment 's concern --- and the world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn . " " and this be you real opinion ! this be you final resolve ! very well . I shall now know how to act . do not imagine , , that you ambition will ever be gratify . I come to try you . I hope to find you reasonable ; but , depend upon it , I will carry my point . " in this manner
manner talk on , till they be at the door of the carriage , when , turn hastily round , she add , " I take no leave of you , . I send no compliment to you mother . you deserve no such attention . I be most seriously displease . " make no answer ; and without attempt to persuade she ladyship to return into the house , walk quietly into it herself . she hear the carriage drive away as she proceed up stair . she mother impatiently meet she at the door of the dressing - room , to ask why would not come in again and rest herself . " she do not choose it , " say she daughter , " she would go . " " she be a very fine - look woman ! and she call here be prodigiously civil ! for she only come , I suppose , to tell we the Collinse be well . she be on she road somewhere , I dare say , and so , pass through , think she might as well call on you . I suppose she have nothing particular to say to you , ? " be force to give into a little falsehood here ; for to acknowledge the substance of they conversation be impossible . 57 the discomposure of spirit which this extraordinary visit throw into , could not be easily overcome ; nor could she , for many hour , learn to think of it less than incessantly . , it appear , have actually take the trouble of this journey from , for the sole purpose of breaking off she suppose engagement with . it be a rational scheme , to be sure ! but from what the report of they engagement could originate , be at a loss to imagine ; till she recollect that he be the intimate friend of , and she be the sister of , be enough , at a time when the expectation of one wedding make everybody eager for another , to supply the idea . she have not herself forget to feel that the marriage of she sister must bring they more frequently together . and she neighbour at , therefore ( for through they communication with the , the report , she conclude , have reach lady Catherine ) , have only set that down as almost certain and immediate , which she have look forward to as possible at some future time . in revolve 's expression , however , she could not help feel some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of she persist in this interference . from what she have say of she resolution to prevent they marriage , it occur to that she must meditate a application to she nephew ; and how he might take a similar representation of the evils attach to a connection with she , she da not pronounce . she know not the exact degree of he affection for he aunt , or he dependence on she judgment , but it be natural to suppose that he think much higher of she ladyship than she could do ; and it be certain that , in enumerat the misery of a marriage with one , whose immediate connection be so unequal to he own , he aunt would address he on he weakest side . with he notions of dignity , he would probably feel that the argument , which to have appear weak and ridiculous , contain much good sense and solid reasoning . if he have be waver before as to what he should do , which have often see likely , the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt , and determine he at once to be as happy as dignity unblemished could make he . in that case he would return no more . might see he in she way through town ; and he engagement to of come again to must give way . " if , therefore , a excuse for not keep he promise should come to he friend within a few day , " she add , " I shall know how to understand it . I shall then give over every expectation , every wish of he constancy . if he be satisfied with only regrett I , when he might have obtain my affections and hand , I shall soon cease to regret he at all . " * * * * * the surprise of the rest of the family , on hearing who they visitor have be , be very great ; but they obligingly satisfie it , with the same kind of supposition which have appease 's curiosity ; and be spare from much teasing on the subject . the next morning , as she be go downstairs , she be meet by she father , who come out of he library with a letter in he hand . " Lizzy , " say he , " I be go to look for you ; come into my room . " she follow he thither ; and she curiosity to know what he have to tell she be heighten by the supposition of its be in some manner connect with the letter he hold . it suddenly struck she that it might be from ; and she anticipate with dismay all the consequent explanation . she follow she father to the fire place , and they both sit down . he then say , " I have receive a letter this morning that have astonished I exceedingly . as it principally concern yourself , you ought to know its contents . I do not know before , that I have two daughters on the brink of matrimony . let I congratulate you on a very important conquest . " the colour now
now rush into 's cheek in the instantaneous conviction of its be a letter from the nephew , instead of the aunt ; and she be undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explain himself at all , or offend that he letter be not rather address to herself ; when she father continue : " you look conscious . young lady have great penetration in such matter as these ; but I think I may defy even you sagacity , to discover the name of you admirer . this letter be from . " " from ! and what can he have to say ? " " something very much to the purpose of course . he begin with congratulation on the approaching nuptial of my eldest daughter , of which , it seem , he have be tell by some of the good - natured , gossip Lucas . I shall not sport with you impatience , by read what he say on that point . what relate to yourself , be as follow : 'Have thus offer you the sincere congratulation of and myself on this happy event , let I now add a short hint on the subject of another ; of which we have be advertise by the same authority . you daughter , it be presume , will not long bear the name of , after she elder sister have resign it , and the chosen partner of she fate may be reasonably look up to as one of the most illustrious personage in this land . ' " can you possibly guess , , who be mean by this ? " ' this young gentleman be bless , in a peculiar way , with every thing the heart of mortal can most desire ,-- splendid property , noble kindred , and extensive patronage . yet in spite of all these temptation , let I warn my cousin , and yourself , of what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure with this gentleman 's proposal , which , of course , you will be inclin to take immediate advantage of . ' " have you any idea , , who this gentleman be ? but now it come out : " 'my motive for caution you be as follow . we have reason to imagine that he aunt , , do not look on the match with a friendly eye . ' " , you see , be the man ! now , , I think I have surprise you . could he , or the , have pitch on any man within the circle of we acquaintance , whose name would have give the lie more effectually to what they relate ? , who never look at any woman but to see a blemish , and who probably never look at you in he life ! it be admirable ! " try to join in she father 's pleasantry , but could only force one most reluctant smile . never have he wit be direct in a manner so little agreeable to she . " be you not divert ? " " oh ! yes . pray read on . " " 'After mention the likelihood of this marriage to she ladyship last night , she immediately , with she usual condescension , express what she feel on the occasion ; when it become apparent , that on the score of some family objection on the part of my cousin , she would never give she consent to what she term so disgraceful a match . I think it my duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin , that she and she noble admirer may be aware of what they be about , and not run hastily into a marriage which have not be properly sanction . ' moreover add , 'I be truly rejoice that my cousin 's sad business have be so well hush up , and be only concerned that there live together before the marriage take place should be so generally know . I must not , however , neglect the duty of my station , or refrain from declare my amazement at hearing that you receive the young couple into you house as soon as they be marry . it be a encouragement of vice ; and have I be the rector of , I should very strenuously have oppose it . you ought certainly to forgive they , as a , but never to admit they in you sight , or allow they name to be mention in you hearing . ' that be he notion of forgiveness ! the rest of he letter be only about he dear 's situation , and he expectation of a young olive - branch . but , Lizzy , you look as if you do not enjoy it . you be not go to be missish , I hope , and pretend to be affront at a idle report . for what do we live , but to make sport for we neighbour , and laugh at they in we turn ? " " oh ! " cry , " I be excessively divert . but it be so strange ! " " yes -- that be what make it amuse . have they fix on any other man it would have be nothing ; but he perfect indifference , and you point dislike , make it so delightfully absurd ! much as I abominate write , I would not give up 's correspondence for any consideration . Nay , when I read a letter of he , I can not help give he the preference even over , much as I value the impudence and hypocrisy of my son - in - law . and pray , , what say about this report ? do she call to refuse she consent ? "
" to this question he daughter reply only with a laugh ; and as it have be ask without the least suspicion , she be not distress by he repeat it . have never be more at a loss to make she feeling appear what they be not . it be necessary to laugh , when she would rather have cry . she father have most cruelly mortify she , by what he say of 's indifference , and she could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration , or fear that perhaps , instead of he see too little , she might have fancie too much . chapter 58 instead of receive any such letter of excuse from he friend , as expect to do , he be able to bring with he to Longbourn before many day have pass after 's visit . the gentleman arrive early ; and , before have time to tell he of they have see he aunt , of which she daughter sit in momentary dread , , who want to be alone with , propose they all walk out . it be agree to . be not in the habit of walking ; could never spare time ; but the remain five set off together . and , however , soon allow the other to outstrip they . they lag behind , while , , and be to entertain each other . very little be say by either ; be too much afraid of he to talk ; be secretly form a desperate resolution ; and perhaps he might be do the same . they walk towards the Lucas , because wish to call upon ; and as see no occasion for make it a general concern , when leave they she go boldly on with he alone . now be the moment for she resolution to be execute , and , while she courage be high , she immediately say : " , I be a very selfish creature ; and , for the sake of give relief to my own feeling , care not how much I may be wounde you 's . I can no longer help thanke you for you unexampled kindness to my poor sister . ever since I have know it , I have be most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it . be it know to the rest of my family , I should not have merely my own gratitude to express . " " I be sorry , exceedingly sorry , " reply , in a tone of surprise and emotion , " that you have ever be inform of what may , in a mistaken light , have give you uneasiness . I do not think be so little to be trust . " " you must not blame my aunt . 's thoughtlessness first betraye to I that you have be concerned in the matter ; and , of course , I could not rest till I know the particular . let I thank you again and again , in the name of all my family , for that generous compassion which induce you to take so much trouble , and bear so many mortification , for the sake of discover they . " " if you will thank I , " he reply , " let it be for yourself alone . that the wish of give happiness to you might add force to the other inducement which lead I on , I shall not attempt to deny . but you family owe I nothing . much as I respect they , I believe I think only of you . " be too much embarrassed to say a word . after a short pause , she companion add , " you be too generous to trifle with I . if you feeling be still what they be last , tell I so at once . my affection and wish be unchanged , but one word from you will silence I on this subject for ever . " , feel all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of he situation , now force herself to speak ; and immediately , though not very fluently , give he to understand that she sentiment have undergone so material a change , since the period to which he allude , as to make she receive with gratitude and pleasure he present assurance . the happiness which this reply produce , be such as he have probably never feel before ; and he express himself on the occasion as sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can be suppose to do . have be able to encounter he eye , she might have see how well the expression of heartfelt delight , diffuse over he face , become he ; but , though she could not look , she could listen , and he tell she of feeling , which , in prove of what importance she be to he , make he affection every moment more valuable . they walk on , without know in what direction . there be too much to be think , and feel , and say , for attention to any other object . she soon lear not that they be indebt for they present good understanding to the effort of he aunt , who do call on he in she return through , and there relate she journey to , its motive , and the substance of she conversation with ; dwell emphatically on every expression of the latter which , in she ladyship 's apprehension , peculiarly denote she perverseness and assurance ; in the belief that such a relation must assist she endeavour to obtain that promise from she nephew which she have refuse to give . but , unluckily for she ladyship , it be effect
effect have be exactly contrariwise . " it teach I to hope , " say he , " as I have scarcely ever allow myself to hope before . I know enough of you disposition to be certain that , have you be absolutely , irrevocably decide against I , you would have acknowledge it to , frankly and openly . " colou and laugh as she reply , " yes , you know enough of my frankness to believe I capable of that . after abuse you so abominably to you face , I could have no scruple in abuse you to all you relation . " " what do you say of I , that I do not deserve ? for , though you accusation be ill - founde , form on mistaken premise , my behaviour to you at the time have merit the severest reproof . it be unpardonable . I can not think of it without abhorrence . " " we will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annex to that evening , " say . " the conduct of neither , if strictly examine , will be irreproachable ; but since then , we have both , I hope , improve in civility . " " I can not be so easily reconcile to myself . the recollection of what I then say , of my conduct , my manners , my expression during the whole of it , be now , and have be many month , inexpressibly painful to I . you reproof , so well apply , I shall never forget : ' have you behave in a more gentlemanlike manner . ' those be you word . you know not , you can scarcely conceive , how they have torture I ;-- though it be some time , I confess , before I be reasonable enough to allow they justice . " " I be certainly very far from expect they to make so strong a impression . I have not the smallest idea of they be ever feel in such a way . " " I can easily believe it . you think I then devoid of every proper feel , I be sure you do . the turn of you countenance I shall never forget , as you say that I could not have address you in any possible way that would induce you to accept I . " " oh ! do not repeat what I then say . these recollection will not do at all . I assure you that I have long be most heartily asham of it . " mention he letter . " do it , " say he , " do it soon make you think better of I ? do you , on read it , give any credit to its contents ? " she explain what it be effect on she have be , and how gradually all she former prejudice have be remove . " I know , " say he , " that what I write must give you pain , but it be necessary . I hope you have destroy the letter . there be one part especially , the opening of it , which I should dread you have the power of read again . I can remember some expression which might justly make you hate I . " " the letter shall certainly be burnt , if you believe it essential to the preservation of my regard ; but , though we have both reason to think my opinion not entirely unalterable , they be not , I hope , quite so easily change as that imply . " " when I write that letter , " reply , " I believe myself perfectly calm and cool , but I be since convinced that it be write in a dreadful bitterness of spirit . " " the letter , perhaps , begin in bitterness , but it do not end so . the adieu be charity itself . but think no more of the letter . the feeling of the person who write , and the person who receive it , be now so widly different from what they be then , that every unpleasant circumstance attend it ought to be forgote . you must learn some of my philosophy . think only of the past as its remembrance give you pleasure . " " I can not give you credit for any philosophy of the kind . you retrospection must be so totally void of reproach , that the contentment arise from they be not of philosophy , but , what be much better , of innocence . but with I , it be not so . painful recollection will intrude which can not , which ought not , to be repell . I have be a selfish be all my life , in practice , though not in principle . as a child I be teach what be right , but I be not teach to correct my temper . I be give good principle , but leave to follow they in pride and conceit . unfortunately a only son ( for many year a only child ) , I be spoild by my parent , who , though good themselves ( my father , particularly , all that be benevolent and amiable ) , allow , encourage , almost teach I to be selfish and overbearing ; to care for none beyond my own family circle ; to think meanly of all the rest of the world ; to wish at least to think meanly of they sense and worth compare with my own . such I be , from eight to eight and twenty ; and such I might still have be but for you , dearest , loveliest ! what do I not owe you ! you teach I
I a lesson , hard indeed at first , but most advantageous . by you , I be properly humble . I come to you without a doubt of my reception . you show I how insufficient be all my pretension to please a woman worthy of be pleased . " " have you then persuade yourself that I should ? " " indeed I have . what will you think of my vanity ? I believe you to be wish , expect my address . " " my manners must have be in fault , but not intentionally , I assure you . I never mean to deceive you , but my spirit might often lead I wrong . how you must have hate I after that evening ? " " hate you ! I be angry perhaps at first , but my anger soon begin to take a proper direction . " " I be almost afraid of ask what you think of I , when we meet at . you blame I for come ? " " no indeed ; I feel nothing but surprise . " " you surprise could not be greater than mine in be notice by you . my conscience tell I that I deserve no extraordinary politeness , and I confess that I do not expect to receive more than my due . " " my object then , " reply , " be to show you , by every civility in my power , that I be not so mean as to resent the past ; and I hope to obtain you forgiveness , to lessen you ill opinion , by let you see that you reproof have be attend to . how soon any other wish introduce themselves I can hardly tell , but I believe in about half a hour after I have see you . " he then tell she of 's delight in she acquaintance , and of she disappointment at its sudden interruption ; which naturally lead to the cause of that interruption , she soon learn that he resolution of follow she from in of she sister have be form before he quit the inn , and that he gravity and thoughtfulness there have arisen from no other struggle than what such a purpose must comprehend . she express she gratitude again , but it be too painful a subject to each , to be dwelt on farther . after walk several mile in a leisurely manner , and too busy to know anything about it , they find at last , on examine they watch , that it be time to be at home . " what could become of and ! " be a wonder which introduce the discussion of they affair . be delighted with they engagement ; he friend have give he the earliest information of it . " I must ask whether you be surprised ? " say . " not at all . when I go away , I feel that it would soon happen . " " that be to say , you have give you permission . I guess as much . " and though he exclaim at the term , she find that it have be pretty much the case . " on the evening before my go to , " say he , " I make a confession to he , which I believe I ought to have make long ago . I tell he of all that have occur to make my former interference in he affair absurd and impertinent . he surprise be great . he have never have the slightest suspicion . I tell he , moreover , that I believe myself mistaken in supposing , as I have do , that you sister be indifferent to he ; and as I could easily perceive that he attachment to she be unabated , I feel no doubt of they happiness together . " could not help smile at he easy manner of direct he friend . " do you speak from you own observation , " say she , " when you tell he that my sister love he , or merely from my information last spring ? " " from the former . I have narrowly observe she during the two visit which I have lately make here ; and I be convinced of she affection . " " and you assurance of it , I suppose , carry immediate conviction to he . " " it do . be most unaffectedly modest . he diffidence have prevent he depending on he own judgment in so anxious a case , but he reliance on mine make every thing easy . I be oblige to confess one thing , which for a time , and not unjustly , offend he . I could not allow myself to conceal that you sister have be in town three month last winter , that I have know it , and purposely keep it from he . he be angry . but he anger , I be persuade , last no longer than he remain in any doubt of you sister 's sentiment . he have heartily forgive I now . " longe to observe that have be a most delightful friend ; so easily guide that he worth be invaluable ; but she check herself . she remember that he have yet to learn to be laugh at , and it be rather too early to begin . in anticipate the happiness of , which of course be to be inferior only to he own , he continue the conversation till they reach the house . in the hall they parte . 59 " my dear , where can you have be walk to ? " be a question which receive from as soon as she enter they room , and from all the other when
when they sit down to table . she have only to say in reply , that they have wander about , till she be beyond she own knowledge . she colou as she speak ; but neither that , nor anything else , awaken a suspicion of the truth . the evening pass quietly , unmark by anything extraordinary . the acknowledge lover talk and laugh , the unacknowledged be silent . be not of a disposition in which happiness overflow in mirth ; and , agitate and confuse , rather know that she be happy than feel herself to be so ; for , besides the immediate embarrassment , there be other evils before she . she anticipate what would be feel in the family when she situation become known ; she be aware that no one like he but ; and even fear that with the other it be a dislike which not all he fortune and consequence might do away . at night she open she heart to . though suspicion be very far from 's general habit , she be absolutely incredulous here . " you be joke , . this can not be !-- engage to ! no , no , you shall not deceive I . I know it to be impossible . " " this be a wretched begin indeed ! my sole dependence be on you ; and I be sure nobody else will believe I , if you do not . yet , indeed , I be in earnest . I speak nothing but the truth . he still love I , and we be engage . " look at she doubtingly . " oh , ! it can not be . I know how much you dislike he . " " you know nothing of the matter . that be all to be forget . perhaps I do not always love he so well as I do now . but in such case as these , a good memory be unpardonable . this be the last time I shall ever remember it myself . " still look all amazement . again , and more seriously assure she of its truth . " ! can it be really so ! yet now I must believe you , " cry . " my dear , dear , I would --- I do congratulate you --- but be you certain ? forgive the question --- be you quite certain that you can be happy with he ? " " there can be no doubt of that . it be settle between we already , that we be to be the happiest couple in the world . but be you please , ? shall you like to have such a brother ? " " very , very much . nothing could give either or myself more delight . but we consider it , we talk of it as impossible . and do you really love he quite well enough ? oh , ! do anything rather than marry without affection . be you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do ? " " oh , yes ! you will only think I feel more than I ought to do , when I tell you all . " " what do you mean ? " " why , I must confess that I love he better than I do . I be afraid you will be angry . " " my dearest sister , now be serious . I want to talk very seriously . let I know every thing that I be to know , without delay . will you tell I how long you have love he ? " " it have be come on so gradually , that I hardly know when it begin . but I believe I must date it from my first see he beautiful grounds at . " another entreaty that she would be serious , however , produce the desire effect ; and she soon satisfi by she solemn assurance of attachment . when convince on that article , have nothing further to wish . " now I be quite happy , " say she , " for you will be as happy as myself . I always have a value for he . be it for nothing but he love of you , I must always have esteem he ; but now , as 's friend and you husband , there can be only and yourself more dear to I . but , you have be very sly , very reserv with I . how little do you tell I of what pass at and ! I owe all that I know of it to another , not to you . " tell she the motives of she secrecy . she have be unwilling to mention ; and the unsettled state of she own feeling have make she equally avoid the name of he friend . but now she would no longer conceal from she he share in 's marriage . all be acknowledge , and half the night spend in conversation . * * * * * " good gracious ! " cry , as she stand at a window the next morning , " if that disagreeable be not come here again with we dear ! what can he mean by be so tiresome as to be always come here ? I have no notion but he would go a - shooting , or something or other , and not disturb we with he company . what shall we do with he ? Lizzy , you must walk out with he again , that he may not be in 's way . " could hardly help laugh at so convenient a proposal ; yet be really vex that she mother should be always give he such a epithet . as soon as
as they enter , look at she so expressively , and shake hand with such warmth , as leave no doubt of he good information ; and he soon afterwards say aloud , " . , have you no more lane hereabout in which may lose she way again to - day ? " " I advise , and , and , " say , " to walk to this morning . it be a nice long walk , and have never see the view . " " it may do very well for the other , " reply ; " but I be sure it will be too much for . will not it , ? " own that she have rather stay at home . profess a great curiosity to see the view from the , and silently consent . as she go up stair to get ready , . follow she , say : " I be quite sorry , , that you should be force to have that disagreeable man all to yourself . but I hope you will not mind it : it be all for 's sake , you know ; and there be no occasion for talk to he , except just now and then . so , do not put yourself to inconvenience . " during they walk , it be resolve that 's consent should be ask in the course of the evening . reserve to herself the application for she mother 's . she could not determine how she mother would take it ; sometimes doubt whether all he wealth and yograndeu would be enough to overcome she abhorrence of the man . but whether she be violently set against the match , or violently delighte with it , it be certain that she manner would be equally ill adapt to do credit to she sense ; and she could no more bear that should hear the first rapture of she joy , than the first vehemence of she disapprobation . * * * * * in the evening , soon after withdraw to the library , she see rise also and follow he , and she agitation on see it be extreme . she do not fear she father 's opposition , but he be go to be make unhappy ; and that it should be through she mean --- that she , he favourite child , should be distresse he by she choice , should be fill he with fear and regret in disposing of she --- be a wretched reflection , and she sit in misery till appear again , when , look at he , she be a little relieved by he smile . in a few minute he approach the table where she be sit with ; and , while pretend to admire she work say in a whisper , " go to you father , he want you in the library . " she be go directly . she father be walk about the room , look grave and anxious . " Lizzy , " say he , " what be you do ? be you out of you sense , to be accept this man ? have not you always hate he ? " how earnestly do she then wish that she former opinion have be more reasonable , she expression more moderate ! it would have spa she from explanations and profession which it be exceedingly awkward to give ; but they be now necessary , and she assure he , with some confusion , of she attachment to . " or , in other word , you be determined to have he . he be rich , to be sure , and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriage than . but will they make you happy ? " " have you any other objection , " say , " than you belief of my indifference ? " " none at all . we all know he to be a proud , unpleasant sort of man ; but this would be nothing if you really like he . " " I do , I do like he , " she reply , with tear in she eye , " I love he . indeed he have no improper pride . he be perfectly amiable . you do not know what he really be ; then pray do not pain I by speaking of he in such term . " " Lizzy , " say she father , " I have give he my consent . he be the kind of man , indeed , to whom I should never dare refuse anything , which he condescende to ask . I now give it to you , if you be resolve on have he . but let I advise you to think better of it . I know you disposition , . I know that you could be neither happy nor respectable , unless you truly esteem you husband ; unless you look up to he as a superior . you lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in a unequal marriage . you could scarcely escape discredit and misery . my child , let I not have the grief of see you unable to respect you partner in life . you know not what you be about . " , still more affected , be earnest and solemn in she reply ; and at length , by repeat assurances that be really the object of she choice , by explain the gradual change which she estimation of he have undergone , relate she absolute certainty that he affection be not the work of a day , but have stand the test of many month ' suspense , and enumerat with energy all he good quality , she do conquer she father 's incredulity , and reconcile he to
to the match . " well , my dear , " say he , when she cease speak , " I have no more to say . if this be the case , he deserve you . I could not have part with you , my , to anyone less worthy . " to complete the favourable impression , she then tell he what have voluntarily do for . he hear she with astonishment . " this be a evening of wonder , indeed ! and so , do every thing ; make up the match , give the money , pay the fellow 's debt , and get he he commission ! so much the better . it will save I a world of trouble and economy . have it be you uncle 's do , I must and would have pay he ; but these violent young lover carry every thing they own way . I shall offer to pay he to - morrow ; he will rant and storm about he love for you , and there will be a end of the matter . " he then recollect she embarrassment a few day before , on he reading 's letter ; and after laugh at she some time , allow she at last to go --- say , as she quit the room , " if any young man come for or , send they in , for I be quite at leisure . " 's mind be now relieve from a very heavy weight ; and , after half a hour 's quiet reflection in she own room , she be able to join the other with tolerable composure . every thing be too recent for gaiety , but the evening pass tranquilly away ; there be no longer anything material to be dread , and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time . when she mother go up to she dressing - room at night , she follow she , and make the important communication . it be effect be most extraordinary ; for on first hear it , sit quite still , and unable to utter a syllable . be it under many , many minute that she could comprehend what she hear ; though not in general backward to credit what be for the advantage of she family , or that come in the shape of a lover to any of they . she begin at length to recover , to fidget about in she chair , get up , sit down again , wonder , and bless herself . " good gracious ! bless I ! only think ! dear I ! ! who would have think it ! and be it really true ? oh ! my sweetest ! how rich and how great you will be ! what pin - money , what jewel , what carriage you will have ! 's be nothing to it --- nothing at all . I be so pleased --- so happy . such a charme man !-- so handsome ! so tall !--Oh , my dear ! pray apologise for my have dislike he so much before . I hope he will overlook it . dear , dear . a house in town ! every thing that be charme ! three daughter marry ! ten thousand a year ! oh , ! what will become of I . I shall go distract . " this be enough to prove that she approbation need not be doubt : and , rejoice that such a effusion be hear only by herself , soon go away . but before she have be three minute in she own room , she mother follow she . " my dearest child , " she cry , " I can think of nothing else ! ten thousand a year , and very likely more ! ' tTis as good as a ! and a special licence . you must and shall be marry by a special licence . but my dearest love , tell I what dish be particularly fond of , that I may have it to - morrow . " this be a sad oman of what she mother 's behaviour to the gentleman himself might be ; and find that , though in the certain possession of he warmest affection , and secure of she relation ' consent , there be still something to be wish for . but the morrow pass off much better than she expect ; for . luckily stood in such awe of she intend son - in - law that she venture not to speak to he , unless it be in she power to offer he any attention , or mark she deference for he opinion . have the satisfaction of see she father take pain to get acquainted with he ; and soon assure she that he be rise every hour in he esteem . " I admire all my three son - in - law highly , " say he . " Wickham , perhaps , be my favourite ; but I think I shall like you husband quite as well as 's . " 60 's spirits soon rise to playfulness again , she want to account for he have ever fall in love with she . " how could you begin ? " say she . " I can comprehend you go on charmingly , when you have once make a begin ; but what could set you off in the first place ? " " I can not fix on the hour , or the spot , or the look , or the word , which lay the foundation . it be too long ago . I be in the middle before I know that I have begin . " " my beauty you have early withstood , and as for my manners
manners --- my behaviour to you be at least always border on the uncivil , and I never speak to you without rather wish to give you pain than not . now be sincere ; do you admire I for my impertinence ? " " for the liveliness of you mind , I do . " " you may as well call it impertinence at once . it be very little less . the fact be , that you be sick of civility , of deference , of officious attention . you be disgust with the woman who be always speak , and look , and think for you approbation alone . I rouse , and interest you , because I be so unlike they . have you not be really amiable , you would have hate I for it ; but in spite of the pain you take to disguise yourself , you feeling be always noble and just ; and in you heart , you thoroughly despise the person who so assiduously court you . there --- I have save you the trouble of accounting for it ; and really , all thing consider , I begin to think it perfectly reasonable . to be sure , you know no actual good of I --- but nobody think of that when they fall in love . " " be there no good in you affectionate behaviour to while she be ill at ? " " ! who could have do less for she ? but make a virtue of it by all means . my good quality be under you protection , and you be to exaggerate they as much as possible ; and , in return , it belong to I to find occasion for teasing and quarrell with you as often as may be ; and I shall begin directly by ask you what make you so unwilling to come to the point at last . what make you so shy of I , when you first call , and afterwards dine here ? why , especially , when you call , do you look as if you do not care about I ? " " because you be grave and silent , and give I no encouragement . " " but I be embarrass . " " and so be I . " " you might have talk to I more when you come to dinner . " " a man who have feel less , might . " " how unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give , and that I should be so reasonable as to admit it ! but I wonder how long you would have go on , if you have be leave to yourself . I wonder when you would have speak , if I have not ask you ! my resolution of thank you for you kindness to have certainly great effect . too much , I be afraid ; for what become of the moral , if we comfort spring from a breach of promise ? for I ought not to have mention the subject . this will never do . " " you need not distress yourself . the moral will be perfectly fair . 's unjustifiable endeavour to separate we be the means of remove all my doubt . I be not indebt for my present happiness to you eager desire of express you gratitude . I be not in a humour to wait for any opening of you 's . my aunt 's intelligence have give I hope , and I be determined at once to know every thing . " " have be of infinite use , which ought to make she happy , for she love to be of use . but tell I , what do you come down to Netherfield for ? be it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed ? or have you intend any more serious consequence ? " " my real purpose be to see you , and to judge , if I could , whether I might ever hope to make you love I . my avow one , or what I avow to myself , be to see whether you sister be still partial to , and if she be , to make the confession to he which I have since make . " " shall you ever have courage to announce to what be to befall she ? " " I be more likely to want more time than courage , . but it ought to do , and if you will give I a sheet of paper , it shall be do directly . " " and if I have not a letter to write myself , I might sit by you and admire the evenness of you writing , as another young lady once do . but I have a aunt , too , who must not be longer neglect . " from a unwillingness to confess how much she intimacy with have be over-rated , have never yet answer 's long letter ; but now , have that to communicate which she know would be most welcome , she be almost asham to find that she uncle and aunt have already lose three day of happiness , and immediately write as follow : " I would have thank you before , my dear aunt , as I ink to have do , for you long , kind , satisfactory , detail of particular ; but to say the truth , I be too cross to write . you suppose more than really exist . but now suppose as much as you choose ; give a loose rein to you fancy , indulge you imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford , and unless you believe I actually marry , you can not greatly err .
. you must write again very soon , and praise he a great deal more than you do in you last . I thank you , again and again , for not go to the Lakes . how could I be so silly as to wish it ! you idea of the poney be delightful . we will go round the every day . I be the happiest creature in the world . perhaps other people have say so before , but not one with such justice . I be happier even than ; she only smile , I laugh . send you all the love in the world that he can spare from I . you be all to come to at . yours , etc . " 's letter to be in a different style ; and still different from either be what send to , in reply to he last . " I must trouble you once more for congratulation . will soon be the wife of . as well as you can . but , if I be you , I would stand by the nephew . he have more to give . " yours sincerely , etc . " 's congratulation to she brother , on he approaching marriage , be all that be affectionate and insincere . she write even to on the occasion , to express she delight , and repeat all she former profession of regard . be not deceive , but she be affect ; and though feel no reliance on she , could not help write she a much kinder answer than she knew be deserv . the joy which express on receive similar information , be as sincere as she brother 's in send it . four side of paper be insufficient to contain all she delight , and all she earnest desire of be love by she sister . before any answer could arrive from , or any congratulation to from he wife , the family hear that the be come themselves to . the reason of this sudden removal be soon evident . have be render so exceedingly angry by the contents of she nephew 's letter , that , really rejoice in the match , be anxious to get away till the storm be blow over . at such a moment , the arrival of she friend be a sincere pleasure to , though in the course of they meeting she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly buy , when she see expose to all the parading and obsequious civility of she husband . he bear it , however , with admirable calmness . he could even listen to , when he compliment he on carry away the brightest jewel of the country , and express he hope of they all meeting frequently at 's , with very decent composure . if he do shrug he shoulders , it be not till be out of sight . 's vulgarity be another , and perhaps a greater , tax on he forbearance ; and though , as well as she sister , stand in too much awe of he to speak with the familiarity which 's good humour encourage , yet , whenever she do speak , she must be vulgar . be she respect for he , though it make she more quiet , at all likely to make she more elegant . do all she could to shield he from the frequent notice of either , and be ever anxious to keep he to herself , and to those of she family with whom he might converse without mortification ; and though the uncomfortable feeling arise from all this take from the season of courtship much of its pleasure , it add to the hope of the future ; and she look forward with delight to the time when they should be remove from society so little pleasing to either , to all the comfort and elegance of they family party at . 61 happy for all she maternal feeling be the day on which get rid of she two most deserve daughter . with what delighte pride she afterwards visit , and talk of , may be guess . I wish I could say , for the sake of she family , that the accomplishment of she earnest desire in the establishment of so many of she child produce so happy a effect as to make she a sensible , amiable , well - inform woman for the rest of she life ; though perhaps it be lucky for she husband , who might not have relish domestic felicity in so unusual a form , that she still be occasionally nervous and invariably silly . miss he second daughter exceedingly ; he affection for she draw he oftener from home than anything else could do . he delight in go to , especially when he be least expect . and remain at only a twelvemonth . so near a vicinity to she mother and relation be not desirable even to he easy temper , or she affectionate heart . the darling wish of he sister be then gratify ; he buy a estate in a neighbour county to , and and , in addition to every other source of happiness , be within thirty mile of each other . , to she very material advantage , spend the chief of she time with she two elder sister . in society so superior to what she have generally known , she improvement be great . she be not of so ungovernable a temper as ; and , remove from the influence of 's example , she become , by proper attention and management , less irritable , less ignorant , and less insipid . from the further disadvantage of 's society she be of course carefully keep , and though frequently invite she to come and
and stay with she , with the promise of ball and young man , she father would never consent to she go . be the only daughter who remain at home ; and she be necessarily draw from the pursuit of accomplishment by 's be quite unable to sit alone . be oblige to mix more with the world , but she could still moralize over every morning visit ; and as she be no longer mortify by comparison between she sister 's beauty and she own , it be suspect by she father that she submit to the change without much reluctance . as for and , they characters suffer no revolution from the marriage of she sister . he bear with philosophy the conviction that must now become acquainted with whatever of he ingratitude and falsehood have before be unknown to she ; and in spite of every thing , be not wholly without hope that might yet be prevail on to make he fortune . the congratulatory letter which receive from on she marriage , explain to she that , by he wife at least , if not by himself , such a hope be cherish . the letter be to this effect : " my , " I wish you joy . if you love half as well as I do my dear Wickham , you must be very happy . it be a great comfort to have you so rich , and when you have nothing else to do , I hope you will think of we . I be sure would like a place at court very much , and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help . any place would do , of about three or four hundred a year ; but however , do not speak to about it , if you have rather not . " yours , etc . " as it happen that have much rather not , she endeavoure in she answer to put a end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind . such relief , however , as it be in she power to afford , by the practice of what might be call economy in she own private expence , she frequently send they . it have always be evident to she that such a income as theirs , under the direction of two person so extravagant in they want , and heedless of the future , must be very insufficient to they support ; and whenever they change they quarter , either or herself be sure of be apply to for some little assistance towards discharge they bill . they manner of live , even when the restoration of peace dismiss they to a home , be unsettled in the extreme . they be always move from place to place in quest of a cheap situation , and always spend more than they ink . he affection for she soon sunk into indifference ; she be last a little longer ; and in spite of she youth and she manners , she retain all the claim to reputation which she marriage have give she . though could never receive he at , yet , for 's sake , he assist he further in he profession . be occasionally a visitor there , when she husband be go to enjoy himself in or ; and with the they both of they frequently stay so long , that even 's good humour be overcome , and he proceed so far as to talk of give they a hint to be gone . be very deeply mortify by 's marriage ; but as she think it advisable to retain the right of visit at , she dropt all she resentment ; be fonder than ever of , almost as attentive to as heretofore , and pay off every arrear of civility to . be now 's home ; and the attachment of the sister be exactly what have hope to see . they be able to love each other even as well as they intend . have the highest opinion in the world of ; though at first she often listen with a astonishment border on alarm at she lively , sportive , manner of talk to she brother . he , who have always inspired in herself a respect which almost overcome she affection , she now see the object of open pleasantry . she mind receive knowledge which have never before fall in she way . by 's instruction , she begin to comprehend that a woman may take libertie with she husband which a brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten year younger than himself . be extremely indignant on the marriage of she nephew ; and as she give way to all the genuine frankness of she character in she reply to the letter which announce its arrangement , she send he language so very abusive , especially of , that for some time all intercourse be at a end . but at length , by 's persuasion , he be prevail on to overlook the offence , and seek a reconciliation ; and , after a little further resistance on the part of he aunt , she resentment give way , either to she affection for he , or she curiosity to see how he wife conduct herself ; and she condescende to wait on they at , in spite of that pollution which its wood have receive , not merely from the presence of such a mistress , but the visit of she uncle and aunt from the city . with the Gardiner , they be always on the most intimate term . Darcy , as well as , really love they ; and they be both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who ,
