sense and SENSIBILITy by ( 1811 ) chapter 1 the family of have long be settle in . they estate be large , and they residence be at , in the centre of they property , where , for many generation , they have live in so respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of they surround acquaintance . the late owner of this estate be a single man , who live to a very advanced age , and who for many year of he life , have a constant companion and housekeeper in he sister . but she death , which happen ten year before he own , produce a great alteration in he home ; for to supply she loss , he invite and receive into he house the family of he nephew , the legal inheritor of the estate , and the person to whom he intend to bequeath it . in the society of he nephew and niece , and they child , the old 's day be comfortably spend . he attachment to they all increase . the constant attention of and . to he wish , which proceed not merely from interest , but from goodness of heart , give he every degree of solid comfort which he age could receive ; and the cheerfulness of the child add a relish to he existence . by a former marriage , have one son : by he present lady , three daughter . the son , a steady respectable young man , be amply provide for by the fortune of he mother , which have be large , and half of which devolve on he on he coming of age . by he own marriage , likewise , which happen soon afterwards , he add to he wealth . to he therefore the succession to the estate be not so really important as to he sister ; for they fortune , independent of what might arise to they from they father 's inherit that property , could be but small . they mother have nothing , and they father only seven thousand pound in he own disposal ; for the remaining moiety of he first wife 's fortune be also secured to she child , and he have only a life - interest in it . the old gentleman die : he will be read , and like almost every other will , give as much disappointment as pleasure . he be neither so unjust , nor so ungrateful , as to leave he estate from he nephew ; -- but he leave it to he on such term as destroy half the value of the bequest . have wish for it more for the sake of he wife and daughter than for himself or he son ; -- but to he son , and he son 's son , a child of four year old , it be secure , in such a way , as to leave to himself no power of provide for those who be most dear to he , and who must need a provision by any charge on the estate , or by any sale of it be valuable woods . the whole be tie up for the benefit of this child , who , in occasional visit with he father and mother at , have so far gain on the affections of he uncle , by such attraction as be by no means unusual in child of two or three year old ; a imperfect articulation , a earnest desire of have he own way , many cunn trick , and a great deal of noise , as to outweigh all the value of all the attention which , for year , he have receive from he niece and she daughter . he mean not to be unkind , however , and , as a mark of he affection for the three girl , he leave they a thousand pound a - piece . 's disappointment be , at first , severe ; but he temper be cheerful and sanguine ; and he might reasonably hope to live many year , and by live economically , lay by a considerable sum from the produce of a estate already large , and capable of almost immediate improvement . but the fortune , which have be so tardy in come , be he only one twelvemonth . he survive he uncle no longer ; and ten thousand pound , include the late legacy , be all that remain for he widow and daughter . he son be send for as soon as he danger be know , and to he recommend , with all the strength and urgency which illness could command , the interest of he mother - in - law and sister . have not the strong feeling of the rest of the family ; but he be affect by a recommendation of such a nature at such a time , and he promise to do every thing in he power to make they comfortable . he father be render easy by such a assurance , and have the leisure to consider how much there might prudently be in he power to do for they . he be not a ill - dispose young man , unless to be rather could hear and rather selfish be to be ill - dispose : but he be , in general , well respect ; for he conduct himself with propriety in the discharge of he ordinary duty . have he marry a more amiable woman , he might have be make still more respectable than he be :-- he might even have be make amiable himself ; for he be very young when he marry , and very fond of he wife . but be a strong caricature of himself ; -- more narrow - minded and selfish
selfish . when he give he promise to he father , he meditate within himself to increase the fortune of he sister by the present of a thousand pound a - piece . he then really think himself equal to it . the prospect of four thousand a - year , in addition to he present income , besides the remaining half of he own mother 's fortune , war he heart , and make he feel capable of generosity .-- " yes , he would give they three thousand pound : it would be liberal and handsome ! it would be enough to make they completely easy . three thousand pound ! he could spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience . " -- he think of it all day long , and for many day successively , and he do not repent . no sooner be he father 's funeral over , than , without send any notice of she intention to she mother - in - law , arrive with she child and they attendant . no one could dispute she right to come ; the house be she husband 's from the moment of he father 's decease ; but the indelicacy of she conduct be so much the greater , and to a woman in 's situation , with only common feeling , must have be highly unpleasing ; -- but in Her mind there be a sense of honor so kee , a generosity so romantic , that any offence of the kind , by whomsoever give or receive , be to she a source of immoveable disgust . have never be a favourite with any of she husband 's family ; but she have have no opportunity , till the present , of shew they with how little attention to the comfort of other people she could act when occasion require it . so acutely do feel this ungracious behaviour , and so earnestly do she despise she daughter - in - law for it , that , on the arrival of the latter , she would have quit the house for ever , have not the entreaty of she eldest girl induce she first to reflect on the propriety of go , and she own tender love for all she three child determine she afterwards to stay , and for they sake avoid a breach with they brother . , this eldest daughter , whose advice be so effectual , possess a strength of understanding , and coolness of judgment , which qualifie she , though only nineteen , to be the counsellor of she mother , and enable she frequently to counteract , to the advantage of they all , that eagerness of mind in which must generally have lead to imprudence . she have a excellent heart ; -- she disposition be affectionate , and she feeling be strong ; but she know how to govern they : it be a knowledge which she mother have yet to learn ; and which one of she sister have resolve never to be teach . 's abilitie be , in many respects , quite equal to 's . she be sensible and clever ; but eager in everything : she sorrow , she joy , could have no moderation . she be generous , amiable , interesting : she be everything but prudent . the resemblance between she and she mother be strikingly great . see , with concern , the excess of she sister 's sensibility ; but by it be value and cherish . they encourage each other now in the violence of they affliction . the agony of grief which overpower they at first , be voluntarily renew , be seek for , be create again and again . they give themselves up wholly to they sorrow , seek increase of wretchedness in every reflection that could afford it , and resolve against ever admit consolation in future . , too , be deeply afflict ; but still she could struggle , she could exert herself . she could consult with she brother , could receive she sister - in - law on she arrival , and treat she with proper attention ; and could strive to rouse she mother to similar exertion , and encourage she to similar forbearance . , the other sister , be a good - humore , well - dispose girl ; but as she have already imbibe a good deal of 's romance , without have much of she sense , she do not , at thirteen , bid fair to equal she sister at a more advanced period of life . chapter 2 Mr . now install herself mistress of ; and she mother and sister - in - law be degrad to the condition of visitor . as such , however , they be treat by she with quiet civility ; and by she husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody beyond himself , he wife , and they child . he really press they , with some earnestness , to consider as they home ; and , as no plan appear so eligible to as remain there till she could accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood , he invitation be accept . a continuance in a place where everything remind she of former delight , be exactly what sui she mind . in season of cheerfulness , no temper could be more cheerful than hers , or possess , in a greater degree , that sanguine expectation of happiness which be happiness itself . but in sorrow she must be equally carry away by she fancy , and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she be beyond alloy . do not at all approve of what she husband intend to do for he sister . to take three thousand pound from the fortune
fortune of they dear little boy would be impoverish he to the most dreadful degree . she beg he to think again on the subject . how could he answer it to himself to rob he child , and he only child too , of so large a sum ? and what possible claim could the , who be related to he only by half blood , which she consider as no relationship at all , have on he generosity to so large a amount . it be very well know that no affection be ever suppose to exist between the child of any man by different marriage ; and why be he to ruin himself , and they poor little , by give away all he money to he half sister ? " it be my father 's last request to I , " reply she husband , " that I should assist he widow and daughter . " " he do not know what he be talk of , I dare say ; ten to one but he be light - head at the time . have he be in he right sense , he could not have think of such a thing as begge you to give away half you fortune from you own child . " " he do not stipulate for any particular sum , my dear Fanny ; he only request I , in general term , to assist they , and make they situation more comfortable than it be in he power to do . perhaps it would have be as well if he have leave it wholly to myself . he could hardly suppose I should neglect they . but as he require the promise , I could not do less than give it ; at least I think so at the time . the promise , therefore , be give , and must be perform . something must be do for they whenever they leave and settle in a new home . " " well , then , let something be do for they ; but that something need not be three thousand pound . consider , " she add , " that when the money be once part with , it never can return . you sister will marry , and it will be gone for ever . if , indeed , it could be restore to we poor little boy -- " " why , to be sure , " say she husband , very gravely , " that would make great difference . the time may come when will regret that so large a sum be part with . if he should have a numerous family , for instance , it would be a very convenient addition . " " to be sure it would . " " perhaps , then , it would be better for all party , if the sum be diminish one half .-- five hundred pound would be a prodigious increase to they fortune ! " " oh ! beyond anything great ! what brother on earth would do half so much for he sister , even if really he sister ! and as it be -- only half blood ! -- but you have such a generous spirit ! " " I would not wish to do any thing mean , " he reply . " one have rather , on such occasion , do too much than too little . no one , at least , can think I have not do enough for they : even themselves , they can hardly expect more . " " there be no know what they may expect , " say the lady , " but we be not to think of they expectation : the question be , what you can afford to do . " " certainly -- and I think I may afford to give they five hundred pound a -piece . as it be , without any addition of mine , they will each have about three thousand pound on they mother 's death -- a very comfortable fortune for any young woman . " " to be sure it be ; and , indeed , it strike I that they can want no addition at all . they will have ten thousand pound divide amongst they . if they marry , they will be sure of do well , and if they do not , they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of ten thousand pound . " " that be very true , and , therefore , I do not know whether , upon the whole , it would not be more advisable to do something for they mother while she life , rather than for they -- something of the annuity kind I mean .-- my sister would feel the good effect of it as well as herself . a hundr a year would make they all perfectly comfortable . " he wife hesitate a little , however , in give she consent to this plan . " to be sure , " say she , " it be better than part with fifteen hundred pound at once . but , then , if should live fifteen year we shall be completely take in . " " fifteen year ! my dear Fanny ; she life can not be worth half that purchase . " " certainly not ; but if you observe , people always live for ever when there be a annuity to be pay they ; and she be very stout and healthy , and hardly forty . a annuity be a very serious business ; it come over and over every year , and there be no get rid of it . you be not aware of what you be do . I have know a great deal of the trouble
trouble of annuity ; for my mother be clog with the payment of three to old superannuated servants by my father 's will , and it be amazing how disagreeable she find it . twice every year these annuity be to be pay ; and then there be the trouble of get it to they ; and then one of they be say to have die , and afterwards it turn out to be no such thing . my mother be quite sick of it . she income be not she own , she say , with such perpetual claim on it ; and it be the more unkind in my father , because , otherwise , the money would have be entirely at my mother 's disposal , without any restriction whatever . it have give I such a abhorrence of annuity , that I be sure I would not pin myself down to the payment of one for all the world . " " it be certainly a unpleasant thing , " reply , " to have those kind of yearly drain on one 's income . one be fortune , as you mother justly say , be not one be own . to be tie down to the regular payment of such a sum , on every rent day , be by no means desirable : it take away one 's independence . " " undoubtedly ; and after all you have no thanks for it . they think themselves secure , you do no more than what be expect , and it raise no gratitude at all . if I be you , whatever I do should be do at my own discretion entirely . I would not bind myself to allow they any thing yearly . it may be very inconvenient some year to spare a hundred , or even fifty pound from we own expense . " " I believe you be right , my love ; it will be better that there should by no annuity in the case ; whatever I may give they occasionally will be of far greater assistance than a yearly allowance , because they would only enlarge they style of living if they feel sure of a larger income , and would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of the year . it will certainly be much the best way . a present of fifty pound , now and then , will prevent they ever be distress for money , and will , I think , be amply discharge my promise to my father . " " to be sure it will . indeed , to say the truth , I be convince within myself that you father have no idea of you give they any money at all . the assistance he think of , I dare say , be only such as might be reasonably expect of you ; for instance , such as look out for a comfortable small house for they , help they to move they thing , and send they present of fish and game , and so forth , whenever they be in season . I will lay my life that he mean nothing farther ; indeed , it would be very strange and unreasonable if he do . do but consider , my dear , how excessively comfortable you mother - in - law and she daughter may live on the interest of seven thousand pound , besides the thousand pound belong to each of the girl , which bring they in fifty pound a year a - piece , and , of course , they will pay they mother for they board out of it . altogether , they will have five hundred a - year amongst they , and what on earth can four woman want for more than that ?-- they will live so cheap ! they housekeeping will be nothing at all . they will have no carriage , no horse , and hardly any servants ; they will keep no company , and can have no expense of any kind ! only conceive how comfortable they will be ! five hundred a year ! I be sure I can not imagine how they will spend half of it ; and as to you give they more , it be quite absurd to think of it . they will be much more able to give you something . " " upon my word , " say , " I believe you be perfectly right . my father certainly could mean nothing more by he request to I than what you say . I clearly understand it now , and I will strictly fulfil my engagement by such act of assistance and kindness to they as you have describe . when my mother remove into another house my service shall be readily give to accommodate she as far as I can . some little present of furniture too may be acceptable then . " " certainly , " return . " but , however , one thing must be consider . when you father and mother move to , though the furniture of be sell , all the china , plate , and linen be save , and be now leave to you mother . she house will therefore be almost completely fitte up as soon as she take it . " " that be a material consideration undoubtedly . a valuable legacy indeed ! and yet some of the plate would have be a very pleasant addition to we own stock here . " " yes ; and the set of breakfast china be twice as handsome as what belong to this house . a great deal too handsome , in my opinion , for any place they can ever afford to live in . but , however , so it be .
. you father think only of they . and I must say this : that you owe no particular gratitude to he , nor attention to he wish ; for we very well know that if he could , he would have leave almost everything in the world to they . " this argument be irresistible . it give to he intention whatever of decision be want before ; and he finally resolve , that it would be absolutely unnecessary , if not highly indecorous , to do more for the widow and child of he father , than such kind of neighbourly act as he own wife point out . chapter 3 Mr . remain at several month ; not from any disinclination to move when the sight of every well know spot cease to raise the violent emotion which it produce for a while ; for when she spirit begin to revive , and she mind become capable of some other exertion than that of heighten its affliction by melancholy remembrance , she be impatient to be go , and indefatigable in she inquirie for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of ; for to remove far from that beloved spot be impossible . but she could hear of no situation that at once answer she notion of comfort and ease , and sui the prudence of she eldest daughter , whose steadier judgment reject several house as too large for they income , which she mother would have approve . have be inform by she husband of the solemn promise on the part of he son in they favour , which give comfort to he last earthly reflection . she doubt the sincerity of this assurance no more than he have doubt it himself , and she think of it for she daughter ' sake with satisfaction , though as for herself she be persuade that a much smaller provision than would support she in affluence . for they brother 's sake , too , for the sake of he own heart , she rejoice ; and she reproach herself for be unjust to he merit before , in believe he incapable of generosity . he attentive behaviour to herself and he sister convince she that they welfare be dear to he , and , for a long time , she firmly rely on the liberality of he intention . the contempt which she have , very early in they acquaintance , felt for she daughter - in - law , be very much increase by the farther knowledge of she character , which half a year 's residence in she family afforde ; and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal affection on the side of the former , the two lady might have find it impossible to have liv together so long , have not a particular circumstance occur to give still greater eligibility , accord to the opinion of , to she daughter 's continuance at . this circumstance be a grow attachment between she eldest girl and the brother of , a gentleman - like and pleasing young man , who be introduce to they acquaintance soon after he sister 's establishment at , and who have since spend the greatest part of he time there . some mother might have encourage the intimacy from motive of interest , for be the eldest son of a man who have die very rich ; and some might have repress it from motives of prudence , for , except a trifl sum , the whole of he fortune depend on the will of he mother . but be alike uninfluenced by either consideration . it be enough for she that he appear to be amiable , that he love she daughter , and that return the partiality . it be contrary to every doctrine of she be that difference of fortune should keep any couple asunder who be attract by resemblance of disposition ; and that 's merit should not be acknowledge by every one who know she , be to she comprehension impossible . be not recommend to they good opinion by any peculiar graces of person or address . he be not handsome , and he manners require intimacy to make they pleas . he be too diffident to do justice to himself ; but when he natural shyness be overcome , he behaviour give every indication of a open , affectionate heart . he understanding be good , and he education have give it solid improvement . but he be neither fitte by ability nor disposition to answer the wish of he mother and sister , who longe to see he distinguished -- as -- they hardly know what . they want he to make a fine figure in the world in some manner or other . he mother wish to interest he in political concern , to get he into parliament , or to see he connect with some of the great man of the day . wish it likewise ; but in the mean while , till one of these superior blessing could be attaine , it would have quiet she ambition to see he drive a barouche . but have no turn for great man or barouch . all he wish centere in domestic comfort and the quiet of private life . fortunately he have a younger brother who be more promising . have be stay several week in the house before he engage much of 's attention ; for she be , at that time , in such affliction as render she careless of surround object . she see only that he be quiet and unobtrusive , and she like he for it . he do not disturb the wretchedness of she mind by ill - time conversation . she be first call to observe and approve he farther , by a reflection which chance one
one day to make on the difference between he and he sister . it be a contrast which recommend he most forcibly to she mother . " it be enough , " say she ; " to say that he be unlike Fanny be enough . it imply everything amiable . I love he already . " " I think you will like he , " say , " when you know more of he . " " like he ! " reply she mother with a smile . " I feel no sentiment of approbation inferior to love . " " you may esteem he . " " I have never yet know what it be to separate esteem and love . " now take pain to get acquainted with he . she manners be attach , and soon banish he reserve . she speedily comprehend all he merit ; the persuasion of he regard for perhaps assist she penetration ; but she really feel assure of he worth : and even that quietness of manner , which militate against all she establish idea of what a young man 's address ought to be , be no longer uninterest when she know he heart to be warm and he temper affectionate . no sooner do she perceive any symptom of love in he behaviour to , than she consider they serious attachment as certain , and look forward to they marriage as rapidly approach . " in a few month , my dear . " say she , " , in all probability be settle for life . we shall miss she ; but she will be happy . " " oh ! , how shall we do without she ? " " my love , it will be scarcely a separation . we shall live within a few mile of each other , and shall meet every day of we life . you will gain a brother , a real , affectionate brother . I have the highest opinion in the world of 's heart . but you look grave , ; do you disapprove you sister 's choice ? " " perhaps , " say , " I may consider it with some surprise . be very amiable , and I love he tenderly . but yet -- he be not the kind of young man -- there be something want -- he figure be not strike ; it have none of that grace which I should expect in the man who could seriously attach my sister . he eye want all that spirit , that fire , which at once announce virtue and intelligence . and besides all this , I be afraid , , he have no real taste . seem scarcely to attract he , and though he admire 's drawing very much , it be not the admiration of a person who can understand they worth . it be evident , in spite of he frequent attention to she while she draw , that in fact he know nothing of the matter . he admire as a lover , not as a connoisseur . to satisfy I , those character must be united . I could not be happy with a man whose taste do not in every point coincide with my own . he must enter into all my feeling ; the same book , the same music must charm we both . oh ! mama , how spiritless , how tame be 's manner in read to we last night ! I feel for my sister most severely . yet she bear it with so much composure , she seem scarcely to notice it . I could hardly keep my seat . to hear those beautiful line which have frequently almost drive I wild , pronounce with such impenetrable calmness , such dreadful indifference ! " -- " he would certainly have do more justice to simple and elegant prose . I think so at the time ; but you would give he . " " , , if he be not to be animate by !-- but we must allow for difference of taste . have not my feeling , and therefore she may overlook it , and be happy with he . but it would have break my heart , have I love he , to hear he read with so little sensibility . mama , the more I know of the world , the more am I convince that I shall never see a man whom I can really love . I require so much ! he must have all 's virtue , and he person and manners must ornament he goodness with every possible charm . " " remember , my love , that you be not seventee . it be yet too early in life to despair of such a happiness . why should you be less fortunate than you mother ? in one circumstance only , my , may you destiny be different from she be ! " 4 " what a pity it be , , " say , " that should have no taste for drawing . " " no taste for draw ! " reply , " why should you think so ? he do not draw himself , indeed , but he have great pleasure in see the performance of other people , and I assure you he be by no means deficient in natural taste , though he have not have opportunity of improve it . have he ever be in the way of learn , I think he would have draw very well . he distrust he own judgment in such matter so much , that he be always unwilling to give he opinion on any picture ; but he have a innate propriety and simplicity of taste , which in general direct he perfectly right . " be afraid
afraid of offending , and say no more on the subject ; but the kind of approbation which describe as excited in he by the drawing of other people , be very far from that rapturous delight , which , in she opinion , could alone be call taste . yet , though smile within herself at the mistake , she honoure she sister for that blind partiality to which produce it . " I hope , , " continue , " you do not consider he as deficient in general taste . indeed , I think I may say that you cannot , for you behaviour to he be perfectly cordial , and if that be you opinion , I be sure you could never be civil to he . " hardly know what to say . she would not wound the feeling of she sister on any account , and yet to say what she do not believe be impossible . at length she reply : " do not be offend , , if my praise of he be not in every thing equal to you sense of he merit . I have not have so many opportunity of estimate the minuter propensity of he mind , he inclination and taste , as you have ; but I have the highest opinion in the world of he goodness and sense . I think he every thing that be worthy and amiable . " " I be sure , " reply , with a smile , " that he dearest friend could not be dissatisfied with such commendation as that . I do not perceive how you could express yourself more warmly . " be rejoiced to find she sister so easily pleased . " of he sense and he goodness , " continue , " no one can , I think , be in doubt , who have see he often enough to engage he in unreserved conversation . the excellence of he understanding and he principles can be conceal only by that shyness which too often keep he silent . you know enough of he to do justice to he solid worth . but of he minuter propensity , as you call they you have from peculiar circumstance be keep more ignorant than myself . he and I have be at time throw a good deal together , while you have be wholly engross on the most affectionate principle by my mother . I have see a great deal of he , have study he sentiment and hear he opinion on subject of literature and taste ; and , upon the whole , I venture to pronounce that he mind be well - inform , enjoyment of book exceedingly great , he imagination lively , he observation just and correct , and he taste delicate and pure . he abilitie in every respect improve as much upon acquaintance as he manners and person . at first sight , he address be certainly not strike ; and he person can hardly be call handsome , till the expression of he eye , which be uncommonly good , and the general sweetness of he countenance , be perceive . at present , I know he so well , that I think he really handsome ; or at least , almost so . what say you , ? " " I shall very soon think he handsome , , if I do not now . when you tell I to love he as a brother , I shall no more see imperfection in he face , than I now do in he heart . " start at this declaration , and be sorry for the warmth she have be betraye into , in speak of he . she feel that stand very high in she opinion . she believe the regard to be mutual ; but she require greater certainty of it to make 's conviction of they attachment agreeable to she . she know that what and she mother conjecture one moment , they believe the next -- that with they , to wish be to hope , and to hope be to expect . she try to explain the real state of the case to she sister . " I do not attempt to deny , " say she , " that I think very highly of he -- that I greatly esteem , that I like he . " here burst forth with indignation -- " he ! like he ! -heart ! oh ! worse than cold - hear ! Ashamed of be otherwise . use those word again , and I will leave the room this moment . " could not help laugh . " excuse I , " say she ; " and be assure that I mean no offence to you , by speak , in so quiet a way , of my own feeling . believe they to be stronger than I have declare ; believe they , in short , to be such as he merit , and the suspicion -- the hope of he affection for I may warrant , without imprudence or folly . but farther than this you must not believe . I be by no means assure of he regard for I . there be moment when the extent of it seem doubtful ; and till he sentiment be fully know , you can not wonder at my wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality , by believe or call it more than it be . in my heart I feel little -- scarcely any doubt of he preference . but there be other point to be consider besides he inclination . he be very far from be independent . what he mother really be we can not know ; but , from 's occasional mention of she conduct and opinion , we have never be
be dispose to think she amiable ; and I be very much mistaken if be not himself aware that there would be many difficulty in he way , if he be to wish to marry a woman who have not either a great fortune or high rank . " be astonished to find how much the imagination of she mother and herself have outstrip the truth . " and you really be not engage to he ! " say she . " yet it certainly soon will happen . but two advantage will proceed from this delay . I shall not lose you so soon , and will have greater opportunity of improve that natural taste for you favourite pursuit which must be so indispensably necessary to you future felicity . oh ! if he should be so far stimulate by you genius as to learn to draw himself , how delightful it would be ! " have give she real opinion to she sister . she could not consider she partiality for in so prosperous a state as have believe it . there be , at time , a want of spirit about he which , if it do not denote indifference , spoke of something almost as unpromising . a doubt of she regard , suppose he to feel it , need not give he more than inquietude . it would not be likely to produce that dejection of mind which frequently attend he . a more reasonable cause might be find in the dependent situation which forbade the indulgence of he affection . she know that he mother neither behave to he so as to make he home comfortable at present , nor to give he any assurance that he might form a home for himself , without strictly attend to she view for he aggrandizement . with such a knowledge as this , it be impossible for to feel easy on the subject . she be far from depend on that result of he preference of she , which she mother and sister still consider as certain . Nay , the longer they be together the more doubtful seem the nature of he regard ; and sometimes , for a few painful minute , she believe it to be no more than friendship . but , whatever might really be its limit , it be enough , when perceive by he sister , to make she uneasy , and at the same time , ( which be still more common , ) to make she uncivil . she take the first opportunity of affront she mother - in - law on the occasion , talk to she so expressively of she brother 's great expectation , of 's resolution that both she son should marry well , and of the danger attend any young woman who attempt to draw he in ; that could neither pretend to be unconscious , nor endeavor to be calm . she give she a answer which mark she contempt , and instantly leave the room , resolve that , whatever might be the inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal , she belov should not be expose another week to such insinuation . in this state of she spirit , a letter be deliver to she from the post , which contain a proposal particularly well time . it be the offer of a small house , on very easy term , belong to a relation of she own , a gentleman of consequence and property in . the letter be from this gentleman himself , and write in the true spirit of friendly accommodation . he understand that she be in need of a dwelling ; and though the house he now offer she be merely a cottage , he assure she that everything should be do to it which she might think necessary , if the situation pleas she . he earnestly press she , after give the particular of the house and garden , to come with she daughter to , the place of he own residence , from whence she might judge , herself , whether , for the house be in the same parish , could , by any alteration , be make comfortable to she . he seem really anxious to accommodate they and the whole of he letter be write in so friendly a style as could not fail of give pleasure to he cousin ; more especially at a moment when she be suffer under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of she nearer connections . she need no time for deliberation or inquiry . she resolution be form as she read . the situation of , in a county so far distant from as , which , but a few hour before , would have be a sufficient objection to outweigh every possible advantage belong to the place , be now its first recommendation . to quit the neighbourhood of be no longer a evil ; it be a object of desire ; it be a blessing , in comparison of the misery of continue she daughter - in - law 's guest ; and to remove for ever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit or visit it while such a woman be its mistress . she instantly write she acknowledgment of he kindness , and she acceptance of he proposal ; and then hasten to show both letter to she daughter , that she might be secure of they approbation before she answer be send . have always think it would be more prudent for they to settle at some distance from , than immediately amongst they present acquaintance . on that head , therefore , it be not for she to oppose she mother 's intention of remove into . the house , too , as describe by , be on so simple a scale
scale , and the rent so uncommonly moderate , as to leave she no right of objection on either point ; and , therefore , though it be not a plan which bring any charm to she fancy , though it be a removal from the vicinity of beyond she wish , she make no attempt to dissuade she mother from send a letter of acquiescence . chapter 5 no sooner be she answer dispatch , than indulge herself in the pleasure of announcing to she son - in - law and he wife that she be provide with a house , and should incommode they no longer than till every thing be ready for she inhabit it . they hear she with surprise . say nothing ; but she husband civilly hope that she would not be settle far from . she have great satisfaction in replying that she be go into .-- turn hastily towards she , on hear this , and , in a voice of surprise and concern , which require no explanation to she , repeat , " ! be you , indeed , go there ? so far from hence ! and to what part of it ? " she explain the situation . it be within four miles northward of . " it be but a cottage , " she continue , " but I hope to see many of my friend in it . a room or two can easily be add ; and if my friend find no difficulty in travelling so far to see I , I be sure I will find none in accommodate they . " she conclude with a very kind invitation to and to visit she at ; and to she give one with still greater affection . though she late conversation with she daughter - in - law have make she resolve on remain at no longer than be unavoidable , it have not produce the smallest effect on she in that point to which it principally ten . to separate and be as far from be she object as ever ; and she wish to show , by this point invitation to she brother , how totally she disregard she disapprobation of the match . tell he mother again and again how exceedingly sorry he be that she have take a house at such a distance from as to prevent he be of any service to she in remove she furniture . he really feel conscientiously vex on the occasion ; for the very exertion to which he have limit the performance of he promise to he father be by this arrangement render impracticable .-- the furniture be all send around by water . it chiefly consist of household linen , plate , china , and book , with a handsome pianoforte of 's . see the package depart with a sigh : she could not help feel it hard that as 's income would be so trifl in comparison with they own , she should have any handsome article of furniture . take the house for a twelvemonth ; it be ready furnish , and she might have immediate possession . no difficulty arise on either side in the agreement ; and she wait only for the disposal of she effect at , and to determine she future household , before she set off for the west ; and this , as she be exceedingly rapid in the performance of everything that interest she , be soon do .-- the horse which be leave she by she husband have be sell soon after he death , and a opportunity now offer of disposing of she carriage , she agree to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of she eldest daughter . for the comfort of she child , have she consult only she own wish , she would have keep it ; but the discretion of prevail . she wisdom too limit the number of they servants to three ; two maid and a man , with whom they be speedily provide from amongst those who have form they establishment at . the man and one of the maid be send off immediately into , to prepare the house for they mistress 's arrival ; for as be entirely unknown to , she prefer go directly to the cottage to be a visitor at ; and she rely so undoubtingly on 's description of the house , as to feel no curiosity to examine it herself till she enter it as she own . she eagerness to be go from be preserve from diminution by the evident satisfaction of she daughter - in - law in the prospect of she removal ; a satisfaction which be but feebly attempt to be conceal under a cold invitation to she to defer she departure . now be the time when she son - in - law 's promise to he father might with particular propriety be fulfil . since he have neglect to do it on first come to the estate , they quit he house might be look on as the most suitable period for its accomplishment . but begin shortly to give over every hope of the kind , and to be convince , from the general drift of he discourse , that he assistance extend no farther than they maintenance for six month at . he so frequently talk of the increase expensis of housekeeping , and of the perpetual demand upon he purse , which a man of any consequence in the world be beyond calculation expose to , that he see rather to stand in need of more money himself than to have any design of give money away . in a very few week from the day which bring 's first letter to , every thing be so far settle in they future abode as to enable and she
she daughter to begin they journey . many be the tear shed by they in they last adieus to a place so much beloved . " dear , dear ! " say , as she wander alone before the house , on the last evening of they be there ; " when shall I cease to regret you !-- when learn to feel a home elsewhere !-- oh ! happy house , could you know what I suffer in now view you from this spot , from whence perhaps I may view you no more !-- and you , ye well - know tree !-- but you will continue the same .-- no leaf will decay because we be remove , nor any branch become motionless although we can observe you no longer !-- no ; you will continue the same ; unconscious of the pleasure or the regret you occasion , and insensible of any change in those who walk under you shade ! -- but who will remain to enjoy you ? " chapter 6 the first part of they journey be perform in too melancholy a disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant . but as they draw towards the end of it , they interest in the appearance of a country which they be to inhabit overcame they dejection , and a view of as they enter it give they cheerfulness . it be a pleasant fertile spot , well wood , and rich in pasture . after win along it for more than a mile , they reach they own house . a small green court be the whole of it be demesne in front ; and a neat wicket gate admit they into it . as a house , , though small , be comfortable and compact ; but as a cottage it be defective , for the building be regular , the roof be ti , the window shutter be not paint green , nor be the wall cover with honeysuckle . a narrow passage lead directly through the house into the garden behind . on each side of the entrance be a sitting room , about sixteen foot square ; and beyond they be the office and the stair . Fou be -rooms and two garret form the rest of the house . it have not be build many year and be in good repair . in comparison of , it be poor and small indeed !-- but the tear which recollection call forth as they enter the house be soon dry away . they be cheer by the joy of the servants on they arrival , and each for the sake of the other resolve to appear happy . it be very early in ; the season be fine , and from first see the place under the advantage of good weather , they receive a impression in its favour which be of material service in recommend it to they last approbation . the situation of the house be good . high hill rise immediately behind , and at no great distance on each side ; some of which be open downs , the other cultivate and woody . the village of be chiefly on one of these hill , and form a pleasant view from the cottage window . the prospect in front be more extensive ; it command the whole of the valley , and reach into the country beyond . the hill which surround the cottage terminate the valley in that direction ; under another name , and in another course , it branch out again between two of the steepest of they . with the size and furniture of the house be upon the whole well satisfie ; for though she former style of life render many additions to the latter indispensable , yet to add and improve be a delight to she ; and she have at this time ready money enough to supply all that be want of greater elegance to the apartment . " as for the house itself , to be sure , " say she , " it be too small for we family , but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the present , as it be too late in the year for improvement . perhaps in the spring , if I have plenty of money , as I dare say I shall , we may think about building . these parlor be both too small for such party of we friend as I hope to see often collect here ; and I have some thought of throw the passage into one of they with perhaps a part of the other , and so leave the remainder of that other for a entrance ; this , with a new drawing room which may be easily add , and a bed - chamber and garret above , will make it a very snug little cottage . I could wish the stair be handsome . but one must not expect every thing ; though I suppose it would be no difficult matter to wie they . I shall see how much I be before - hand with the world in the spring , and we will plan we improvement accordingly . " in the mean time , till all these alteration could be make from the savings of a income of five hundred a - year by a woman who never save in she life , they be wise enough to be contente with the house as it be ; and each of they be busy in arrange they particular concern , and endeavoring , by place around they book and other possession , to form themselves a home . 's pianoforte be unpacked and properly dispose of ; and 's drawing be affix to the wall of they sitting room . in such employment as these they be interrupt soon after
after breakfast the next day by the entrance of they landlord , who call to welcome they to , and to offer they every accommodation from he own house and garden in which theirs might at present be deficient . be a good look man about forty . he have formerly visit at , but it be too long for he young cousins to remember he . he countenance be thoroughly good - humour ; and he manners be as friendly as the style of he letter . they arrival seem to afford he real satisfaction , and they comfort to be a object of real solicitude to he . he say much of he earnest desire of they live in the most sociable term with he family , and press they so cordially to dine at every day till they be better settle at home , that , though he entreaty be carry to a point of perseverance beyond civility , they could not give offence . he kindness be not confin to word ; for within a hour after he leave they , a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit arrive from the park , which be follow before the end of the day by a present of game . he insist , moreover , on convey all they letter to and from the post for they , and would not be deny the satisfaction of send they he newspaper every day . have send a very civil message by he , denote she intention of waiting on as soon as she could be assure that she visit would be no inconvenience ; and as this message be answer by a invitation equally polite , she ladyship be introduce to they the next day . they be , of course , very anxious to see a person on whom so much of they comfort at must depend ; and the elegance of she appearance be favourable to they wish . be not more than six or seven and twenty ; she face be handsome , she figure tall and striking , and she address graceful . she manners have all the elegance which she husband 's want . but they would have be improve by some share of he frankness and warmth ; and she visit be long enough to detract something from they first admiration , by shew that , though perfectly well - breed , she be reserve , cold , and have nothing to say for herself beyond the most common - place inquiry or remark . conversation however be not want , for be very chatty , and have take the wise precaution of bring with she they eldest child , a fine little boy about six year old , by which mean there be one subject always to be recur to by the ladie in case of extremity , for they have to enquire he name and age , admire he beauty , and ask he question which he mother answer for he , while he hang about she and hold down he head , to the great surprise of she ladyship , who wonder at he be so shy before company , as he could make noise enough at home . on every formal visit a child ought to be of the party , by way of provision for discourse . in the present case it take up ten minute to determine whether the boy be most like he father or mother , and in what particular he resemble either , for of course every body differ , and every body be astonished at the opinion of the other . a opportunity be soon to be give to the Dashwood of debating on the rest of the child , as would not leave the house without secure they promise of dining at the park the next day . chapter 7 be about half a mile from the cottage . the lady have pass near it in they way along the valley , but it be screen from they view at home by the projection of a hill . the house be large and handsome ; and the live in a style of equal hospitality and elegance . the former be for 's gratification , the latter for that of he lady . they be scarcely ever without some friend stay with they in the house , and they keep more company of every kind than any other family in the neighbourhood . it be necessary to the happiness of both ; for however dissimilar in temper and outward behaviour , they strongly resemble each other in that total want of talent and taste which confin they employment , unconnected with such as society produce , within a very narrow compass . be a sportsman , a mother . he hunt and shoot , and she humoure she child ; and these be they only resource . have the advantage of be able to spoil she child all the year round , while 's independent employment be in existence only half the time . Continual engagement at home and abroad , however , supply all the deficiency of nature and education ; support the good spirit of , and give exercise to the good breeding of he wife . pique herself upon the elegance of she table , and of all she domestic arrangement ; and from this kind of vanity be she greatest enjoyment in any of they party . but 's satisfaction in society be much more real ; he delight in collect about he more young people than he house would hold , and the noisier they be the better be he pleased . he be a blessing to all the juvenile part of the neighbourhood , for in summer he be for ever form party to eat cold ham and chicken out of door , and in winter
winter he private ball be numerous enough for any young lady who be not suffer under the unsatiable appetite of fifteen . the arrival of a new family in the country be always a matter of joy to he , and in every point of view he be charme with the inhabitant he have now procure for he cottage at . the be young , pretty , and unaffected . it be enough to secure he good opinion ; for to be unaffected be all that a pretty girl could want to make she mind as captivat as she person . the friendliness of he disposition make he happy in accommodate those , whose situation might be consider , in comparison with the past , as unfortunate . in show kindness to he cousin therefore he have the real satisfaction of a good heart ; and in settle a family of female only in he cottage , he have all the satisfaction of a sportsman ; for a sportsman , though he esteem only those of he sex who be sportsman likewise , be not often desirous of encourage they taste by admit they to a residence within he own manor . and she daughter be meet at the door of the house by , who welcome they to with unaffected sincerity ; and as he attend they to the draw room repeat to the young lady the concern which the same subject have draw from he the day before , at be unable to get any smart young man to meet they . they would see , he say , only one gentleman there besides himself ; a particular friend who be stay at the park , but who be neither very young nor very gay . he hope they would all excuse the smallness of the party , and could assure they it should never happen so again . he have be to several family that morne in hope of procure some addition to they number , but it be moonlight and every body be full of engagement . luckily 's mother have arrive at within the last hour , and as she be a very cheerful agreeable woman , he hope the young lady would not find it so very dull as they might imagine . the young lady , as well as they mother , be perfectly satisfied with have two entire stranger of the party , and wish for no more . , 's mother , be a good - humour , merry , fat , elderly woman , who talk a great deal , see very happy , and rather vulgar . she be full of joke and laughter , and before dinner be over have say many witty thing on the subject of lover and husband ; hope they have not leave they heart behind they in , and pretend to see they blush whether they do or not . be vex at it for she sister 's sake , and turn she eye towards to see how she bear these attack , with a earnestness which give far more pain than could arise from such common - place raillery as 's . , the friend of , seem no more adapt by resemblance of manner to be he friend , than be to be he wife , or to be 's mother . he be silent and grave . he appearance however be not unpleasing , in spite of he be in the opinion of and a absolute old bachelor , for he be on the wrong side of five and thirty ; but though he face be not handsome , he countenance be sensible , and he address be particularly gentlemanlike . there be nothing in any of the party which could recommend they as companion to the Dashwoods ; but the cold insipidity of be so particularly repulsive , that in comparison of it the gravity of , and even the boisterous mirth of and he mother - in - law be interesting . seem to be rouse to enjoyment only by the entrance of she four noisy child after dinner , who pull she about , tore she clothes , and put a end to every kind of discourse except what related to themselves . in the evening , as be discover to be musical , she be invite to play . the instrument be unlocked , every body prepare to be charme , and , who sang very well , at they request go through the chief of the song which have bring into the family on she marriage , and which perhaps have lain ever since in the same position on the pianoforte , for she ladyship have celebrate that event by give up music , although by she mother 's account , she have play extremely well , and by she own be very fond of it . 's performance be highly applaude . be loud in he admiration at the end of every song , and as loud in he conversation with the other while every song last . frequently call he to order , wonder how any one 's attention could be divert from music for a moment , and ask to s a particular song which have just finish . alone , of all the party , hear she without be in rapture . he pay she only the compliment of attention ; and she feel a respect for he on the occasion , which the other have reasonably forfeit by they shameless want of taste . he pleasure in music , though it amount not to that ecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with she own , be estimable when contrast against the horrible insensibility of the other ; and she be reasonable enough to allow that a man of five and thirty might well have outlive all acuteness of feeling and every
every exquisite power of enjoyment . she be perfectly dispose to make every allowance for the colonel 's advanced state of life which humanity require . . be a widow with a ample jointure . she have only two daughter , both of whom she have liv to see respectably married , and she have now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of the world . in the promotion of this object she be zealously active , as far as she ability reach ; and miss no opportunity of project wedding among all the young people of she acquaintance . she be remarkably quick in the discovery of attachment , and have enjoy the advantage of raise the blush and the vanity of many a young lady by insinuation of she power over such a young man ; and this kind of discernment enable she soon after she arrival at decisively to pronounce that be very much in love with . she rather suspect it to be so , on the very first evening of they be together , from he listening so attentively while she sang to they ; and when the visit be return by the 's dining at the cottage , the fact be ascertain by he listening to she again . it must be so . she be perfectly convinced of it . it would be a excellent match , for he be rich , and she be handsome . have be anxious to see well marry , ever since she connection with first bring he to she knowledge ; and she be always anxious to get a good husband for every pretty girl . the immediate advantage to herself be by no means inconsiderable , for it suppli she with endless joke against they both . at the park she laugh at the colonel , and in the cottage at . to the former she raillery be probably , as far as it regard only himself , perfectly indifferent ; but to the latter it be at first incomprehensible ; and when its object be understood , she hardly know whether most to laugh at its absurdity , or censure its impertinence , for she consider it as a unfeeling reflection on the colonel 's advanced year , and on he forlorn condition as a old bachelor . , who could not think a man five year younger than herself , so exceedingly ancient as he appear to the youthful fancy of she daughter , venture to clear from the probability of wishing to throw ridicule on he age . " but at least , , you can not deny the absurdity of the accusation , though you may not think it intentionally ill - natured . be certainly younger than , but he be old enough to be my father ; and if he be ever animate enough to be in love , must have long outlive every sensation of the kind . it be too ridiculous ! when be a man to be safe from such wit , if age and infirmity will not protect he ? " " Infirmity ! " say , " do you call infirm ? I can easily suppose that he age may appear much greater to you than to my mother ; but you can hardly deceive yourself as to he have the use of he limb ! " " do not you hear he complain of the rheumatism ? and be not that the commonest infirmity of declining life ? " " my dearest child , " say she mother , laugh , " at this rate you must be in continual terror of my decay ; and it must seem to you a miracle that my life have be extend to the advanced age of forty . " " Mamma , you be not do I justice . I know very well that be not old enough to make he friend yet apprehensive of lose he in the course of nature . he may live twenty year longer . but thirty - five have nothing to do with matrimony . " " perhaps , " say , " thirty - five and seventeen have better not have any thing to do with matrimony together . but if there should by any chance happen to be a woman who be single at seven and twenty , I should not think 's be thirty - five any objection to he marry she . " " a woman of seven and twenty , " say , after pause a moment , " can never hope to feel or inspire affection again , and if she home be uncomfortable , or she fortune small , I can suppose that she might bring herself to submit to the office of a nurse , for the sake of the provision and security of a wife . in he marry such a woman therefore there would be nothing unsuitable . it would be a compact of convenience , and the world would be satisfied . in my eyes it would be no marriage at all , but that would be nothing . to I it would seem only a commercial exchange , in which each wish to be benefite at the expense of the other . " " it would be impossible , I know , " reply , " to convince you that a woman of seven and twenty could feel for a man of thirty - five anything near enough to love , to make he a desirable companion to she . but I must object to you dooming and he wife to the constant confinement of a sick chamber , merely because he chance to complain yesterday ( a very cold damp day ) of a slight rheumatic feel in one of he shoulders . " " but he talk of flannel waistcoat , " say
say ; " and with I a flannel waistcoat be invariably connect with ach , cramp , rheumatism , and every species of ailment that can afflict the old and the feeble . " " have he be only in a violent fever , you would not have despise he half so much . , , be not there something interesting to you in the flushed cheek , hollow eye , and quick pulse of a fever ? " after this , upon 's leave the room , " , " say , " I have a alarm on the subject of illness which I can not conceal from you . I be sure be not well . we have now be here almost a fortnight , and yet he do not come . nothing but real indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay . what else can detain he at ? " " have you any idea of he come so soon ? " say . " I have none . on the contrary , if I have feel any anxiety at all on the subject , it have be in recollect that he sometimes show a want of pleasure and readiness in accept my invitation , when I talk of he come to . do expect he already ? " " I have never mention it to she , but of course she must . " " I rather think you be mistaken , for when I be talk to she yesterday of get a new grate for the spare bedchamber , she observe that there be no immediate hurry for it , as it be not likely that the room would be want for some time . " " how strange this be ! what can be the meaning of it ! but the whole of they behaviour to each other have be unaccountable ! how cold , how compose be they last adieus ! how languid they conversation the last evening of they be together ! in 's farewell there be no distinction between and I : it be the good wish of a affectionate brother to both . twice do I leave they purposly together in the course of the last morning , and each time do he most unaccountably follow I out of the room . and , in quit and , cry not as I do . even now she self - command be invariable . when be she deject or melancholy ? when do she try to avoid society , or appear restless and dissatisfie in it ? " chapter 9 the Dashwood be now settle at with tolerable comfort to themselves . the house and the garden , with all the object surround they , be now become familiar , and the ordinary pursuit which have give to half its charms be engage in again with far greater enjoyment than have be able to afford , since the loss of they father . , who call on they every day for the first fortnight , and who be not in the habit of see much occupation at home , could not conceal he amazement on find they always employ . they visitor , except those from , be not many ; for , in spite of 's urgent entreaty that they would mix more in the neighbourhood , and repeat assurance of he carriage be always at they service , the independence of 's spirit overcome the wish of society for she child ; and she be resolute in declining to visit any family beyond the distance of a walk . there be but few who could be so class ; and it be not all of they that be attainable . about a mile and a half from the cottage , along the narrow win valley of , which issue from that of , as formerly describe , the girl have , in one of they earliest walk , discover a ancient respectable look mansion which , by remind they a little of , interest they imagination and make they wish to be better acquaint with it . but they learn , on enquiry , that its possessor , a elderly lady of very good character , be unfortunately too infirm to mix with the world , and never stir from home . the whole country about they abound in beautiful walks . the high downs which invite they from almost every window of the cottage to seek the exquisite enjoyment of air on they summit , be a happy alternative when the dirt of the valley beneath shut up they superior beautie ; and towards one of these hill do and one memorable morning direct they step , attract by the partial sunshine of a showery sky , and unable longer to bear the confinement which the settle rain of the two preceding day have occasion . the weather be not tempt enough to draw the two other from they pencil and they book , in spite of 's declaration that the day would be lastingly fair , and that every threatening cloud would be draw off from they hill ; and the two girl set off together . they gaily ascend the down , rejoice in they own penetration at every glimpse of blue sky ; and when they catch in they face the animating gale of a high south -westerly wind , they pitie the fear which have prevent they mother and from share such delightful sensation . " be there a felicity in the world , " say , " superior to this ?-- , we will walk here at least two hour . " agree , and they pursue they way against the wind , resist it with laughing delight for about twenty minute longer , when suddenly the cloud unit over they head , and a driving rain set full in they face .-- Chagrin and
and surprise , they be oblige , though unwillingly , to turn back , for no shelter be nearer than they own house . one consolation however remain for they , to which the exigence of the moment give more than usual propriety ; it be that of run with all possible speed down the steep side of the hill which lead immediately to they garden gate . they set off . have at first the advantage , but a false step bring she suddenly to the ground ; and , unable to stop herself to assist she , be involuntarily hurrie along , and reach the bottom in safety . a gentleman carry a gun , with two pointer play round he , be pass up the hill and within a few yard of , when she accident happen . he put down he gun and run to she assistance . she have raise herself from the ground , but she foot have be twist in she fall , and she be scarcely able to stand . the gentleman offer he service ; and perceive that she modesty decline what she situation render necessary , take she up in he arm without farther delay , and carry she down the hill . then pass through the garden , the gate of which have be leave open by , he bear she directly into the house , whither be just arrive , and quit not he hold till he have seat she in a chair in the parlour . and she mother rise up in amazement at they entrance , and while the eye of both be fix on he with a evident wonder and a secret admiration which equally spring from he appearance , he aologize for he intrusion by relate its cause , in a manner so frank and so graceful that he person , which be uncommonly handsome , receive additional charms from he voice and expression . have he be even old , ugly , and vulgar , the gratitude and kindness of would have be secure by any act of attention to she child ; but the influence of youth , beauty , and elegance , give a interest to the action which come home to she feeling . she thank he again and again ; and , with a sweetness of address which always attend she , invite he to be seat . but this he decline , as he be dirty and wet . then beg to know to whom she be oblige . he name , he reply , be , and he present home be at , from whence he hope she would allow he the honour of call tomorrow to enquire after . the honour be readily grant , and he then depart , to make himself still more interesting , in the midst of a heavy rain . he manly beauty and more than common gracefulness be instantly the theme of general admiration , and the laugh which he gallantry raise against receive particular spirit from he exterior attraction .-- herself have see less of he person that the rest , for the confusion which crimson over she face , on he lift she up , have rob she of the power of regard he after they enter the house . but she have see enough of he to join in all the admiration of the other , and with a energy which always adorn she praise . he person and air be equal to what she fancy have ever draw for the hero of a favourite story ; and in he carry she into the house with so little previous formality , there be a rapidity of think which particularly recommend the action to she . every circumstance belong to he be interesting . he name be good , he residence be in they favourite village , and she soon find out that of all manly dress a shooting - jacket be the most become . she imagination be busy , she reflection be pleasant , and the pain of a sprained ankle be disregarde . call on they as soon as the next interval of fair weather that morne allow he to get out of door ; and 's accident be related to he , he be eagerly ask whether he know any gentleman of the name of at . " ! " cry ; " what , be he in the country ? that be good news however ; I will ride over tomorrow , and ask he to dinner on . " " you know he then , " say . " know he ! to be sure I do . why , he be down here every year . " " and what sort of a young man be he ? " " as good a kind of fellow as ever liv , I assure you . a very decent shot , and there be not a bolder rider in . " " and be that all you can say for he ? " cry , indignantly . " but what be he manners on more intimate acquaintance ? what he pursuits , he talents , and genius ? " be rather puzzl . " upon my soul , " say he , " I do not know much about he as to all that . but he be a pleasant , good humoured fellow , and have get the nicest little black bitch of a pointer I ever see . be she out with he today ? " but could no more satisfy he as to the colour of 's pointer , than he could describe to she the shade of he mind . " but who be he ? " say . " where do he come from ? have he a house at ? " on this point could give more certain
certain intelligence ; and he tell they that have no property of he own in the country ; that he reside there only while he be visit the old lady at , to whom he be related , and whose possession he be to inherit ; add , " yes , yes , he be very well worth catching I can tell you , ; he have a pretty little estate of he own in Somersetshire besides ; and if I be you , I would not give he up to my younger sister , in spite of all this tumbling down hills . must not expect to have all the man to herself . will be jealous , if she do not take care . " " I do not believe , " say , with a good humoured smile , " that will be incommod by the attempt of either of my daughter towards what you call Catche he . it be not a employment to which they have be bring up . be very safe with we , let they be ever so rich . I be glad to find , however , from what you say , that he be a respectable young man , and one whose acquaintance will not be ineligible . " " he be as good a sort of fellow , I believe , as ever liv , " repeat . " I remember last at a little hop at the park , he dance from eight o'clock till four , without once sit down . " " do he indeed ? " cry with sparkling eye , " and with elegance , with spirit ? " " yes ; and he be up again at eight to ride to covert . " " that be what I like ; that be what a young man ought to be . whatever be he pursuits , he eagerness in they should know no moderation , and leave he no sense of fatigue . " " aye , aye , I see how it will be , " say , " I see how it will be . you will be set you cap at he now , and never think of poor . " " that be a expression , , " say , warmly , " which I particularly dislike . I abhor every common - place phrase by which wit be intend ; and ' set one 's cap at a man , ' or ' make a conquest , ' be the most odious of all . they tendency be gross and illiberal ; and if they construction could ever be deem clever , time have long ago destroy all its ingenuity . " do not much understand this reproof ; but he laugh as heartily as if he do , and then reply , " ay , you will make conquest enough , I dare say , one way or other . poor ! he be quite smitten already , and he be very well worth set you cap at , I can tell you , in spite of all this tumbling about and spraining of ankle . " chapter 10 's preserver , as , with more elegance than precision , sty , call at the cottage early the next morning to make he personal enquirie . he be receive by with more than politeness ; with a kindness which 's account of he and she own gratitude prompt ; and every thing that pass during the visit tend to assure he of the sense , elegance , mutual affection , and domestic comfort of the family to whom accident have now introduce he . of they personal charms he have not require a second interview to be convince . have a delicate complexion , regular feature , and a remarkably pretty figure . be still handsomer . she form , though not so correct as she sister 's , in have the advantage of height , be more striking ; and she face be so lovely , that when in the common cant of praise , she be call a beautiful girl , truth be less violently outraged than usually happen . she skin be very brown , but , from its transparency , she complexion be uncommonly brilliant ; she feature be all good ; she smile be sweet and attractive ; and in she eyes , which be very dark , there be a life , a spirit , a eagerness , which could hardily be see without delight . from Willoughby they expression be at first hold back , by the embarrassment which the remembrance of he assistance create . but when this pass away , when she spirit become collect , when she see that to the perfect good - breeding of the gentleman , he united frankness and vivacity , and above all , when she hear he declare , that of music and dancing he be passionately fond , she give he such a look of approbation as secure the largest share of he discourse to herself for the rest of he stay . it be only necessary to mention any favourite amusement to engage she to talk . she could not be silent when such point be introduce , and she have neither shyness nor reserve in they discussion . they speedily discover that they enjoyment of dancing and music be mutual , and that it arise from a general conformity of judgment in all that related to either . encourage by this to a further examination of he opinion , she proceed to question he on the subject of book ; she favourite author be bring forward and dwelt upon with so rapturous a delight , that any young man of five and twenty must have be insensible indeed , not to become a immediate convert to the excellence of
of such work , however disregard before . they taste be strikingly alike . the same book , the same passage be idolize by each -- or if any difference appear , any objection arise , it last no longer than till the force of she argument and the brightness of she eye could be display . he acquiesce in all she decision , catch all she enthusiasm ; and long before he visit conclude , they converse with the familiarity of a long - establish acquaintance . " well , , " say , as soon as he have leave they , " for one morning I think you have do pretty well . you have already ascertaine 's opinion in almost every matter of importance . you know what he think of and ; you be certain of he estimate they beauty as he ink , and you have receive every assurance of he admiring Pope no more than be proper . but how be you acquaintance to be long support , under such extraordinary despatch of every subject for discourse ? you will soon have exhaust each favourite topic . another meeting will suffice to explain he sentiment on picturesque beauty , and second marriage , and then you can have nothing farther to ask . " -- " , " cry , " be this fair ? be this just ? be my idea so scanty ? but I see what you mean . I have be too much at my ease , too happy , too frank . I have er against every common - place notion of decorum ; I have be open and sincere where I ought to have be reserve , spiritless , dull , and deceitful -- have I talk only of the weather and the roads , and have I speak only once in ten minute , this reproach would have be spare . " " my love , " say she mother , " you must not be offend with -- she be only in jest . I should scold she myself , if she be capable of wish to check the delight of you conversation with we new friend . " -- be soften in a moment . , on he side , give every proof of he pleasure in they acquaintance , which a evident wish of improve it could offer . he come to they every day . to enquire after be at first he excuse ; but the encouragement of he reception , to which every day give greater kindness , make such a excuse unnecessary before it have cease to be possible , by 's perfect recovery . she be confine for some day to the house ; but never have any confinement be less irksome . be a young man of good abilitie , quick imagination , lively spirit , and open , affectionate manners . he be exactely form to engage 's heart , for with all this , he join not only a captivating person , but a natural ardour of mind which be now rouse and increase by the example of she own , and which recommend he to she affection beyond every thing else . he society become gradually she most exquisite enjoyment . they read , they talk , they sang together ; he musical talents be considerable ; and he read with all the sensibility and spirit which have unfortunately want . in 's estimation he be as faultless as in 's ; and see nothing to censure in he but a propensity , in which he strongly resemble and peculiarly delighte she sister , of say too much what he think on every occasion , without attention to person or circumstance . in hastily form and give he opinion of other people , in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of undivided attention where he heart be engage , and in slighte too easily the form of worldly propriety , he display a want of caution which could not approve , in spite of all that he and could say in its support . begin now to perceive that the desperation which have seize she at sixteen and a half , of ever see a man who could satisfy she idea of perfection , have be rash and unjustifiable . be all that she fancy have delineate in that unhappy hour and in every brighter period , as capable of attach she ; and he behaviour declare he wish to be in that respect as earnest , as he ability be strong . she mother too , in whose mind not one speculative thought of they marriage have be raise , by he prospect of riche , be lead before the end of a week to hope and expect it ; and secretly to congratulate herself on have gain two such son - in - law as and . 's partiality for , which have so early be discover by he friend , now first become perceptible to , when it cease to be notice by they . they attention and wit be draw off to he more fortunate rival ; and the raillery which the other have incur before any partiality arose , be remove when he feeling begin really to call for the ridicule so justly annex to sensibility . be oblige , though unwillingly , to believe that the sentiment which have assign he for she own satisfaction , be now actually excit by she sister ; and that however a general resemblance of disposition between the party might forward the affection of , a equally striking opposition of character be no hindrance to the regard of . she see it with concern ; for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope , when oppose to a very lively one of five and twenty ? and as she could not even
even wish he successful , she heartily wish he indifferent . she like he -- in spite of he gravity and reserve , she beheld in he a object of interest . he manners , though serious , be mild ; and he reserve appear rather the result of some oppression of spirit than of any natural gloominess of temper . have drop hints of past injury and disappointment , which justify she belief of he be a unfortunate man , and she regard he with respect and compassion . perhaps she pitie and esteem he the more because he be slighte by and , who , prejudice against he for be neither lively nor young , see resolve to undervalue he merit . " be just the kind of man , " say Willoughby one day , when they be talk of he together , " whom every body speak well of , and nobody care about ; whom all be delighted to see , and nobody remember to talk to . " " that be exactely what I think of he , " cry . " do not boast of it , however , " say , " for it be injustice in both of you . he be highly esteem by all the family at the park , and I never see he myself without take pain to converse with he . " " that he be patronise by you , " reply , " be certainly in he favour ; but as for the esteem of the other , it be a reproach in itself . who would submit to the indignity of be approve by such a woman as and , that could command the indifference of any body else ? " " but perhaps the abuse of such people as yourself and will make amend for the regard of and she mother . if they praise be censure , you censure may be praise , for they be not more undiscerning , than you be prejudiced and unjust . " " in defence of you protege you can even be saucy . " " my protege , as you call he , be a sensible man ; and sense will always have attraction for I . yes , , even in a man between thirty and forty . he have see a great deal of the world ; have be abroad , have read , and have a thinking mind . I have find he capable of give I much information on various subject ; and he have always answer my inquirie with readiness of good - breeding and good nature . " " that be to say , " cry contemptuously , " he have tell you , that in the the climate be hot , and the mosquitoe be troublesome . " " he would have tell I so , I doubt not , have I make any such inquiry , but they happen to be point on which I have be previously inform . " " perhaps , " say , " he observation may have extend to the existence of nabob , gold mohr , and palanquin . " " I may venture to say that this observation have stretch much further than you candour . but why should you dislike he ? " " I do not dislike he . I consider he , on the contrary , as a very respectable man , who have every body 's good word , and nobody 's notice ; who , have more money than he can spend , more time than he know how to employ , and two new coat every year . " " add to which , " cry , " that he have neither genius , taste , nor spirit . that he understanding have no brilliancy , he feeling no ardour , and he voice no expression . " " you decide on he imperfection so much in the mass , " reply , " and so much on the strength of you own imagination , that the commendation I be able to give of he be comparatively cold and insipid . I can only pronounce he to be a sensible man , well - breed , well - inform , of gentle address , and , I believe , possesse a amiable heart . " " , " cry , " you be now use I unkindly . you be endeavour to disarm I by reason , and to convince I against my will . but it will not do . you shall find I as stubborn as you can be artful . I have three unanswerable reason for disliking ; he threaten I with rain when I want it to be fine ; he have find fault with the hanging of my curricle , and I can not persuade he to buy my brown mare . if it will be any satisfaction to you , however , to be tell , that I believe he character to be in other respects irreproachable , I be ready to confess it . and in return for a acknowledgment , which must give I some pain , you can not deny I the privilege of dislik he as much as ever . " 11 have or she daughter imagine when they first come into , that so many engagement would arise to occupy they time as shortly present themselves , or that they should have such frequent invitation and such constant visitor as to leave they little leisure for serious employment . yet such be the case . when be recover , the scheme of amusement at home and abroad , which have be previously form , be put into execution . the private ball at the park then begin ; and party on the water be make and accomplish as often as a showery would allow
allow . in every meeting of the be include ; and the ease and familiarity which naturally attend these party be exactly calculate to give increase intimacy to he acquaintance with the , to afford he opportunity of witnesse the excellency of , of marking he animate admiration of she , and of receive , in she behaviour to himself , the most point assurance of she affection . could not be surprised at they attachment . she only wish that it be less openly shewn ; and once or twice do venture to suggest the propriety of some self - command to . but abhor all concealment where no real disgrace could attend unreserve ; and to aim at the restraint of sentiment which be not in themselves illaudable , appear to she not merely a unnecessary effort , but a disgraceful subjection of reason to common - place and mistaken notion . think the same ; and they behaviour at all time , be a illustration of they opinion . when he be present she have no eye for any one else . every thing he do , be right . every thing he say , be clever . if they evening at the park be conclude with card , he cheat himself and all the rest of the party to get she a good hand . if dancing form the amusement of the night , they be partner for half the time ; and when oblige to separate for a couple of dance , be careful to stand together and scarcely speak a word to any body else . such conduct make they of course most exceedingly laugh at ; but ridicule could not shame , and see hardly to provoke they . enter into all they feeling with a warmth which leave she no inclination for check this excessive display of they . to she it be but the natural consequence of a strong affection in a young and ardent mind . this be the season of happiness to . she heart be devote to , and the fond attachment to , which she bring with she from , be more likely to be soften than she have think it possible before , by the charms which he society bestow on she present home . 's happiness be not so great . she heart be not so much at ease , nor she satisfaction in they amusement so pure . they afford she no companion that could make amend for what she have leave behind , nor that could teach she to think of with less regret than ever . neither nor could supply to she the conversation she miss ; although the latter be a everlasting talker , and from the first have regard she with a kindness which ensure she a large share of she discourse . she have already repeat she own history to three or four time ; and have 's memory be equal to she means of improvement , she might have know very early in they acquaintance all the particular of 's last illness , and what he say to he wife a few minute before he die . be more agreeable than she mother only in be more silent . need little observation to perceive that she reserve be a mere calmness of manner with which sense have nothing to do . towards she husband and mother she be the same as to they ; and intimacy be therefore neither to be look for nor desire . she have nothing to say one day that she have not say the day before . she insipidity be invariable , for even she spirit be always the same ; and though she do not oppose the party arrange by she husband , provide every thing be conduct in style and she two eldest child attend she , she never appear to receive more enjoyment from they than she might have experience in sit at home ; -- and so little do she presence add to the pleasure of the other , by any share in they conversation , that they be sometimes only reminded of she be amongst they by she solicitude about she troublesome boy . in alone , of all she new acquaintance , do find a person who could in any degree claim the respect of ability , excite the interest of friendship , or give pleasure as a companion . be out of the question . she admiration and regard , even she sisterly regard , be all he own ; but he be a lover ; he attention be wholly 's , and a far less agreeable man might have be more generally pleasing . , unfortunately for himself , have no such encouragement to think only of , and in conversing with he find the greatest consolation for the indifference of she sister . 's compassion for he increase , as she have reason to suspect that the misery of disappointed love have already be know to he . this suspicion be give by some word which accidently drop from he one evening at the park , when they be sit down together by mutual consent , while the other be dance . he eye be fix on , and , after a silence of some minute , he say , with a faint smile , " you sister , I understand , do not approve of second attachment . " " no , " reply , " she opinion be all romantic . " " or rather , as I believe , she consider they impossible to exist . " " I believe she do . but how she contrive it without reflec on the character of she own father , who have himself two wife , I know not . a few year however will settle she opinion on the reasonable basis of common
common sense and observation ; and then they may be more easy to define and to justify than they now be , by any body but herself . " " this will probably be the case , " he reply ; " and yet there be something so amiable in the prejudice of a young mind , that one be sorry to see they give way to the reception of more general opinion . " " I can not agree with you there , " say . " there be inconvenience attend such feeling as 's , which all the charms of enthusiasm and ignorance of the world can not ato for . she system have all the unfortunate tendency of setting propriety at nuy ; and a better acquaintance with the world be what I look forward to as she greatest possible advantage . " after a short pause he resume the conversation by say ,-- " do you sister make no distinction in she objection against a second attachment ? or be it equally criminal in every body ? be those who have be disappoint in they first choice , whether from the inconstancy of it be object , or the perverseness of circumstance , to be equally indifferent during the rest of they life ? " " upon my word , I be not acquaint with the minutia of she principle . I only know that I never yet hear she admit any instance of a second attachment 's be pardonable . " " this , " say he , " can not hold ; but a change , a total change of sentiment -- no , no , do not desire it ; for when the romantic refinement of a young mind be oblige to give way , how frequently be they succeed by such opinion as be but too common , and too dangerous ! I speak from experience . I once know a lady who in temper and mind greatly resemble you sister , who think and judge like she , but who from a inforce change -- from a series of unfortunate circumstance " -- here he stopt suddenly ; appear to think that he have say too much , and by he countenance give rise to conjecture , which might not otherwise have enter 's head . the lady would probably have pass without suspicion , have he not convince Dashwood that what concern she ought not to escape he lip . as it be , it require but a slight effort of fancy to connect he emotion with the tender recollection of past regard . attempt no more . but , in she place , would not have do so little . the whole story would have be speedily form under she active imagination ; and every thing establish in the most melancholy order of disastrous love . chapter 12 and be walk together the next morning the latter communicate a piece of news to she sister , which in spite of all that she know before of 's imprudence and want of thought , surprise she by its extravagant testimony of both . tell she , with the greatest delight , that have give she a horse , one that he have breed himself on he estate in , and which be exactly calculate to carry a woman . without consider that it be not in she mother 's plan to keep any horse , that if she be to alter she resolution in favour of this gift , she must buy another for the servant , and keep a servant to ride it , and after all , build a stable to receive they , she have accept the present without hesitation , and tell she sister of it in rapture . " he intend to send he groom into immediately for it , " she add , " and when it arrive we will ride every day . you shall share it be use with I . imagine to yourself , my dear , the delight of a gallop on some of these down . " most unwilling be she to awake from such a dream of felicity to comprehend all the unhappy truth which attend the affair ; and for some time she refuse to submit to they . as to a additional servant , the expense would be a trifle ; she be sure would never object to it ; and any horse would do for he ; he might always get one at the park ; as to a stable , the merest she would be sufficient . then venture to doubt the propriety of she receive such a present from a man so little , or at least so lately know to she . this be too much . " you be mistaken , , " say she warmly , " in suppose I know very little of . I have not know he long indeed , but I be much better acquaint with he , than I be with any other creature in the world , except yourself and . it be not time or opportunity that be to determine intimacy ; -- it be disposition alone . year would be insufficient to make some people acquaint with each other , and seven day be more than enough for other . I should hold myself guilty of greater impropriety in accept a horse from my brother , than from . of I know very little , though we have liv together for year ; but of Willoughby my judgment have long be form . " think it wisest to touch that point no more . she know she sister 's temper . opposition on so tender a subject would only attach she the more to she own opinion . but by a appeal to she affection for she mother , by represent the inconvenience
inconvenience which that indulgent mother must draw on herself , if ( as would probably be the case ) she consent to this increase of establishment , be shortly subdue ; and she promise not to tempt she mother to such imprudent kindness by mention the offer , and to tell when she see he next , that it must be decline . she be faithful to she word ; and when call at the cottage , the same day , hear she express she disappointment to he in a low voice , on be oblige to forego the acceptance of he present . the reason for this alteration be at the same time relate , and they be such as to make further entreaty on he side impossible . he concern however be very apparent ; and after express it with earnestness , he add , in the same low voice ,--" but , , the horse be still yours , though you can not use it now . I shall keep it only till you can claim it . when you leave to form you own establishment in a more lasting home , shall receive you . " this be all overhear by ; and in the whole of the sentence , in he manner of pronounce it , and in he address she sister by she Christian name alone , she instantly see a intimacy so decide , a meaning so direct , as mark a perfect agreement between they . from that moment she doubt not of they be engage to each other ; and the belief of it create no other surprise than that she , or any of they friend , should be leave by tempers so frank , to discover it by accident . relate something to she the next day , which place this matter in a still clearer light . have spend the preceding evening with they , and , by be leave some time in the parlour with only he and , have have opportunity for observation , which , with a most important face , she communicate to she eldest sister , when they be next by themselves . " oh , ! " she cry , " I have such a secret to tell you about . I be sure she will be marry to very soon . " " you have say so , " reply , " almost every day since they first meet on high - church down ; and they have not know each other a week , I believe , before you be certain that wear he picture round she neck ; but it turn out to be only the miniature of we great uncle . " " but indeed this be quite another thing . I be sure they will be marry very soon , for he have get a lock of she hair . " " take care , . it may be only the hair of some great uncle of he . " " but , indeed , , it be 's . I be almost sure it be , for I see he cut it off . last night after tea , when you and go out of the room , they be whisper and talk together as fast as could be , and he seem to be begge something of she , and presently he take up she scissors and cut off a long lock of she hair , for it be all tumble down she back ; and he kiss it , and fold it up in a piece of white paper ; and put it into he pocket - book . " for such particulars , state on such authority , could not withhold she credit ; nor be she dispose to it , for the circumstance be in perfect unison with what she have hear and see herself . 's sagacity be not always display in a way so satisfactory to she sister . when attack she one evening at the park , to give the name of the young man who be 's particular favourite , which have be long a matter of great curiosity to she , answer by look at she sister , and say , " I must not tell , may I , ? " this of course make every body laugh ; and try to laugh too . but the effort be painful . she be convince that have fix on a person whose name she could not bear with composure to become a stand joke with . feel for she most sincerely ; but she do more harm than good to the cause , by turn very red and say in a angry manner to , " remember that whatever you conjecture may be , you have no right to repeat they . " " I never have any conjecture about it , " reply ; " it be you who tell I of it yourself . " this increase the mirth of the company , and be eagerly press to say something more . " oh ! pray , , let we know all about it , " say . " what be the gentleman 's name ? " " I must not tell , ma 'am . but I know very well what it be ; and I know where he be too . " " yes , yes , we can guess where he be ; at he own house at to be sure . he be the curate of the parish I dare say . " " no , that he be not . he be of no profession at all . " " , " say with great warmth , " you know that all this be a invention of you own , and that there be no such person in existence . "
" " well , then , he be lately dead , , for I be sure there be such a man once , and he name begin with a . " most grateful do feel to for observing , at this moment , " that it rain very hard , " though she believe the interruption to proceed less from any attention to she , than from she ladyship 's great dislike of all such inelegant subject of raillery as delighte she husband and mother . the idea however start by she , be immediately pursue by , who be on every occasion mindful of the feeling of other ; and much be say on the subject of rain by both of they . open the piano - forte , and ask to sit down to it ; and thus amidst the various endeavour of different people to quit the topic , it fall to the ground . but not so easily do recover from the alarm into which it have throw she . a party be form this evening for go on the follow day to see a very fine place about twelve mile from , belong to a brother - in - law of , without whose interest it could not be see , as the proprietor , who be then abroad , have leave strict order on that head . the grounds be declare to be highly beautiful , and , who be particularly warm in they praise , might be allow to be a tolerable judge , for he have for party to visit they , at least , twice every summer for the last ten year . they contain a noble piece of water ; a sail on which be to a form a great part of the morning 's amusement ; cold provision be to be take , open carriage only to be employ , and every thing conduct in the usual style of a complete party of pleasure . to some few of the company it appear rather a bold undertaking , consider the time of year , and that it have rain every day for the last fortnight ; -- and , who have already a cold , be persuade by to stay at home . chapter 13 they intend excursion to turn out very different from what have expect . she be prepare to be wet through , fatigue , and frightene ; but the event be still more unfortunate , for they do not go at all . by ten o'clock the whole party be assemble at the park , where they be to breakfast . the morning be rather favourable , though it have raine all night , as the cloud be then disperse across the sky , and the sun frequently appear . they be all in high spirit and good humour , eager to be happy , and determi to submit to the greatest inconvenience and hardship rather than be otherwise . while they be at breakfast the letter be bring in . among the rest there be one for ; -- he take it , look at the direction , change colour , and immediately leave the room . " what be the matter with ? " say . nobody could tell . " I hope he have have no bad news , " say . " it must be something extraordinary that could make leave my breakfast table so suddenly . " in about five minute he return . " no bad news , , I hope ; " say , as soon as he enter the room . " none at all , ma 'am , I thank you . " " be it from ? I hope it be not to say that you sister be worse . " " no , ma 'am . it come from town , and be merely a letter of business . " " but how come the hand to discompose you so much , if it be only a letter of business ? come , come , this will not do , ; so let we hear the truth of it . " " my dear madam , " say , " recollect what you be say . " " perhaps it be to tell you that you cousin Fanny be marry ? " say , without attend to she daughter 's reproof . " no , indeed , it be not . " " well , then , I know who it be from , . and I hope she be well . " " whom do you mean , ma 'am ? " say he , colour a little . " oh ! you know who i mean . " " I be particularly sorry , ma 'am , " say he , address , " that I should receive this letter today , for it be on business which require my immediate attendance in town . " " in town ! " cry . " what can you have to do in town at this time of year ? " " my own loss be great , " he continue , " in be oblige to leave so agreeable a party ; but I be the more concerned , as I fear my presence be necessary to gain you admittance at . " what a blow upon they all be this ! " but if you write a note to the housekeeper , , " say , eagerly , " will it not be sufficient ? " he shook he head . " we must go , " say .--" it shall not be put off when we be so near it . you can not go to town till tomorrow , , that be all . " " I wish it could be so easily settle . but it be not in my
my power to delay my journey for one day ! " " if you would but let we know what you business be , " say , " we might see whether it could be put off or not . " " you would not be six hour later , " say , " if you be to defer you journey till we return . " " I can not afford to lose one hour . " -- then hear say , in a low voice to , " there be some people who can not bear a party of pleasure . be one of they . he be afraid of catching could I dare say , and invent this trick for get out of it . I would lay fifty guinea the letter be of he own writing . " " I have no doubt of it , " reply . " there be no persuading you to change you mind , , I know of old , " say , " when once you be determine on anything . but , however , I hope you will think better of it . consider , here be the two come over from , the three walk up from the cottage , and get up two hour before he usual time , on purpose to go to . " again repeat he sorrow at be the cause of disappoint the party ; but at the same time declare it to be unavoidable . " well , then , when will you come back again ? " " I hope we shall see you at , " add she ladyship , " as soon as you can conveniently leave town ; and we must put off the party to Whitwell till you return . " " you be very obliging . but it be so uncertain , when I may have it in my power to return , that I dare not engage for it at all . " " oh ! he must and shall come back , " cry . " if he be not here by the end of the week , I shall go after he . " " ay , so do , , " cry , " and then perhaps you may find out what he business be . " " I do not want to pry into other man 's concern . I suppose it be something he be asham of . " 's horse be announce . " you do not go to town on horseback , do you ? " add . " no . only to . I shall then go post . " " well , as you be resolve to go , I wish you a good journey . but you have better change you mind . " " I assure you it be not in my power . " he then take leave of the whole party . " be there no chance of my see you and you sister in town this winter , ? " " I be afraid , none at all . " " then I must bid you farewell for a longer time than I should wish to do . " to , he merely bow and say nothing . " , " say , " before you go , do let we know what you be go about . " he wish she a good morning , and , attend by , leave the room . the complaints and lamentation which politeness have hithertoo restrained , now burst forth universally ; and they all agree again and again how provoke it be to be so disappoint . " I can guess what he business be , however , " say exultingly . " can you , ma 'am ? " say almost every body . " yes ; it be about , I be sure . " " and who be ? " ask . " what ! do not you know who be ? I be sure you must have heard of she before . she be a relation of the 's , my dear ; a very near relation . we will not say how near , for fear of shock the young lady . " then , lowere she voice a little , she say to , " she be he natural daughter . " " indeed ! " " oh , yes ; and as like he as she can stare . I dare say the will leave she all he fortune . " when return , he join most heartily in the general regret on so unfortunate a event ; conclude however by observing , that as they be all get together , they must do something by way of be happy ; and after some consultation it be agree , that although happiness could only be enjoy at , they might procure a tolerable composure of mind by drive about the country . the carriage be then order ; 's be first , and never look happier than when she get into it . he drive through the park very fast , and they be soon out of sight ; and nothing more of they be see till they return , which do not happen till after the return of all the rest . they both seem delighted with they drive ; but say only in general term that they have keep in the lane , while the other go on the down . it be settle that there should be a dance in the evening , and that every body should be extremely merry all day long . some more of the come to dinner , and they have the pleasure of sit down nearly twenty to table , which observe with great contentment . take he usual place between the two elder . sit on
on 's right hand ; and they have not be long seate , before she lean behind she and , and say to , loud enough for they both to hear , " I have find you out in spite of all you tricks . I know where you spend the morning . " colou , and reply very hastily , " where , pray ? " -- " do not you know , " say , " that we have be out in my curricle ? " " yes , yes , , I know that very well , and I be determined to find out where you have be to .-- I hope you like you house , . it be a very large one , I know ; and when I come to see you , I hope you will have new -furnished it , for it want it very much when I be there six year ago . " turn away in great confusion . laugh heartily ; and find that in she resolution to know where they have be , she have actually make she own woman enquire of 's groom ; and that she have by that method be inform that they have go to , and spend a considerable time there in walking about the garden and go all over the house . could hardly believe this to be true , as it see very unlikely that should propose , or consent , to enter the house while be in it , with whom have not the smallest acquaintance . as soon as they leave the dining - room , enquire of she about it ; and great be she surprise when she find that every circumstance relate by be perfectly true . be quite angry with she for doubte it . " why should you imagine , , that we do not go there , or that we do not see the house ? be not it what you have often wished to do yourself ? " " yes , , but I would not go while be there , and with no other companion than . " " however be the only person who can have a right to show that house ; and as he go in a open carriage , it be impossible to have any other companion . I never spend a pleasanter morning in my life . " " I be afraid , " reply , " that the pleasantness of a employment do not always evince its propriety . " " on the contrary , nothing can be a stronger proof of it , ; for if there have be any real impropriety in what I do , I should have be sensible of it at the time , for we always know when we be act wrong , and with such a conviction I could have have no pleasure . " " but , my dear , as it have already expose you to some very impertinent remark , do you not now begin to doubt the discretion of you own conduct ? " " if the impertinent remark of be to be the proof of impropriety in conduct , we be all offende every moment of we life . I value not she censure any more than I should do she commendation . I be not sensible of have do anything wrong in walk over 's grounds , or in see she house . they will one day be 's , and -- " " if they be one day to be you own , , you would not be justifi in what you have do . " she blush at this hint ; but it be even visibly gratify to she ; and after a ten minute ' interval of earnest thought , she come to she sister again , and say with great good humour , " perhaps , , it be rather ill - judge in I to go to ; but want particularly to show I the place ; and it be a charming house , I assure you .-- there be one remarkably pretty sit room up stair ; of a nice comfortable size for constant use , and with modern furniture it would be delightful . it be a corner room , and have window on two side . on one side you look across the bowling - green , behind the house , to a beautiful hanging wood , and on the other you have a view of the church and village , and , beyond they , of those fine bold hill that we have so often admire . I do not see it to advantage , for nothing could be more forlorn than the furniture , -- but if it be newly fitte up -- a couple of hundred pound , say , would make it one of the pleasantest summer - room in . " could have listen to she without interruption from the other , she would have describe every room in the house with equal delight . chapter 14 the sudden termination of 's visit at the park , with he steadiness in concealing its cause , fill the mind , and raise the wonder of for two or three day ; she be a great wonderer , as every one must be who take a very lively interest in all the comings and goings of all they acquaintance . she wonder , with little intermission what could be the reason of it ; be sure there must be some bad news , and think over every kind of distress that could have befall he , with a fix determination that he should not escape they all . " something very melancholy must be the matter , I be sure , " say she . " I could see it in he face
face . poor man ! I be afraid he circumstance may be bad . the estate at be never reckon more than two thousand a year , and he brother leave everything sadly involve . I do think he must have be send for about money matter , for what else can it be ? I wonder whether it be so . I would give anything to know the truth of it . perhaps it be about and , by the bye , I dare say it be , because he look so conscious when I mention she . may be she be ill in town ; nothing in the world more likely , for I have a notion she be always rather sickly . I would lay any wager it be about . it be not so very likely he should be distress in he circumstance now , for he be a very prudent man , and to be sure must have clear the estate by this time . I wonder what it can be ! May be he sister be worse at , and have send for he over . he set off in such a hurry seem very like it . well , I wish he out of all he trouble with all my heart , and a good wife into the bargain . " so wonder , so talk . she opinion varie with every fresh conjecture , and all see equally probable as they arise . , though she feel really interested in the welfare of , could not bestow all the wonder on he go so suddenly away , which be desirous of she feeling ; for besides that the circumstance do not in she opinion justify such last amazement or variety of speculation , she wonder be otherwise dispose of . it be engross by the extraordinary silence of she sister and on the subject , which they must know to be peculiarly interesting to they all . as this silence continue , every day make it appear more strange and more incompatible with the disposition of both . why they should not openly acknowledge to she mother and herself , what they constant behaviour to each other declare to have take place , could not imagine . she could easily conceive that marriage might not be immediately in they power ; for though be independent , there be no reason to believe he rich . he estate have be rate by at about six or seven hundr a year ; but he live at a expense to which that income could hardly be equal , and he have himself often complain of he poverty . but for this strange kind of secrecy maintain by they relative to they engagement , which in fact conceal nothing at all , she could not account ; and it be so wholly contradictory to they general opinion and practice , that a doubt sometimes enter she mind of they be really engage , and this doubt be enough to prevent she make any inquiry of . nothing could be more expressive of attachment to they all , than 's behaviour . to it have all the distinguishing tenderness which a lover 's heart could give , and to the rest of the family it be the affectionate attention of a son and a brother . the cottage seem to be consider and love by he as he home ; many more of he hour be spend there than at ; and if no general engagement collect they at the park , the exercise which call he out in the morning be almost certain of ende there , where the rest of the day be spend by himself at the side of , and by he favourite pointer at she foot . one evening in particular , about a week after leave the country , he heart seem more than usually open to every feeling of attachment to the around he ; and on 's happen to mention she design of improve the cottage in the spring , he warmly oppose every alteration of a place which affection have establish as perfect with he . " what ! " he exclaim -- " improve this dear cottage ! no . that I will never consent to . not a stone must be add to its wall , not a inch to its size , if my feeling be regarde . " " do not be alarm , " say , " nothing of the kind will be do ; for my mother will never have money enough to attempt it . " " I be heartily glad of it , " he cry . " may she always be poor , if she can employ she riche no better . " " thank you , . but you may be assure that I would not sacrifice one sentiment of local attachment of yours , or of any one whom I love , for all the improvement in the world . Depend upon it that whatever unemployed sum may remain , when I make up my account in the spring , I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dispose of it in a manner so painful to you . but be you really so attach to this place as to see no defect in it ? " " I be , " say he . " to I it be faultless . Nay , more , I consider it as the only form of building in which happiness be attainable , and be I rich enough I would instantly pull down , and build it up again in the exact plan of this cottage . " " with dark narrow stair and a kitchen that smoke , I suppose , " say . " yes , " cry he in the same eager tone , " with
with all and every thing belong to it ;-- in no one convenience or INconvenience about it , should the least variation be perceptible . then , and then only , under such a roof , I might perhaps be as happy at as I have be at . " " I flatter myself , " reply , " that even under the disadvantage of better room and a broader staircase , you will hereafter find you own house as faultless as you now do this . " " there certainly be circumstance , " say , " which might greatly endear it to I ; but this place will always have one claim of my affection , which no other can possibly share . " look with pleasure at , whose fine eye be fix so expressively on , as plainly denote how well she understand he . " how often do I wish , " add he , " when I be at this time twelvemonth , that cottage be inhabit ! I never pass within view of it without admir its situation , and grieve that no one should live in it . how little do I then think that the very first news I should hear from , when I next come into the country , would be that cottage be take : and I feel a immediate satisfaction and interest in the event , which nothing but a kind of prescience of what happiness I should experience from it , can account for . must it not have be so , ? " speak to she in a lowered voice . then continue he former tone , he say , " and yet this house you would spoil , ? you would rob it of its simplicity by imaginary improvement ! and this dear parlour in which we acquaintance first begin , and in which so many happy hour have be since spend by we together , you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance , and every body would be eager to pass through the room which have hithertoo contain within itself more real accommodation and comfort than any other apartment of the handsomest dimension in the world could possibly afford . " again assu he that no alteration of the kind should be attempt . " you be a good woman , " he warmly reply . " you promise make I easy . extend it a little farther , and it will make I happy . tell I that not only you house will remain the same , but that I shall ever find you and yours as unchanged as you dwelling ; and that you will always consider I with the kindness which have make everything belong to you so dear to I . " the promise be readily give , and 's behaviour during the whole of the evening declare at once he affection and happiness . " shall we see you tomorrow to dinner ? " say , when he be leave they . " I do not ask you to come in the morning , for we must walk to the park , to call on . " he engage to be with they by four o'clock . chapter 15 's visit to take place the next day , and two of she daughter go with she ; but excuse herself from be of the party , under some trifling pretext of employment ; and she mother , who conclude that a promise have be make by the night before of call on she while they be absent , be perfectly satisfied with she remain at home . on they return from the park they find 's curricle and servant in wait at the cottage , and be convinced that she conjecture have be just . so far it be all as she have foreseen ; but on enter the house she beheld what no foresight have teach she to expect . they be no sooner in the passage than come hastily out of the parlour apparently in violent affliction , with she handkerchief at she eye ; and without notice they run up stair . surprise and alarme they proceed directly into the room she have just quit , where they find only , who be lean against the mantel - piece with he back towards they . he turn round on they come in , and he countenance shew that he strongly partake of the emotion which over -power . " be anything the matter with she ? " cry as she enter -- " be she ill ? " " I hope not , " he reply , try to look cheerful ; and with a force smile presently add , " it be I who may rather expect to be ill -- for I be now suffer under a very heavy disappointment ! " " disappointment ? " " yes , for I be unable to keep my engagement with you . have this morning exercise the privilege of riche upon a poor dependent cousin , by send I on business to . I have just receive my dispatch , and take my farewell of ; and by way of exhilaration I be now come to take my farewell of you . " " to !-- and be you go this morning ? " " almost this moment . " " this be very unfortunate . but must be obliged ; -- and she business will not detain you from we long I hope . " he colou as he reply , " you be very kind , but I have no idea of return into immediately . my visit to be never repeat within the twelvemonth . " " and be you only friend ? be the only house in the neighbourhood to which you will be welcome ? for shame ,
, , can you wait for a invitation here ? " he colour increase ; and with he eye fix on the ground he only reply , " you be too good . " look at with surprise . feel equal amazement . for a few moments every one be silent . first spoke . " I have only to add , my dear , that at cottage you will always be welcome ; for I will not press you to return here immediately , because you only can judge how far that might be pleasing to ; and on this head I shall be no more disposed to question you judgment than to doubt you inclination . " " my engagement at present , " reply , confusedly , " be of such a nature -- that -- I dare not flatter myself " -- he stopt . be too much astonish to speak , and another pause succeed . this be break by , who say with a faint smile , " it be folly to linger in this manner . I will not torment myself any longer by remain among friend whose society it be impossible for I now to enjoy . " he then hastily take leave of they all and leave the room . they see he step into he carriage , and in a minute it be out of sight . feel too much for speech , and instantly quit the parlour to give way in solitude to the concern and alarm which this sudden departure occasion . 's uneasiness be at least equal to she mother 's . she think of what have just pass with anxiety and distrust . 's behaviour in take leave of they , he embarrassment , and affectation of cheerfulness , and , above all , he unwillingness to accept she mother 's invitation , a backwardness so unlike a lover , so unlike himself , greatly disturb she . one moment she fear that no serious design have ever be form on he side ; and the next that some unfortunate quarrel have take place between he and she sister ; -- the distress in which have quit the room be such as a serious quarrel could most reasonably account for , though when she consider what 's love for he be , a quarrel seem almost impossible . but whatever might be the particular of they separation , she sister 's affliction be indubitable ; and she think with the tenderest compassion of that violent sorrow which be in all probability not merely give way to as a relief , but feed and encourage as a duty . in about half a hour she mother return , and though she eye be red , she countenance be not uncheerful . " we dear be now some mile from , , " say she , as she sit down to work , " and with how heavy a heart do he travel ? " " it be all very strange . so suddenly to be gone ! it seem but the work of a moment . and last night he be with we so happy , so cheerful , so affectionate ? and now , after only ten minute notice -- go too without intend to return !-- something more than what he own to we must have happen . he do not speak , he do not behave like himself . you must have see the difference as well as I . what can it be ? can they have quarrell ? why else should he have shewn such unwillingness to accept you invitation here ?" -- " it be not inclination that he want , ; I could plainly see that . he have not the power of accept it . I have think it all over I assure you , and I can perfectly account for every thing that at first seem strange to I as well as to you . " " can you , indeed ! " " yes . I have explain it to myself in the most satisfactory way ; -- but you , , who love to doubt where you can -- it will not satisfy you , I know ; but you shall not talk I out of my trust in it . I be persuade that suspect he regard for , disapprove of it , ( perhaps because she have other view for he , ) and on that account be eager to get he away ; -- and that the business which she send he off to transact be invent as a excuse to dismiss he . this be what I believe to have happen . he be , moreover , aware that she do disapprove the connection , he dare not therefore at present confess to she he engagement with , and he feel himself oblige , from he dependent situation , to give into she scheme , and absent himself from for a while . you will tell I , I know , that this may or may not have happen ; but I will listen to no cavil , unless you can point out any other method of understanding the affair as satisfactory at this . and now , , what have you to say ? " " nothing , for you have anticipate my answer . " " then you would have tell I , that it might or might not have happen . oh , , how incomprehensible be you feeling ! you have rather take evil upon credit than good . you have rather look out for misery for , and guil for poor , than a apology for the latter . you be resolve to think he blameable , because he take leave of we with less affection than he usual behaviour have shewn . and be no allowance to
to be make for inadvertence , or for spirits depresse by recent disappointment ? be no probabilitie to be accept , merely because they be not certainty ? be nothing due to the man whom we have all such reason to love , and no reason in the world to think ill of ? to the possibility of motive unanswerable in themselves , though unavoidably secret for a while ? and , after all , what be it you suspect he of ? " " I can hardly tell myself . but suspicion of something unpleasant be the inevitable consequence of such a alteration as we just witness in he . there be great truth , however , in what you have now urge of the allowances which ought to be make for he , and it be my wish to be cando in my judgment of every body . may undoubtedly have very sufficient reasons for he conduct , and I will hope that he have . but it would have be more like to acknowledge they at once . Secrecy may be advisable ; but still I can not help wonder at its be practice by he . " " do not blame he , however , for departing from he character , where the deviation be necessary . but you really do admit the justice of what I have say in he defence ?-- I be happy -- and he be acquit . " " not entirely . it may be proper to conceal they engagement ( if they be engage ) from -- and if that be the case , it must be highly expedient for to be but little in at present . but this be no excuse for they conceal it from we . " " Conceal it from we ! my dear child , do you accuse and of concealment ? this be strange indeed , when you eye have be reproach they every day for incautiousness . " " I want no proof of they affection , " say ; " but of they engagement I do . " " I be perfectly satisfied of both . " " yet not a syllable have be say to you on the subject , by either of they . " " I have not want syllable where action have speak so plainly . have not he behaviour to and to all of we , for at least the last fortnight , declare that he love and consider she as he future wife , and that he feel for we the attachment of the nearest relation ? have we not perfectly understand each other ? have not my consent be daily ask by he look , he manner , he attentive and affectionate respect ? my , be it possible to doubt they engagement ? how could such a think occur to you ? how be it to be suppose that , persuade as he must be of you sister 's love , should leave she , and leave she perhaps for month , without tell she of he affection ; -- that they should part without a mutual exchange of confidence ? " " I confess , " reply , " that every circumstance except one be in favour of they engagement ; but that one be the total silence of both on the subject , and with I it almost outweigh every other . " " how strange this be ! you must think wretchedly indeed of , if , after all that have openly pass between they , you can doubt the nature of the term on which they be together . have he be act a part in he behaviour to you sister all this time ? do you suppose he really indifferent to she ? " " no , I can not think that . he must and do love she I be sure . " " but with a strange kind of tenderness , if he can leave she with such indifference , such carelessness of the future , as you attribute to he . " " you must remember , my dear mother , that I have never consider this matter as certain . I have have my doubt , I confess ; but they be fainter than they be , and they may soon be entirely do away . if we find they correspond , every fear of mine will be remove . " " a mighty concession indeed ! if you be to see they at the altar , you would suppose they be go to be marry . Ungracious girl ! but I require no such proof . nothing in my opinion have ever pass to justify doubt ; no secrecy have be attempt ; all have be uniformly open and unreserved . you can not doubt you sister 's wish . it must be therefore whom you suspect . but why ? be he not a man of honour and feel ? have there be any inconsistency on he side to create alarm ? can he be deceitful ? " " I hope not , I believe not , " cry . " I love , sincerely love he ; and suspicion of he integrity can not be more painful to yourself than to I . it have be involuntary , and I will not encourage it . I be start , I confess , by the alteration in he manners this morning ; -- he do not speak like himself , and do not return you kindness with any cordiality . but all this may be explain by such a situation of he affair as you have suppose . he have just part from my sister , have see she leave he in the greatest affliction ; and if he feel obliged , from a fear of offending , to resist the temptation of
of return here soon , and yet aware that by decline you invitation , by say that he be go away for some time , he should seem to act a ungenerous , a suspicious part by we family , he might well be embarrassed and disturbed . in such a case , a plain and open avowal of he difficulty would have be more to he honour I think , as well as more consistent with he general character ; -- but I will not raise objection against any one 's conduct on so illiberal a foundation , as a difference in judgment from myself , or a deviation from what I may think right and consistent . " " you speak very properly . Willoughby certainly do not deserve to be suspect . though we have not know he long , he be no stranger in this part of the world ; and who have ever speak to he disadvantage ? have he be in a situation to act independently and marry immediately , it might have be odd that he should leave we without acknowledge everything to I at once : but this be not the case . it be a engagement in some respects not prosperously begin , for they marriage must be at a very uncertain distance ; and even secrecy , as far as it can be observe , may now be very advisable . " they be interrupt by the entrance of ; and be then at liberty to think over the representation of she mother , to acknowledge the probability of many , and hope for the justice of all . they see nothing of till dinner time , when she enter the room and take she place at the table without say a word . she eye be red and swoll ; and it seem as if she tear be even then restrain with difficulty . she avoid the look of they all , could neither eat nor speak , and after some time , on she mother 's silently press she hand with tender compassion , she small degree of fortitude be quite overcome , she burst into tear and leave the room . this violent oppression of spirit continue the whole evening . she be without any power , because she be without any desire of command over herself . the slightest mention of anything relative to overpower she in a instant ; and though she family be most anxiously attentive to she comfort , it be impossible for they , if they speak at all , to keep clear of every subject which she feeling connect with he . chapter 16 would have think herself very inexcusable have she be able to sleep at all the first night after part from . she would have be asham to look she family in the face the next morning , have she not risen from she bed in more need of repose than when she lay down in it . but the feeling which make such composure a disgrace , leave she in no danger of incurr it . she be awake the whole night , and she weep the greatest part of it . she get up with a headache , be unable to talk , and unwilling to take any nourishment ; give pain every moment to she mother and sister , and forbid all attempt at consolation from either . she sensibility be potent enough ! when breakfast be over she walk out by herself , and wander about the village of , indulge the recollection of past enjoyment and cry over the present reverse for the chief of the morning . the evening pass off in the equal indulgence of feeling . she play over every favourite song that she have be use to play to , every air in which they voice have be oftenest join , and sit at the instrument gaze on every line of music that he have write out for she , till she heart be so heavy that no farther sadness could be gain ; and this nourishment of grief be every day apply . she spend whole hour at the pianoforte alternately singe and cry ; she voice often totally suspend by she tear . in book too , as well as in music , she court the misery which a contrast between the past and present be certain of give . she read nothing but what they have be use to read together . such violence of affliction indeed could not be support for ever ; it sunk within a few day into a calmer melancholy ; but these employment , to which she daily recur , she solitary walk and silent meditation , still produce occasional effusion of sorrow as lively as ever . no letter from come ; and none seem expect by . she mother be surprised , and again become uneasy . but could find explanations whenever she want they , which at least satisfied herself . " remember , , " say she , " how very often fetch we letter himself from the post , and carry they to it . we have already agree that secrecy may be necessary , and we must acknowledge that it could not be maintain if they correspondence be to pass through 's hand . " could not deny the truth of this , and she try to find in it a motive sufficient for they silence . but there be one method so direct , so simple , and in she opinion so eligible of know the real state of the affair , and of instantly remove all mystery , that she could not help suggest it to she mother . " why do you not ask at once , " say she , " whether she be or she be not engage to ? from
from you , she mother , and so kind , so indulgent a mother , the question could not give offence . it would be the natural result of you affection for she . she use to be all unreserve , and to you more especially . " " I would not ask such a question for the world . Suppose it possible that they be not engage , what distress would not such a enquiry inflict ! at any rate it would be most ungenerous . I should never deserve she confidence again , after force from she a confession of what be mean at present to be unacknowledged to any one . I know 's heart : I know that she dearly love I , and that I shall not be the last to whom the affair be make known , when circumstance make the revealment of it eligible . I would not attempt to force the confidence of any one ; of a child much less ; because a sense of duty would prevent the denial which she wish might direct . " think this generosity overstrain , consider she sister 's youth , and urge the matter farther , but in vain ; common sense , common care , common prudence , be all sunk in 's romantic delicacy . it be several day before 's name be mention before by any of she family ; and , indeed , be not so nice ; they witticism add pain to many a painful hour ; -- but one evening , , accidentally take up a volume of , exclaim , " we have never finish , ; we dear go away before we could get through it . we will put it by , that when he come again ... but it may be month , perhaps , before that happen . " " month ! " cry , with strong surprise . " no -- nor many week . " be sorry for what she have say ; but it give pleasure , as it produce a reply from so expressive of confidence in and knowledge of he intention . one morning , about a week after he leave the country , be prevail on to join she sister in they usual walk , instead of wander away by herself . she have carefully avoid every companion in she ramble . if she sister intend to walk on the downs , she directly steal away towards the lane ; if they talk of the valley , she be as speedy in climb the hill , and could never be find whan the other set off . but at length she be secure by the exertion of , who greatly disapprove such continual seclusion . they walk along the road through the valley , and chiefly in silence , for 's could not be control , and , satisfied with gain one point , would not then attempt more . beyond the entrance of the valley , where the country , though still rich , be less wild and more open , a long stretch of the road which they have travel on first come to , lay before they ; and on reach that point , they stop to look around they , and examine a prospect which form the distance of they view from the cottage , from a spot which they have never happen to reach in any of they walk before . amongst the object in the scene , they soon discover a animated one ; it be a man on horseback ride towards they . in a few minute they could distinguish he to be a gentleman ; and in a moment afterwards rapturously exclaim , " it be he ; it be indeed ;-- I know it be ! " -- and be hasten to meet he , when cry out , " indeed , , I think you be mistaken . it be not Willoughby . the person be not tall enough for he , and have not he air . " " he have , he have , " cry , " I be sure he have . he air , he coat , he horse . I know how soon he would come . " she walk eagerly on as she speak ; and , to screen from particularity , as she feel almost certain of it be not be , quicken she pace and keep up with she . they be soon within thirty yard of the gentleman . look again ; she heart sunk within she ; and abruptly turn round , she be hurrie back , when the voice of both she sister be raise to detain she ; a third , almost as well know as 's , join they in begge she to stop , and she turn round with surprise to see and welcome . he be the only person in the world who could at that moment be forgiven for not be ; the only one who could have gain a smile from she ; but she disperse she tear to smile on he , and in she sister 's happiness forget for a time she own disappointment . he dismount , and give he horse to he servant , walk back with they to , whither he be purposely come to visit they . he be welcome by they all with great cordiality , but especially by , who show more warmth of regard in she reception of he than even herself . to , indeed , the meeting between and she sister be but a continuation of that unaccountable coldness which she have often observe at in they mutual behaviour . on 's side , more particularly , there be a deficiency of all that a lover ought to look and say on such a occasion . he be
be confused , seem scarcely sensible of pleasure in see they , look neither rapturous nor gay , say little but what be force from he by question , and distinguished by no mark of affection . see and listen with increase surprise . she begin almost to feel a dislike of ; and it end , as every feeling must end with she , by carry back she thought to , whose manners for a contrast sufficiently strike to those of he brother elect . after a short silence which succeed the first surprise and enquiry of meeting , ask if he come directly from . no , he have be in a fortnight . " a fortnight ! " she repeat , surprise at he be so long in the same county with without see she before . he look rather distressed as he add , that he have be stay with some friend near . " have you be lately in ? " say . " I be at about a month ago . " " and how do dear , dear look ? " cry . " dear , dear , " say , " probably look much as it always do at this time of the year . the woods and walk thickly cover with dead leave . " " oh , " cry , " with what transport sensation have I formerly see they fall ! how have I deligh , as I walk , to see they drive in shower about I by the wind ! what feeling have they , the season , the air altogether inspire ! now there be no one to regard they . they be see only as a nuisance , sweep hastily off , and drive as much as possible from the sight . " " it be not every one , " say , " who have you passion for dead leave . " " no ; my feeling be not often share , not often understand . but they be . " -- as she say this , she sunk into a reverie for a few moment ; -- but rouse herself again , " now , , " say she , call he attention to the prospect , " here be valley . look up to it , and be tranquil if you can . look at those hill ! do you ever see they equal ? to the left be park , amongst those woods and plantation . you may see the end of the house . and there , beneath that farthest hill , which rise with such grandeur , be we cottage . " " it be a beautiful country , " he reply ; " but these bottom must be dirty in winter . " " how can you think of dirt , with such object before you ? " " because , " reply he , smile , " among the rest of the object before I , I see a very dirty lane . " " how strange ! " say to herself as she walk on . " have you a agreeable neighbourhood here ? be the pleasant people ? " " no , not all , " answer ; " we could not be more unfortunately situate . " " , " cry she sister , " how can you say so ? how can you be so unjust ? they be a very respectable family , ; and towards we have behave in the friendliest manner . have you forget , , how many pleasant day we have owed to they ? " " no , " say , in a low voice , " nor how many painful moment . " take no notice of this ; and direct she attention to they visitor , endeavoure to support something like discourse with he , by talk of they present residence , its convenience , & c. extort from he occasional question and remark . he coldness and reserve mortify she severely ; she be vex and half angry ; but resolve to regulate she behaviour to he by the past rather than the present , she avoid every appearance of resentment or displeasure , and treat he as she think he ought to be treat from the family connection . chapter 17 be surprised only for a moment at see he ; for he come to be , in she opinion , of all thing the most natural . she joy and expression of regard long outlive she wonder . he receive the kindest welcome from she ; and shyness , coldness , reserve could not stand against such a reception . they have begin to fail he before he enter the house , and they be quite overcome by the captivating manners of . indeed a man could not very well be in love with either of she daughter , without extend the passion to she ; and have the satisfaction of see he soon become more like himself . he affection seem to reanimate towards they all , and he interest in they welfare again become perceptible . he be not in spirit , however ; he praise they house , admire its prospect , be attentive , and kind ; but still he be not in spirit . the whole family perceive it , and , attribute it to some want of liberality in he mother , sit down to table indignant against all selfish parent . " what be 's views for you at present , ? " say she , when dinner be over and they have draw round the fire ; " be you still to be a great orator in spite of yourself ? " " no . I hope my mother be now convinced that I have no more talents than inclination for a public life !
! " " but how be you fame to be establish ? for famous you must be to satisfy all you family ; and with no inclination for expense , no affection for strangers , no profession , and no assurance , you may find it a difficult matter . " " I shall not attempt it . I have no wish to be distinguished ; and have every reason to hope I never shall . thank heaven ! I can not be force into genius and eloquence . " " you have no ambition , I well know . you wish be all moderate . " " as moderate as those of the rest of the world , I believe . I wish as well as every body else to be perfectly happy ; but , like every body else it must be in my own way . greatness will not make I so . " " strange that it would ! " cry . " what have wealth or grandeur to do with happiness ? " " have but little , " say , " but wealth have much to do with it . " " , for shame ! " say , " money can only give happiness where there be nothing else to give it . beyond a competence , it can afford no real satisfaction , as far as mere self be concerned . " " perhaps , " say , smile , " we may come to the same point . you competence and my wealth be very much alike , I dare say ; and without they , as the world go now , we shall both agree that every kind of external comfort must be want . you idea be only more noble than mine . come , what be you competence ? " " about eighteen hundred or two thousand a year ; not more than that . " laugh . " two thousand a year ! one be my wealth ! I guess how it would end . " " and yet two thousand a - year be a very moderate income , " say . " a family can not well be maintain on a smaller . I be sure I be not extravagant in my demand . a proper establishment of servant , a carriage , perhaps two , and hunter , can not be support on less . " smile again , to hear she sister describe so accurately they future expense at . " hunter ! " repeat -- " but why must you have hunter ? every body do not hunt . " colou as she reply , " but most people do . " " I wish , " say , strike out a novel thought , " that somebody would give we all a large fortune apiece ! " " oh that they would ! " cry , she eye sparkl with animation , and she cheek glow with the delight of such imaginary happiness . " we be all unanimous in that wish , I suppose , " say , " in spite of the insufficiency of wealth . " " oh dear ! " cry , " how happy I should be ! I wonder what I should do with it ! " look as if she have no doubt on that point . " I should be puzzl to spend so large a fortune myself , " say , " if my child be all to be rich without my help . " " you must begin you improvement on this house , " observe , " and you difficulty will soon vanish . " " what magnificent order would travel from this family to , " say , " in such a event ! what a happy day for bookseller , music - seller , and print- shop ! you , , would give a general commission for every new print of merit to be send you -- and as for , I know she greatness of soul , there would not be music enough in to content she . and book !-- , , -- she would buy they all over and over again : she would buy up every copy , I believe , to prevent they fall into unworthy hand ; and she would have every book that tell she how to admire a old twisted tree . should not you , ? forgive I , if I be very saucy . but I be willing to show you that I have not forget we old dispute . " " I love to be remind of the past , -- whether it be melancholy or gay , I love to recall it -- and you will never offend I by talking of former time . you be very right in suppose how my money would be spend -- some of it , at least -- my loose cash would certainly be employ in improve my collection of music and book . " " and the bulk of you fortune would be lay out in annuity on the author or they heir . " " no , , I should have something else to do with it . " " perhaps , then , you would bestow it as a reward on that person who write the ablest defence of you favourite maxim , that no one can ever be in love more than once in they life -- you opinion on that point be unchanged , I presume ? " " undoubtedly . at my time of life opinion be tolerably fix . it be not likely that I should now see or hear any thing to change they . " " be as steadfast as ever , you see , " say , " she be not at all alte . " " she be only
only grow a little more grave than she be . " " , , " say , " you need not reproach I . you be not very gay yourself . " " why should you think so ! " reply he , with a sigh . " but gaiety never be a part of my character . " " nor do I think it a part of 's , " say ; " I should hardly call she a lively girl -- she be very earnest , very eager in all she do -- sometimes talk a great deal and always with animation -- but she be not often really merry . " " I believe you be right , " he reply , " and yet I have always set she down as a lively girl . " " I have frequently detect myself in such kind of mistake , " say , " in a total misapprehension of character in some point or other : fancie people so much more gay or grave , or ingenious or stupid than they really be , and I can hardly tell why or in what the deception originate . sometimes one be guide by what they say of themselves , and very frequently by what other people say of they , without give oneself time to deliberate and judge . " " but I think it be right , , " say , " to be guide wholly by the opinion of other people . I think we judgment be give we merely to be subservient to those of neighbour . this have always be you doctrine , I be sure . " " no , , never . my doctrine have never aim at the subjection of the understanding . all I have ever attempt to influence have be the behaviour . you must not confound my meaning . I be guilty , I confess , of have often wish you to treat we acquaintance in general with greater attention ; but when have I advise you to adopt they sentiment or to conform to they judgment in serious matters ? " " you have not be able to bring you sister over to you plan of general civility , " say to . " do you gain no ground ? " " quite the contrary , " reply , look expressively at . " my judgament , " he return , " be all on you side of the question ; but I be afraid my practice be much more on you sister 's . I never wish to offend , but I be so foolishly shy , that I often seem negligent , when I be only keep back by my natural awkwardness . I have frequently think that I must have be intend by nature to be fond of low company , I be so little at my ease among stranger of gentility ! " " have not shyness to excuse any inattention of hers , " say . " she know she own worth too well for false shame , " reply . " Shyness be only the effect of a sense of inferiority in some way or other . if I could persuade myself that my manners be perfectly easy and graceful , I should not be shy . " " but you would still be reserve , " say , " and that be worse . " start --" reserve ! be I reserve , ? " " yes , very . " " I do not understand you , " reply he , colouring . " reserve !-- how , in what manner ? what be I to tell you ? what can you suppose ? " look surprised at he emotion ; but try to laugh off the subject , she say to he , " do not you know my sister well enough to understand what she mean ? do not you know she call every one reserve who do not talk as fast , and admire what she admire as rapturously as herself ? " make no answer . he gravity and thoughtfulness return on he in they fullest extent -- and he sit for some time silent and dull . chapter 18 see , with great uneasiness the low spirit of she friend . he visit afforde she but a very partial satisfaction , while he own enjoyment in it appear so imperfect . it be evident that he be unhappy ; she wish it be equally evident that he still distinguished she by the same affection which once she have feel no doubt of inspiring ; but hitherto the continuance of he preference see very uncertain ; and the reservedness of he manner towards she contradict one moment what a more animated look have intimate the preceding one . he join she and in the breakfast - room the next morning before the other be down ; and , who be always eager to promote they happiness as far as she could , soon leave they to themselves . but before she be half way upstairs she hear the parlour door open , and , turn round , be astonished to see himself come out . " I be go into the village to see my horse , " say he , " as you be not yet ready for breakfast ; I shall be back again presently . " *** return to they with fresh admiration of the surround country ; in he walk to the village , he have see many part of the valley to advantage ; and the village itself , in a much higher situation than the cottage , afforde a general view of the whole , which have exceedingly please he . this be a subject which ensure 's attention , and she be begin to describe she own admiration of these
these scene , and to question he more minutely on the object that have particularly strike he , when interrupt she by say , " you must not enquire too far , -- remember I have no knowledge in the picturesque , and I shall offend you by my ignorance and want of taste if we come to particular . I shall call hill steep , which ought to be bold ; surface strange and uncouth , which ought to be irregular and rug ; and distant object out of sight , which ought only to be indistinct through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere . you must be satisfied with such admiration as I can honestly give . I call it a very fine country -- the hill be steep , the wood seem full of fine timber , and the valley look comfortable and snug -- with rich meadow and several neat farm house scatter here and there . it exactly answer my idea of a fine country , because it unite beauty with utility -- and I dare say it be a picturesque one too , because you admire it ; I can easily believe it to be full of rock and promontory , grey moss and brush wood , but these be all lose on I . I know nothing of the picturesque . " " I be afraid it be but too true , " say ; " but why should you boast of it ? " " I suspect , " say , " that to avoid one kind of affectation , here fall into another . because he believe many people pretend to more admiration of the beauty of nature than they really feel , and be disgusted with such pretension , he affect greater indifference and less discrimination in view they himself than he possess . he be fastidious and will have a affectation of he own . " " it be very true , " say , " that admiration of landscape scenery be become a mere jargon . every body pretend to feel and try to describe with the taste and elegance of he who first define what picturesque beauty be . I detest jargon of every kind , and sometimes I have keep my feeling to myself , because I could find no language to describe they in but what be wear and hackney out of all sense and meaning . " " I be convince , " say , " that you really feel all the delight in a fine prospect which you profess to feel . but , in return , you sister must allow I to feel no more than I profess . I like a fine prospect , but not on picturesque principle . I do not like crook , twiste , blast tree . I admire they much more if they be tall , straight , and flourish . I do not like ruin , tatter cottage . I be not fond of nettle or thistle , or heath blossom . I have more pleasure in a snug farm - house than a watch - tower -- and a troop of tidy , happy villag please I better than the finest banditti in the world . " look with amazement at , with compassion at she sister . only laugh . the subject be continue no farther ; and remain thoughtfully silent , till a new object suddenly engage she attention . she be sit by , and in take he tea from , he hand pass so directly before she , as to make a ring , with a plait of hair in the centre , very conspicuous on one of he finger . " I never see you wear a ring before , , " she cry . " be that 's hair ? I remember she promise to give you some . but I should have think she hair have be darker . " speak inconsiderately what she really feel -- but when she see how much she have pain , she own vexation at she want of thought could not be surpass by he . he colou very deeply , and give a momentary glance at , reply , " yes ; it be my sister 's hair . the setting always cast a different shade on it , you know . " have meet he eye , and look conscious likewise . that the hair be she own , she instantaneously feel as well satisfied as ; the only difference in they conclusion be , that what consider as a free gift from she sister , be conscious must have be procure by some theft or contrivance unknown to herself . she be not in a humour , however , to regard it as a affront , and affect to take no notice of what pass , by instantly talk of something else , she internally resolve henceforward to catch every opportunity of eyee the hair and of satisfye herself , beyond all doubt , that it be exactly the shade of she own . 's embarrassment last some time , and it end in a absence of mind still more settled . he be particularly grave the whole morning . severely censure herself for what she have say ; but she own forgiveness might have be more speedy , have she know how little offence it have give she sister . before the middle of the day , they be visit by and , who , have hear of the arrival of a gentleman at the cottage , come to take a survey of the guest . with the assistance of he mother - in - law , be not long in discover that the name of begin with a and this prepare a future mine of raillery against the devoted , which nothing but the newness of
of they acquaintance with could have prevent from be immediately spring . but , as it be , she only learn , from some very significant look , how far they penetration , found on 's instruction , extend . never come to the Dashwood without either invite they to dine at the park the next day , or to drink tea with they that evening . on the present occasion , for the better entertainment of they visitor , towards whose amusement he feel himself bound to contribute , he wish to engage they for both . " you must drink tea with we to night , " say he , " for we shall be quite alone -- and tomorrow you must absolutely dine with we , for we shall be a large party . " enforce the necessity . " and who know but you may raise a dance , " say she . " and that will tempt you , . " " a dance ! " cry . " impossible ! who be to dance ? " " who ! why yourselves , and the Carey , and Whitakers to be sure .-- what ! you think nobody could dance because a certain person that shall be nameless be gone ! " " I wish with all my soul , " cry , " that be among we again . " this , and be blush , give new suspicions to . " and who be ? " say he , in a low voice , to , by whom he be sitte . she give he a brief reply . 's countenance be more communicative . see enough to comprehend , not only the meaning of other , but such of 's expression as have puzzl he before ; and when they visitor leave they , he go immediately round she , and say , in a whisper , " I have be guesse . shall I tell you my guess ? " " what do you mean ? " " shall I tell you . " " certainly . " " well then ; I guess that hunt . " be surprised and confused , yet she could not help smile at the quiet archness of he manner , and after a moment 's silence , say , " oh , ! how can you ?--But the time will come I hope ... I be sure you will like he . " " I do not doubt it , " reply he , rather astonished at she earnestness and warmth ; for have he not imagine it to be a joke for the good of she acquaintance in general , foun only on a something or a nothing between and herself , he would not have venture to mention it . chapter 19 remain a week at the cottage ; he be earnestly press by to stay longer ; but , as if he be bend only on self - mortification , he seem resolve to be go when he enjoyment among he friend be at the height . he spirit , during the last two or three day , though still very unequal , be greatly improve -- he grow more and more partial to the house and environ -- never spoke of go away without a sigh -- declare he time to be wholly disengage -- even doubt to what place he should go when he leave they -- but still , go he must . never have any week pass so quickly -- he could hardly believe it to be go . he say so repeatedly ; other thing he say too , which mark the turn of he feeling and give the lie to he action . he have no pleasure at ; he detest be in town ; but either to or , he must go . he value they kindness beyond any thing , and he greatest happiness be in be with they . yet , he must leave they at the end of a week , in spite of they wish and he own , and without any restraint on he time . place all that be astonish in this way of act to he mother 's account ; and it be happy for she that he have a mother whose character be so imperfectly known to she , as to be the general excuse for every thing strange on the part of she son . disappointed , however , and vex as she be , and sometimes displease with he uncertain behaviour to herself , she be very well dispose on the whole to regard he action with all the candid allowances and generous qualifications , which have be rather more painfully extort from she , for 's service , by she mother . he want of spirits , of openness , and of consistency , be most usually attribute to he want of independence , and he better knowledge of 's disposition and design . the shortness of he visit , the steadiness of he purpose in leave they , originate in the same fetter inclination , the same inevitable necessity of temporizing with he mother . the old well - establish grievance of duty against will , parent against child , be the cause of all . she would have be glad to know when these difficulty be to cease , this opposition be to yield , -- when would be reform , and she son be at liberty to be happy . but from such vain wish she be force to turn for comfort to the renewal of she confidence in 's affection , to the remembrance of every mark of regard in look or word which fall from he while at , and above all to that flatter proon of it which he constantly wear round he finger . " I think
think , , " say , as they be at breakfast the last morning , " you would be a happier man if you have any profession to engage you time and give a interest to you plan and action . some inconvenience to you friend , indeed , might result from it -- you would not be able to give they so much of you time . but ( with a smile ) you would be materially benefit in one particular at least -- you would know where to go when you leave they . " " I do assure you , " he reply , " that I have long think on this point , as you think now . it have be , and be , and probably will always be a heavy misfortune to I , that I have have no necessary business to engage I , no profession to give I employment , or afford I any thing like independence . but unfortunately my own nicety , and the nicety of my friend , have make I what I be , a idle , helpless being . we never could agree in we choice of a profession . I always prefer the church , as I still do . but that be not smart enough for my family . they recommend the army . that be a great deal too smart for I . the law be allow to be genteel enough ; many young man , who have chamber in the Temple , make a very good appearance in the first circle , and drive about town in very knowing gig . but I have no inclination for the law , even in this less abstruse study of it , which my family approve . as for the navy , it have fashion on its side , but I be too old when the subject be first start to enter it -- and , at length , as there be no necessity for my have any profession at all , as I might be as dashing and expensive without a red coat on my back as with one , idleness be pronounce on the whole to be most advantageous and honourable , and a young man of eighteen be not in general so earnestly bent on be busy as to resist the solicitation of he friend to do nothing . I be therefore enter at and have be properly idle ever since . " " the consequence of which , I suppose , will be , " say , " since leisure have not promote you own happiness , that you son will be bring up to as many pursuit , employment , profession , and trade as 's . " " they will be bring up , " say he , in a serious accent , " to be as unlike myself as be possible . in feeling , in action , in condition , in every thing . " " come , come ; this be all a effusion of immediate want of spirit , . you be in a melancholy humour , and fancy that any one unlike yourself must be happy . but remember that the pain of parting from friend will be feel by every body at time , whatever be they education or state . know you own happiness . you want nothing but patience -- or give it a more fascinating name , call it hope . you mother will secure to you , in time , that independence you be so anxious for ; it be she duty , and it will , it must ere long become she happiness to prevent you whole youth from be waste in discontent . how much may not a few month do ? " " I think , " reply , " that I may defy many month to produce any good to I . " this desponding turn of mind , though it could not be communicate to , give additional pain to they all in the parting , which shortly take place , and leave a uncomfortable impression on 's feeling especially , which require some trouble and time to subdue . but as it be she determination to subdue it , and to prevent herself from appear to suffer more than what all she family suffer on he go away , she do not adopt the method so judiciously employ by , on a similar occasion , to augment and fix she sorrow , by seek silence , solitude and idleness . they mean be as different as they object , and equally suit to the advancement of each . sit down to she drawing - table as soon as he be out of the house , busily employ herself the whole day , neither seek nor avoid the mention of he name , appear to interest herself almost as much as ever in the general concern of the family , and if , by this conduct , she do not lessen she own grief , it be at least prevent from unnecessary increase , and she mother and sister be spare much solicitude on she account . such behaviour as this , so exactly the reverse of she own , appear no more meritorious to , than she own have seem faulty to she . the business of self - command she settle very easily ; -- with strong affections it be impossible , with calm one it could have no merit . that she sister 's affection be calm , she da not deny , though she blush to acknowledge it ; and of the strength of she own , she give a very striking proof , by still love and respecte that sister , in spite of this mortifying conviction . without shutt herself up from she family , or leave the house in
in determined solitude to avoid they , or lie awake the whole night to indulge meditation , find every day afforde she leisure enough to think of , and of 's behaviour , in every possible variety which the different state of she spirit at different time could produce , -- with tenderness , pity , approbation , censure , and doubt . there be moment in abundance , when , if not by the absence of she mother and sister , at least by the nature of they employment , conversation be forbidden among they , and every effect of solitude be produce . she mind be inevitably at liberty ; she thought could not be chain elsewhere ; and the past and the future , on a subject so interesting , must be before she , must force she attention , and engross she memory , she reflection , and she fancy . from a reverie of this kind , as she sit at she drawing - table , she be rouse one morning , soon after 's leave they , by the arrival of company . she happen to be quite alone . the closing of the little gate , at the entrance of the green court in front of the house , draw she eye to the window , and she see a large party walk up to the door . amongst they be and and , but there be two other , a gentleman and lady , who be quite unknown to she . she be sit near the window , and as soon as perceive she , he leave the rest of the party to the ceremony of knock at the door , and step across the turf , oblige she to open the casement to speak to he , though the space be so short between the door and the window , as to make it hardly possible to speak at one without be hear at the other . " well , " say he , " we have bring you some stranger . how do you like they ? " " Hush ! they will hear you . " " never mind if they do . it be only the . be very pretty , I can tell you . you may see she if you look this way . " as be certain of see she in a couple of minute , without take that liberty , she beg to be excuse . " where be ? have she run away because we be come ? I see she instrument be open . " " she be walk , I believe . " they be now join by , who have not patience enough to wait till the door be open before she tell she story . she come halloo to the window , " how do you do , my dear ? how do do ? and where be you sister ? what ! all alone ! you will be glad of a little company to sit with you . I have bring my other son and daughter to see you . only think of they come so suddenly ! I think I hear a carriage last night , while we be drink we tea , but it never enter my head that it could be they . I think of nothing but whether it might not be come back again ; so I say to , I do think I hear a carriage ; perhaps it be come back again " -- be oblige to turn from she , in the middle of she story , to receive the rest of the party ; introduce the two stranger ; and come down stair at the same time , and they all sit down to look at one another , while continue she story as she walk through the passage into the parlour , attend by . be several year younger than , and totally unlike she in every respect . she be short and plump , have a very pretty face , and the finest expression of good humour in it that could possibly be . she manners be by no means so elegant as she sister 's , but they be much more prepossessing . she come in with a smile , smile all the time of she visit , except when she laugh , and smile when she go away . she husband be a grave look young man of five or six and twenty , with a air of more fashion and sense than he wife , but of less willingness to please or be pleased . he enter the room with a look of self - consequence , slightly bow to the ladie , without speak a word , and , after briefly survey they and they apartment , take up a newspaper from the table , and continue to read it as long as he stay . , on the contrary , who be strongly endow by nature with a turn for be uniformly civil and happy , be hardly seate before she admiration of the parlour and every thing in it burst forth . " well ! what a delightful room this be ! I never see anything so charme ! only think , , how it be improve since I be here last ! I always think it such a sweet place , ma 'am ! ( turn to Dashwood ) but you have make it so charme ! only look , sister , how delightful every thing be ! how I should like such a house for myself ! should not you , ? " make she no answer , and do not even raise he eye from the newspaper . " do not hear I , " say she , laugh ; " he never do sometimes . it be so
so ridiculous ! " this be quite a new idea to Dashwood ; she have never be use to find wit in the inattention of any one , and could not help look with surprise at they both . , in the meantime , talk on as loud as she could , and continue she account of they surprise , the evening before , on see they friend , without cease till every thing be tell . laugh heartily at the recollection of they astonishment , and every body agree , two or three time over , that it have be quite a agreeable surprise . " you may believe how glad we all be to see they , " add , lean forward towards , and speak in a low voice as if she mean to be hear by no one else , though they be seat on different side of the room ; " but , however , I can not help wish they have not travel quite so fast , nor make such a long journey of it , for they come all round by upon account of some business , for you know ( nodd significantly and point to she daughter ) it be wrong in she situation . I want she to stay at home and rest this morning , but she would come with we ; she long so much to see you all ! " laugh , and say it would not do she any harm . " she expect to be confine in , " continue . could no longer endure such a conversation , and therefore exert herself to ask if there be any news in the paper . " no , none at all , " he reply , and read on . " here come , " cry . " now , , you shall see a monstrous pretty girl . " he immediately go into the passage , open the front door , and usher she in himself . ask she , as soon as she appear , if she have not be to ; and laugh so heartily at the question , as to show she understand it . look up on she enter the room , stare at she some minute , and then return to he newspaper . 's eye be now catch by the drawing which hang round the room . she get up to examine they . " oh ! dear , how beautiful these be ! well ! how delightful ! do but look , mama , how sweet ! I declare they be quite charme ; I could look at they for ever . " and then sit down again , she very soon forgot that there be any such thing in the room . when rise to go away , rose also , laid down the newspaper , stretch himself and look at they all around . " my love , have you be asleep ? " say he wife , laugh . he make she no answer ; and only observe , after again examine the room , that it be very low pitch , and that the ceiling be crook . he then make he bow , and depart with the rest . have be very urgent with they all to spend the next day at the park . , who do not chuse to dine with they oftener than they dine at the cottage , absolutely refuse on she own account ; she daughter might do as they please . but they have no curiosity to see how and eat they dinner , and no expectation of pleasure from they in any other way . they attempt , therefore , likewise , to excuse themselves ; the weather be uncertain , and not likely to be good . but would not be satisfied -- the carriage should be send for they and they must come . too , though she do not press they mother , press they . and join they entreaty , all see equally anxious to avoid a family party ; and the young lady be oblige to yield . " why should they ask we ? " say , as soon as they be gone . " the rent of this cottage be say to be low ; but we have it on very hard term , if we be to dine at the park whenever any one be stay either with they , or with we . " " they mean no less to be civil and kind to we now , " say , " by these frequent invitation , than by those which we receive from they a few week ago . the alteration be not in they , if they party be grow tedious and dull . we must look for the change elsewhere . " chapter 20 as the enter the drawing - room of the park the next day , at one door , come run in at the other , look as good humoured and merry as before . she take they all most affectionately by the hand , and express great delight in see they again . " I be so glad to see you ! " say she , seat herself between and , " for it be so bad a day I be afraid you might not come , which would be a shocking thing , as we go away again tomorrow . we must go , for the Weston come to we next week you know . it be quite a sudden thing we come at all , and I know nothing of it till the carriage be come to the door , and then ask I if I would go with he to . he be so droll ! he never tell I any thing ! I be so sorry we can
can not stay longer ; however we shall meet again in town very soon , I hope . " they be oblige to put a end to such a expectation . " not go to town ! " cry , with a laugh , " I shall be quite disappointed if you do not . I could get the nicest house in world for you , next door to ours , in - square . you must come , indeed . I be sure I shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I be confine , if Dashwood should not like to go into public . " they thank she ; but be oblige to resist all she entreaty . " oh , my love , " cry to she husband , who just then enter the room --" you must help I to persuade the to go to town this winter . " she love make no answer ; and after slightly bow to the ladie , begin complain of the weather . " how horrid all this be ! " say he . " such weather make every thing and every body disgust . Dullness be as much produce within door as without , by rain . it make one detest all one 's acquaintance . what the devil do mean by not have a billiard room in he house ? how few people know what comfort be ! be as stupid as the weather . " the rest of the company soon dropt in . " I be afraid , , " say , " you have not be able to take you usual walk to today . " look very grave and say nothing . " oh , do not be so sly before we , " say ; " for we know all about it , I assure you ; and I admire you taste very much , for I think he be extremely handsome . we do not live a great way from he in the country , you know . not above ten mile , I dare say . " " much nearer thirty , " say she husband . " ah , well ! there be not much difference . I never be at he house ; but they say it be a sweet pretty place . " " as vile a spot as I ever see in my life , " say . remain perfectly silent , though she countenance betraye she interest in what be say . " be it very ugly ? " continue --" then it must be some other place that be so pretty I suppose . " when they be seat in the dining room , observe with regret that they be only eight all together . " my dear , " say he to he lady , " it be very provoke that we should be so few . why do not you ask the Gilberts to come to we today ? " " do not I tell you , , when you speak to I about it before , that it could not be do ? they dine with we last . " " you and I , , " say , " should not stand upon such ceremony . " " then you would be very ill - breed , " cry . " my love you contradict every body , " say he wife with she usual laugh . " do you know that you be quite rude ? " " I do not know I contradict any body in call you mother ill - breed . " " ay , you may abuse I as you please , " say the good - nature old lady , " you have take off my hand , and can not give she back again . so there I have the whip hand of you . " laugh heartily to think that she husband could not get rid of she ; and exultingly say , she do not care how cross he be to she , as they must live together . it be impossible for any one to be more thoroughly good - natured , or more determined to be happy than . the study indifference , insolence , and discontent of she husband give she no pain ; and when he scold or abuse she , she be highly divert . " be so droll ! " say she , in a whisper , to . " he be always out of humour . " be not inclin , after a little observation , to give he credit for be so genuinely and unaffectedly ill - natured or ill - breed as he wish to appear . he temper might perhaps be a little soured by find , like many other of he sex , that through some unaccountable bia in favour of beauty , he be the husband of a very silly woman , -- but she know that this kind of blunder be too common for any sensible man to be lastingly hurt by it .-- it be rather a wish of distinction , she believe , which produce he contemptuous treatment of every body , and he general abuse of every thing before he . it be the desire of appear superior to other people . the motive be too common to be wonder at ; but the means , however they might succeed by establish he superiority in ill - breeding , be not likely to attach any one to he except he wife . " oh , my dear , " say soon afterwards , " I have get such a favour to ask of you and you sister . will you come and spend some time at this ? now , pray do , -- and come while the Weston be with we
we . you can not think how happy I shall be ! it will be quite delightful !-- my love , " apply to she husband , " do not you long to have the come to ? " " certainly , " he reply , with a sneer --" I come into with no other view . " " there now , " -- say he lady , " you see expect you ; so you can not refuse to come . " they both eagerly and resolutely decline she invitation . " but indeed you must and shall come . I be sure you will like it of all thing . the Weston will be with we , and it will be quite delightful . you can not think what a sweet place be ; and we be so gay now , for be always go about the country canvasse against the election ; and so many people come to dine with we that I never see before , it be quite charming ! but , poor fellow ! it be very fatiguing to he ! for he be force to make every body like he . " could hardly keep she countenance as she assent to the hardship of such a obligation . " how charme it will be , " say , " when he be in parliament ! -- will not it ? how I shall laugh ! it will be so ridiculous to see all he letter direct to he with a -- but do you know , he say , he will never frank for I ? he declare he will not . do not you , ? " take no notice of she . " he can not bear write , you know , " she continue --" he say it be quite shocking . " " no , " say he , " I never say any thing so irrational . do not palm all you abuse of language upon I . " " there now ; you see how droll he be . this be always the way with he ! sometimes he will not speak to I for half a day together , and then he come out with something so droll -- all about any thing in the world . " she surprise very much as they return into the drawing - room , by ask she whether she do not like excessively . " certainly , " say ; " he seem very agreeable . " " well -- I be so glad you do . I think you would , he be so pleasant ; and be excessively pleased with you and you sister I can tell you , and you can not think how disappointed he will be if you do not come to .-- I can not imagine why you should object to it . " be again oblige to decline she invitation ; and by change the subject , put a stop to she entreaty . she think it probable that as they live in the same county , might be able to give some more particular account of 's general character , than could be gather from the 's partial acquaintance with he ; and she be eager to gain from any one , such a confirmation of he merit as might remove the possibility of fear from . she begin by inquiring if they see much of at , and whether they be intimately acquainted with he . " oh dear , yes ; I know he extremely well , " reply ;--" not that I ever speak to he , indeed ; but I have see he for ever in town . somehow or other I never happen to be stay at while he be at . mama see he here once before ; -- but I be with my uncle at . however , I dare say we should have see a great deal of he in , if it have not happen very unluckily that we should never have be in the country together . he be very little at , I believe ; but if he be ever so much there , I do not think would visit he , for he be in the opposition , you know , and besides it be such a way off . I know why you inquire about he , very well ; you sister be to marry he . I be monstrous glad of it , for then I shall have she for a neighbour you know . " " upon my word , " reply , " you know much more of the matter than I do , if you have any reason to expect such a match . " " do not pretend to deny it , because you know it be what every body talk of . I assure you I hear of it in my way through town . " " my dear ! " " upon my honour I do .-- I meet morning in bond - street , just before we leave town , and he tell I of it directly . " " you surprise I very much . tell you of it ! surely you must be mistaken . to give such intelligence to a person who could not be interested in it , even if it be true , be not what I should expect to do . " " but I do assure you it be so , for all that , and I will tell you how it happen . when we meet he , he turn back and walk with we ; and so we begin talking of my brother and sister , and one thing and another , and I say to he , , , there be a new family come to cottage , I hear
hear , and mama send I word they be very pretty , and that one of they be go to be marry to of . be it true , pray ? for of course you must know , as you have be in so lately . ' " " and what do the Colonel say ? " " oh -- he do not say much ; but he look as if he know it to be true , so from that moment I set it down as certain . it will be quite delightful , I declare ! when be it to take place ? " " be very well I hope ? " " oh ! yes , quite well ; and so full of you praise , he do nothing but say fine thing of you . " " I be flatter by he commendation . he seem a excellent man ; and I think he uncommonly please . " " so do I .-- he be such a charme man , that it be quite a pity he should be so grave and so dull . say he be in love with you sister too .-- I assure you it be a great compliment if he be , for he hardly ever fall in love with any body . " " be much know in you part of ? " say . " oh ! yes , extremely well ; that be , I do not believe many people be acquaint with he , because be so far off ; but they all think he extremely agreeable I assure you . nobody be more liked than wherever he go , and so you may tell you sister . she be a monstrous lucky girl to get he , upon my honour ; not but that he be much more lucky in get she , because she be so very handsome and agreeable , that nothing can be good enough for she . however , I do not think she hardly at all handsomer than you , I assure you ; for I think you both excessively pretty , and so do too I be sure , though we could not get he to own it last night . " 's information respecte be not very material ; but any testimony in he favour , however small , be pleasing to she . " I be so glad we be get acquainted at last , " continue .--" and now I hope we shall always be great friend . you can not think how much I longe to see you ! it be so delightful that you should live at the cottage ! nothing can be like it , to be sure ! and I be so glad you sister be go to be well marry ! I hope you will be a great deal at . it be a sweet place , by all account . " " you have be long acquaint with , have not you ? " " yes , a great while ; ever since my sister marry .-- he be a particular friend of 's . I believe , " she add in a low voice , " he would have be very glad to have have I , if he could . and wish it very much . but do not think the match good enough for I , otherwise would have mention it to the Colonel , and we should have be marry immediately . " " do not know of 's proposal to you mother before it be make ? have he never own he affection to yourself ? " " oh , no ; but if mama have not object to it , I dare say he would have like it of all thing . he have not see I then above twice , for it be before I leave school . however , I be much happier as I be . be the kind of man I like . " chapter 21 the return to the next day , and the two family at be again leave to entertain each other . but this do not last long ; have hardly get they last visitor out of she head , have hardly do wonder at 's be so happy without a cause , at 's acting so simply , with good ability , and at the strange unsuitableness which often exist between husband and wife , before 's and 's active zeal in the cause of society , procure she some other new acquaintance to see and observe . in a morning 's excursion to , they have meet with two young lady , whom have the satisfaction of discovering to be she relation , and this be enough for to invite they directly to the park , as soon as they present engagement at be over . they engagement at instantly give way before such a invitation , and be throw into no little alarm on the return of , by hearing that she be very soon to receive a visit from two girl whom she have never see in she life , and of whose elegance , -- whose tolerable gentility even , she could have no proof ; for the assurance of she husband and mother on that subject go for nothing at all . they be she relation to make it so much the worse ; and 's attempt at consolation be therefore unfortunately foun , when she advise she daughter not to care about they be so fashionable ; because they be all cousin and must put up with one another . as it be impossible , however , now to prevent they come , resign herself to the idea of it , with all the philosophy of a well - breed woman , contente herself with merely give she husband a gentle
gentle reprimand on the subject five or six time every day . the young lady arrive : they appearance be by no means ungenteel or unfashionable . they dress be very smart , they manners very civil , they be delighte with the house , and in rapture with the furniture , and they happen to be so doatingly fond of child that 's good opinion be engage in they favour before they have be a hour at the . she declare they to be very agreeable girl indeed , which for she ladyship be enthusiastic admiration . 's confidence in he own judgament rise with this animated praise , and he set off directly for the cottage to tell the of the ' arrival , and to assure they of they be the sweetest girl in the world . from such commendation as this , however , there be not much to be learn ; well know that the sweetest girl in the world be to be meet with in every part of , under every possible variation of form , face , temper and understanding . want the whole family to walk to the directly and look at he guest . Benevolent , philanthropic man ! it be painful to he even to keep a third cousin to himself . " do come now , " say he -- " pray come -- you must come -- I declare you shall come -- you can not think how you will like they . Lucy be monstrous pretty , and so good humoured and agreeable ! the child be all hang about she already , as if she be a old acquaintance . and they both long to see you of all thing , for they have hear at Exeter that you be the most beautiful creature in the world ; and I have tell they it be all very true , and a great deal more . you will be delighted with they I be sure . they have bring the whole coach full of plaything for the child . how can you be so cross as not to come ? why they be you cousin , you know , after a fashion . you be my cousin , and they be my wife 's , so you must be relate . " but could not prevail . he could only obtain a promise of they call at the within a day or two , and then leave they in amazement at they indifference , to walk home and boast anew of they attraction to the , as he have be already boast of the to they . when they promise visit to the and consequent introduction to these young lady take place , they find in the appearance of the eldest , who be nearly thirty , with a very plain and not a sensible face , nothing to admire ; but in the other , who be not more than two or three and twenty , they acknowledge considerable beauty ; she feature be pretty , and she have a sharp quick eye , and a smartness of air , which though it do not give actual elegance or grace , give distinction to she person .-- they manners be particularly civil , and soon allow they credit for some kind of sense , when she see with what constant and judicious attention they be make themselves agreeable to . with she child they be in continual rapture , extoll they beauty , court they notice , and humoure they whim ; and such of they time as could be spare from the importunate demand which this politeness make on it , be spend in admiration of whatever she ladyship be do , if she happen to be do any thing , or in take pattern of some elegant new dress , in which she appearance the day before have throw they into unceasing delight . fortunately for those who pay they court through such foible , a fond mother , though , in pursuit of praise for she child , the most rapacious of human being , be likewise the most credulous ; she demand be exorbitant ; but she will swallow any thing ; and the excessive affection and endurance of the towards she offspring be view therefore by without the smallest surprise or distrust . she see with maternal complacency all the impertinent encroachment and mischievous trick to which she cousin submit . she see they sash untied , they hair pull about they ear , they work - bag search , and they knife and scissors steal away , and feel no doubt of its be a reciprocal enjoyment . it suggest no other surprise than that and should sit so composedly by , without claim a share in what be pass . " be in such spirit today ! " say she , on he take 's pocket handkerchief , and throw it out of window -- " he be full of monkey trick . " and soon afterwards , on the second boy 's violently pinch one of the same lady 's finger , she fondly observe , " how playful be ! " " and here be my sweet little , " she add , tenderly caresse a little girl of three year old , who have not make a noise for the last two minute ; " and she be always so gentle and quiet -- never be there such a quiet little thing ! " but unfortunately in bestow these embrace , a pin in she ladyship 's head dress slightly scratch the child 's neck , produce from this pattern of gentleness such violent scream , as could hardly be outdone by any creature professedly noisy . the mother 's consternation be excessive ; but it could not surpass the alarm of the , and every thing
thing be do by all three , in so critical a emergency , which affection could suggest as likely to assuage the agony of the little sufferer . she be seat in she mother 's lap , cover with kiss , she wound bath with lavender - water , by one of the , who be on she knee to attend she , and she mouth stuff with sugar plum by the other . with such a reward for she tear , the child be too wise to cease crying . she still scream and sob lustily , kick she two brothers for offer to touch she , and all they united soothings be ineffectual till luckily remember that in a scene of similar distress last week , some apricot marmalade have be successfully apply for a bruise temple , the same remedy be eagerly propose for this unfortunate scratch , and a slight intermission of scream in the young lady on hear it , give they reason to hope that it would not be reject .-- she be carry out of the room therefore in she mother 's arm , in quest of this medicine , and as the two boy choose to follow , though earnestly entreate by they mother to stay behind , the four young lady be leave in a quietness which the room have not know for many hour . " poor little creature ! " say , as soon as they be gone . " it might have be a very sad accident . " " yet I hardly know how , " cry , " unless it have be under totally different circumstance . but this be the usual way of heighten alarm , where there be nothing to be alarme at in reality . " " what a sweet woman be ! " say . be silent ; it be impossible for she to say what she do not feel , however trivial the occasion ; and upon therefore the whole task of tell lie when politeness require it , always fall . she do she best when thus call on , by speak of with more warmth than she feel , though with far less than . " and too , " cry the elder sister , " what a charme man he be ! " here too , 's commendation , be only simple and just , come in without any eclat . she merely observ that he be perfectly good humoured and friendly . " and what a charme little family they have ! I never see such fine child in my life .-- I declare I quite doat upon they already , and indeed I be always distractedly fond of child . " " I should guess so , " say , with a smile , " from what I have witness this morning . " " I have a notion , " say , " you think the little rather too much indulge ; perhaps they may be the outside of enough ; but it be so natural in ; and for my part , I love to see child full of life and spirit ; I can not bear they if they be tame and quiet . " " I confess , " reply , " that while I be at , I never think of tame and quiet child with any abhorrence . " a short pause succeed this speech , which be first break by , who seem very much dispose for conversation , and who now say rather abruptly , " and how do you like , ? I suppose you be very sorry to leave . " in some surprise at the familiarity of this question , or at least of the manner in which it be speak , reply that she be . " be a prodigious beautiful place , be not it ? " add . " we have hear admire it excessively , " say , who seem to think some apology necessary for the freedom of she sister . " I think every one must admire it , " reply , " who ever see the place ; though it be not to be suppose that any one can estimate its beauty as we do . " " and have you a great many smart beaux there ? I suppose you have not so many in this part of the world ; for my part , I think they be a vast addition always . " " but why should you think , " say , look asham of she sister , " that there be not as many genteel young man in as ? " " Nay , my dear , I be sure I do not pretend to say that there a n't . I be sure there be a vast many smart beaux in ; but you know , how could I tell what smart beaux there might be about ; and I be only afraid the might find it dull at , if they have not so many as they use to have . but perhaps you young lady may not care about the beaux , and have as lief be without they as with they . for my part , I think they be vastly agreeable , provide they dress smart and behave civil . but I can not bear to see they dirty and nasty . now there be at , a prodigious smart young man , quite a beau , clerk to , you know , and yet if you do but meet he of a morning , he be not fit to be see .-- I suppose you brother be quite a beau , , before he marry , as he be so rich ? " " upon my word , " reply , " I can not tell you ,
, for I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word . but this I can say , that if he ever be a beau before he marry , he be one still for there be not the smallest alteration in he . " " oh ! dear ! one never think of marry man 's be beaux -- they have something else to do . " " ! , " cry she sister , " you can talk of nothing but beaux ; -- you will make believe you think of nothing else . " and then to turn the discourse , she begin admir the house and the furniture . this specimen of the be enough . the vulgar freedom and folly of the eldest leave she no recommendation , and as be not blind by the beauty , or the shrewd look of the youngest , to she want of real elegance and artlessness , she leave the house without any wish of know they better . not so the .-- they come from , well provide with admiration for the use of , he family , and all he relation , and no niggardly proportion be now deal out to he fair cousins , whom they declare to be the most beautiful , elegant , accomplish , and agreeable girl they have ever beheld , and with whom they be particularly anxious to be better acquaint .-- and to be better acquaint therefore , soon find be they inevitable lot , for as be entirely on the side of the , they party would be too strong for opposition , and that kind of intimacy must be submit to , which consist of sit a hour or two together in the same room almost every day . could do no more ; but he do not know that any more be require : to be together be , in he opinion , to be intimate , and while he continual scheme for they meeting be effectual , he have not a doubt of they be establish friend . to do he justice , he do every thing in he power to promote they unreserve , by make the acquaint with whatever he know or suppos of he cousin 's situation in the most delicate particular , -- and have not see they more than twice , before the eldest of they wish she joy on she sister 's have be so lucky as to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she come to . " 'Twill be a fine thing to have she marry so young to be sure , " say she , " and I hear he be quite a beau , and prodigious handsome . and I hope you may have as good luck yourself soon , -- but perhaps you may have a friend in the corner already . " could not suppose that would be more nice in proclaim he suspicions of she regard for , than he have be with respect to ; indeed it be rather he favourite joke of the two , as be somewhat newer and more conjectural ; and since 's visit , they have never dine together without he drinking to she best affections with so much significancy and so many nod and wink , as to excite general attention . the letter -- have be likewise invariably bring forward , and find productive of such countless joke , that its character as the wittiest letter in the alphabet have be long establish with . the , as she expect , have now all the benefit of these joke , and in the eldest of they they raise a curiosity to know the name of the gentleman allude to , which , though often impertinently express , be perfectly of a piece with she general inquisitiveness into the concern of they family . but do not sport long with the curiosity which he delighte to raise , for he have at least as much pleasure in tell the name , as have in hear it . " he name be , " say he , in a very audible whisper ; " but pray do not tell it , for it be a great secret . " " Ferrars ! " repeat ; " be the happy man , be he ? what ! you sister - in - law 's brother , ? a very agreeable young man to be sure ; I know he very well . " " how can you say so , ? " cry , who generally make a amendment to all she sister 's assertion . " though we have see he once or twice at my uncle 's , it be rather too much to pretend to know he very well . " hear all this with attention and surprise . " and who be this uncle ? where do he live ? how come they acquaint ? " she wish very much to have the subject continue , though she do not chuse to join in it herself ; but nothing more of it be say , and for the first time in she life , she think deficient either in curiosity after petty information , or in a disposition to communicate it . the manner in which have speak of , increase she curiosity ; for it strike she as be rather ill - natured , and suggest the suspicion of that lady 's know , or fancie herself to know something to he disadvantage . -- but she curiosity be unavailing , for no farther notice be take of 's name by when allude to , or even openly mention by . chapter 22 , who have never much toleration for any thing like impertinence , vulgarity , inferiority of part , or even difference of taste from herself , be
be at this time particularly ill - dispose , from the state of she spirit , to be pleased with the , or to encourage they advance ; and to the invariable coldness of she behaviour towards they , which check every endeavour at intimacy on they side , principally attribute that preference of herself which soon become evident in the manners of both , but especially of , who miss no opportunity of engage she in conversation , or of striving to improve they acquaintance by a easy and frank communication of she sentiment . be naturally clever ; she remark be often just and amuse ; and as a companion for half a hour frequently find she agreeable ; but she power have receive no aid from education : she be ignorant and illiterate ; and she deficiency of all mental improvement , she want of information in the most common particular , could not be conceal from , in spite of she constant endeavour to appear to advantage . see , and pitie she for , the neglect of ability which education might have render so respectable ; but she see , with less tenderness of feeling , the thorough want of delicacy , of rectitude , and integrity of mind , which she attention , she assiduity , she flattery at the betraye ; and she could have no last satisfaction in the company of a person who join insincerity with ignorance ; whose want of instruction prevent they meeting in conversation on term of equality , and whose conduct toward other make every shew of attention and deference towards herself perfectly valueless . " you will think my question a odd one , I dare say , " say to she one day , as they be walk together from the park to the cottage -- " but pray , be you personally acquaint with you sister - in - law 's mother , ? " do think the question a very odd one , and she countenance express it , as she answer that she have never see . " indeed ! " reply ; " I wonder at that , for I think you must have see she at sometimes . then , perhaps , you can not tell I what sort of a woman she be ? " " no , " return , cautious of give she real opinion of 's mother , and not very desirous of satisfye what seem impertinent curiosity -- " I know nothing of she . " " I be sure you think I very strange , for enquir about she in such a way , " say , eye attentively as she speak ; " but perhaps there may be reasons -- I wish I might venture ; but however I hope you will do I the justice of believe that I do not mean to be impertinent . " make she a civil reply , and they walk on for a few minute in silence . it be break by , who renew the subject again by say , with some hesitation , " I can not bear to have you think I impertinently curious . I be sure I would rather do any thing in the world than be think so by a person whose good opinion be so well worth have as yours . and I be sure I should not have the smallest fear of trust you ; indeed , I should be very glad of you advice how to manage in such and uncomfortable situation as I be ; but , however , there be no occasion to trouble you . I be sorry you do not happen to know . " " I be sorry I do not , " say , in great astonishment , " if it could be of any use to you to know my opinion of she . but really I never understand that you be at all connect with that family , and therefore I be a little surprised , I confess , at so serious a inquiry into she character . " " I dare say you be , and I be sure I do not at all wonder at it . but if I da tell you all , you would not be so much surprise . be certainly nothing to I at present -- but the time may come -- how soon it will come must depend upon herself -- when we may be very intimately connect . " she look down as she say this , amiably bashful , with only one side glance at she companion to observe it be effect on she . " good heaven ! " cry , " what do you mean ? be you acquaint with ? can you be ? " and she do not feel much delighted with the idea of such a sister - in - law . " no , " reply , " not to -- I never see he in my life ; but , " fix she eye upon , " to he eldest brother . " what feel at that moment ? Astonishment , that would have be as painful as it be strong , have not a immediate disbelief of the assertion attend it . she turn towards in silent amazement , unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration ; and though she complexion vari , she stand firm in incredulity , and feel in no danger of a hysterical fit , or a swoon . " you may well be surprised , " continue ; " for to be sure you could have have no idea of it before ; for I dare say he never drop the smallest hint of it to you or any of you family ; because it be always mean to be a great secret
secret , and I be sure have be faithfully keep so by I to this hour . not a soul of all my relation know of it but , and I never should have mention it to you , if I have not feel the greatest dependence in the world upon you secrecy ; and I really think my behaviour in ask so many question about must seem so odd , that it ought to be explain . and I do not think can be displease , when he know I have trust you , because I know he have the highest opinion in the world of all you family , and look upon yourself and the other miss Dashwood quite as he own sister . " -- she pause . for a few moments remain silent . she astonishment at what she hear be at first too great for word ; but at length force herself to speak , and to speak cautiously , she say , with calmness of manner , which tolerably well conceal she surprise and solicitude -- " may I ask if you engagement be of long standing ? " " we have be engage these four year . " " four year ! " " yes . " , though greatly shocked , still feel unable to believe it . " I do not know , " say she , " that you be even acquaint till the other day . " " we acquaintance , however , be of many year date . he be under my uncle 's care , you know , a considerable while . " " you uncle ! " " yes ; . do you never hear he talk of ? " " I think I have , " reply , with a exertion of spirit , which increase with she increase of emotion . " he be four year with my uncle , who live at , near . it be there we acquaintance begin , for my sister and I be often stay with my uncle , and it be there we engagement be form , though not till a year after he have quit as a pupil ; but he be almost always with we afterwards . I be very unwilling to enter into it , as you may imagine , without the knowledge and approbation of he mother ; but I be too young , and love he too well , to be so prudent as I ink to have be .-- though you do not know he so well as I , , you must have see enough of he to be sensible he be very capable of make a woman sincerely attach to he . " " certainly , " answer , without know what she say ; but after a moment 's reflection , she add , with revive security of 's honour and love , and she companion 's falsehood -- " engage to !-- I confess myself so totally surprise at what you tell I , that really -- I beg you pardon ; but surely there must be some mistake of person or name . we can not mean the same . " " we can mean no other , " cry , smile . " , the eldest son of , of , and brother of you sister - in - law , , be the person I mean ; you must allow that I be not likely to be deceive as to the name of the man on who all my happiness depend . " " it be strange , " reply , in a most painful perplexity , " that I should never have hear he even mention you name . " " no ; consider we situation , it be not strange . we first care have be to keep the matter secret .-- you know nothing of I , or my family , and , therefore , there could be no occasion for ever mention my name to you ; and , as he be always particularly afraid of he sister 's suspect any thing , that be reason enough for he not mention it . " she be silent .-- 's security sunk ; but she self - command do not sink with it . " four year you have be engage , " say she with a firm voice . " yes ; and heaven know how much longer we may have to wait . poor ! it put he quite out of heart . " then take a small miniature from she pocket , she add , " to prevent the possibility of mistake , be so good as to look at this face . it do not do he justice , to be sure , but yet I think you can not be deceive as to the person it be draw for .-- I have have it above these three year . " she put it into she hand as she speak ; and when see the painting , whatever other doubt she fear of a too hasty decision , or she wish of detecting falsehood might suffer to linger in she mind , she could have none of its be 's face . she return it almost instantly , acknowledge the likeness . " I have never be able , " continue , " to give he my picture in return , which I be very much vex at , for he have be always so anxious to get it ! but I be determined to set for it the very first opportunity . " " you be quite in the right , " reply calmly . they then proceed a few pace in silence . speak first . " I be sure , " say she , " I have no doubt in the world of you faithfully
faithfully keep this secret , because you must know of what importance it be to we , not to have it reach he mother ; for she would never approve of it , I dare say . I shall have no fortune , and I fancy she be a exceeding proud woman . " " I certainly do not seek you confidence , " say ; " but you do I no more than justice in imagining that I may be depend on . you secret be safe with I ; but pardon I if I express some surprise at so unnecessary a communication . you must at least have feel that my be acquaint with it could not add to its safety . " as she say this , she look earnestly at , hope to discover something in she countenance ; perhaps the falsehood of the greatest part of what she have be say ; but 's countenance suffer no change . " I be afraid you would think I be take a great liberty with you , " say she , " in tell you all this . I have not know you long to be sure , personally at least , but I have know you and all you family by description a great while ; and as soon as I see you , I feel almost as if you be a old acquaintance . besides in the present case , I really think some explanation be due to you after my make such particular inquirie about 's mother ; and I be so unfortunate , that I have not a creature whose advice I can ask . be the only person that know of it , and she have no judgment at all ; indeed , she do I a great deal more harm than good , for I be in constant fear of she betraie I . she do not know how to hold she tongue , as you must perceive , and I be sure I be in the greatest fright in the world t'other day , when 's name be mention by , lest she should out with it all . you can not think how much I go through in my mind from it altogether . I only wonder that I be alive after what I have suffer for 's sake these last four year . every thing in such suspense and uncertainty ; and see he so seldom -- we can hardly meet above twice a - year . I be sure I wonder my heart be not quite break . " here she take out she handkerchief ; but do not feel very compassionate . " sometimes . " continue , after wip she eye , " I think whether it would not be better for we both to break off the matter entirely . " as she say this , she look directly at she companion . " but then at other time I have not resolution enough for it .-- I can not bear the thought of make he so miserable , as I know the very mention of such a thing would do . and on my own account too -- so dear as he be to I -- I do not think I could be equal to it . what would you advise I to do in such a case , ? what would you do yourself ? " " pardon I , " reply , start by the question ; " but I can give you no advice under such circumstance . you own judgament must direct you . " " to be sure , " continue , after a few minute silence on both side , " he mother must provide for he sometime or other ; but poor be so cast down by it ! do you not think he dreadful low - spirite when he be at ? he be so miserable when he leave we at , to go to you , that I be afraid you would think he quite ill . " " do he come from you uncle 's , then , when he visit we ? " " oh , yes ; he have be stay a fortnight with we . do you think he come directly from town ? " " no , " reply , most feelingly sensible of every fresh circumstance in favour of 's veracity ; " I remember he tell we , that he have be stay a fortnight with some friend near . " she remember too , she own surprise at the time , at he mention nothing farther of those friend , at he total silence with respect even to they name . " do not you think he sadly out of spirit ? " repeat . " we do , indeed , particularly so when he first arrive . " " I beg he to exert himself for fear you should suspect what be the matter ; but it make he so melancholy , not be able to stay more than a fortnight with we , and see I so much affect .-- poor fellow !-- I be afraid it be just the same with he now ; for he write in wretched spirit . I hear from he just before I leave ; " take a letter from she pocket and carelessly show the direction to . " you know he hand , I dare say , a charming one it be ; but that be not write so well as usual . -- he be tired , I dare say , for he have just fill the sheet to I as full as possible . " see that it be he hand , and she could doubt no longer . this picture , she have allow herself to believe , might have be accidentally obtain ;
; it might not have be 's gift ; but a correspondence between they by letter , could subsist only under a positive engagement , could be authorise by nothing else ; for a few moment , she be almost overcome -- she heart sunk within she , and she could hardly stand ; but exertion be indispensably necessary ; and she struggle so resolutely against the oppression of she feeling , that she success be speedy , and for the time complete . " write to each other , " say , return the letter into she pocket , " be the only comfort we have in such long separation . yes , I have one other comfort in he picture , but poor have not even that . if he have but my picture , he say he should be easy . I give he a lock of my hair set in a ring when he be at Longstaple last , and that be some comfort to he , he say , but not equal to a picture . perhaps you might notice the ring when you see he ? " " I do , " say , with a composure of , under which be conceal a emotion and distress beyond any thing she have ever feel before . she be mortify , shock , confound . fortunately for she , they have now reach the cottage , and the conversation could be continue no farther . after sit with they a few minute , the return to the , and be then at liberty to think and be wretch . [ at this point in the first and second edition , volume 1 end . ] chapter 23 however small 's general dependence on 's veracity might be , it be impossible for she on serious reflection to suspect it in the present case , where no temptation could be answerable to the folly of invent a falsehood of such a description . what Lucy have assert to be true , therefore , could not , da not longer doubt ; support as it be too on every side by such probability and proof , and contradict by nothing but she own wish . they opportunity of acquaintance in the house of be a foundation for the rest , at once indisputable and alarming ; and 's visit near , he melancholy state of mind , he dissatisfaction at he own prospect , he uncertain behaviour towards herself , the intimate knowledge of the as to and they family connection , which have often surprised she , the picture , the letter , the ring , form altogether such a body of evidence , as overcome every fear of condemn he unfairly , and establish as a fact , which no partiality could set aside , he ill - treatment of herself . -- she resentment of such behaviour , she indignation at have be its dupe , for a short time make she feel only for herself ; but other idea , other consideration , soon arise . have be intentionally deceive she ? have he feign a regard for she which he do not feel ? be he engagement to Lucy a engagement of the heart ? no ; whatever it might once have be , she could not believe it such at present . he affection be all she own . she could not be deceive in that . she mother , sister , Fanny , all have be conscious of he regard for she at ; it be not a illusion of she own vanity . he certainly love she . what a softener of the heart be this persuasion ! how much could it not tempt she to forgive ! he have be blamable , highly blamable , in remain at after he first feel she influence over he to be more than it ought to be . in that , he could not be defend ; but if he have injure she , how much more have he injure himself ; if she case be pitiable , he be hopeless . he imprudence have make she miserable for a while ; but it seem to have deprive himself of all chance of ever be otherwise . she might in time regain tranquillity ; but he , what have he to look forward to ? could he ever be tolerably happy with ; could he , be he affection for herself out of the question , with he integrity , he delicacy , and well - inform mind , be satisfied with a wife like she -- illiterate , artful , and selfish ? the youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally blind he to every thing but she beauty and good nature ; but the four succeeding year -- year , which if rationally spend , give such improvement to the understanding , must have open he eye to she defects of education , while the same period of time , spend on she side in inferior society and more frivolous pursuit , have perhaps rob she of that simplicity which might once have give a interesting character to she beauty . if in the supposition of he seek to marry herself , he difficulty from he mother have seem great , how much greater be they now likely to be , when the object of he engagement be undoubtedly inferior in connection , and probably inferior in fortune to herself . these difficulty , indeed , with a heart so alienate from , might not press very hard upon he patience ; but melancholy be the state of the person by whom the expectation of family opposition and unkindness , could be feel as a relief ! as these consideration occur to she in painful succession , she weep for he , more than for herself . support by the conviction
conviction of have do nothing to merit she present unhappiness , and consol by the belief that have do nothing to forfeit she esteem , she think she could even now , under the first smart of the heavy blow , command herself enough to guard every suspicion of the truth from she mother and sister . and so well be she able to answer she own expectation , that when she join they at dinner only two hour after she have first suffer the extinction of all she dearest hope , no one would have suppose from the appearance of the sister , that be mourn in secret over obstacle which must divide she for ever from the object of she love , and that be internally dwell on the perfection of a man , of whose whole heart she feel thoroughly possessed , and whom she expect to see in every carriage which drive near they house . the necessity of concealing from she mother and , what have be entrust in confidence to herself , though it oblige she to uncease exertion , be no aggravation of 's distress . on the contrary it be a relief to she , to be spare the communication of what would give such affliction to they , and to be save likewise from hear that condemnation of , which would probably flow from the excess of they partial affection for herself , and which be more than she feel equal to support . from they counsel , or they conversation , she know she could receive no assistance , they tenderness and sorrow must add to she distress , while she self - command would neither receive encouragement from they example nor from they praise . she be stronger alone , and she own good sense so well support she , that she firmness be as unshaken , she appearance of cheerfulness as invariable , as with regret so poignant and so fresh , it be possible for they to be . much as she have suffer from she first conversation with on the subject , she soon feel a earnest wish of renew it ; and this for more reason than one . she want to hear many particular of they engagement repeat again , she want more clearly to understand what Lucy really feel for , whether there be any sincerity in she declaration of tender regard for he , and she particularly want to convince , by she readiness to enter on the matter again , and she calmness in conversing on it , that she be no otherwise interested in it than as a friend , which she very much fear she involuntary agitation , in they morning discourse , must have leave at least doubtful . that be dispose to be jealous of she appear very probable : it be plain that have always speak highly in she praise , not merely from 's assertion , but from she venturing to trust she on so short a personal acquaintance , with a secret so confessedly and evidently important . and even 's joking intelligence must have have some weight . but indeed , while remain so well assure within herself of be really belove by , it require no other consideration of probability to make it natural that should be jealous ; and that she be so , she very confidence be a proof . what other reason for the disclosure of the affair could there be , but that might be inform by it of 's superior claim on , and be teach to avoid he in future ? she have little difficulty in understanding thus much of she rival 's intention , and while she be firmly resolve to act by she as every principle of honour and honesty direct , to combat she own affection for and to see he as little as possible ; she could not deny herself the comfort of endeavouring to convince that she heart be unwounded . and as she could now have nothing more painful to hear on the subject than have already be tell , she do not mistrust she own ability of go through a repetition of particular with composure . but it be not immediately that a opportunity of do so could be command , though be as well dispose as herself to take advantage of any that occur ; for the weather be not often fine enough to allow of they join in a walk , where they might most easily separate themselves from the other ; and though they meet at least every other evening either at the park or cottage , and chiefly at the former , they could not be suppose to meet for the sake of conversation . such a thought would never enter either or 's head ; and therefore very little leisure be ever give for a general chat , and none at all for particular discourse . they meet for the sake of eating , drink , and laugh together , play at card , or consequence , or any other game that be sufficiently noisy . one or two meeting of this kind have take place , without afforde any chance of engage in private , when call at the cottage one morning , to beg , in the name of charity , that they would all dine with that day , as he be obliged to attend the club at , and she would otherwise be quite alone , except she mother and the two . , who foresee a fairer opening for the point she have in view , in such a party as this be likely to be , more at liberty among themselves under the tranquil and well - breed direction of than when she husband unit they together in one noisy purpose , immediately accept the invitation ; , with
with she mother 's permission , be equally compliant , and , though always unwilling to join any of they party , be persuade by she mother , who could not bear to have she seclude herself from any chance of amusement , to go likewise . the young lady go , and be happily preserve from the frightful solitude which have threaten she . the insipidity of the meeting be exactly such as have expect ; it produce not one novelty of thought or expression , and nothing could be less interesting than the whole of they discourse both in the dining parlour and draw room : to the latter , the child accompany they , and while they remain there , she be too well convince of the impossibility of engage 's attention to attempt it . they quit it only with the removal of the tea - thing . the card - table be then place , and begin to wonder at herself for have ever entertaine a hope of finding time for conversation at the park . they all rise up in preparation for a round game . " I be glad , " say to , " you be not go to finish poor little 's basket this evening ; for I be sure it must hurt you eye to work filigree by candlelight . and we will make the dear little love some amend for she disappointment to - morrow , and then I hope she will not much mind it . " this hint be enough , recollect herself instantly and reply , " indeed you be very much mistaken , ; I be only wait to know whether you can make you party without I , or I should have be at my filigree already . I would not disappoind the little angel for all the world : and if you want I at the card - table now , I be resolve to finish the basket after supper . " " you be very good , I hope it will not hurt you eye -- will you ring the bell for some work candle ? my poor little girl would be sadly disappointed , I know , if the basket be not finish tomorrow , for though i tell she it certainly would not , I be sure she depend upon have it do . " directly draw she work table near she and reseate herself with a alacrity and cheerfulness which seem to infer that she could taste no greater delight than in make a filigree basket for a spoilt child . propose a rubber of to the other . no one make any objection but , who with she usual inattention to the form of general civility , exclaim , " you Ladyship will have the goodness to excuse I -- you know I detest card . I shall go to the piano - forte ; I have not touch it since it be tune . " and without farther ceremony , she turn away and walk to the instrument . look as if she thanke heaven that she have never make so rude a speech . " can never keep long from that instrument you know , ma 'am , " say , endeavour to smooth away the offence ; " and I do not much wonder at it ; for it be the very best ton piano- forte I ever hear . " the remaining five be now to draw they card . " perhaps , " continue , " if I should happen to cut out , I may be of some use to , in roll she papers for she ; and there be so much still to be do to the basket , that it must be impossible I think for she labour singly , to finish it this evening . I should like the work exceedingly , if she would allow I a share in it . " " indeed I shall be very much oblige to you for you help , " cry , " for I find there be more to be do to it than I think there be ; and it would be a shocking thing to disappoint dear after all . " " oh ! that would be terrible , indeed , " say -- " dear little soul , how I do love she ! " " you be very kind , " say to ; " and as you really like the work , perhaps you will be as well pleas not to cut in till another rubber , or will you take you chance now ? " Elinor joyfully profit by the first of these proposal , and thus by a little of that address which could never condescmend to practise , gain she own end , and pleas at the same time . make room for she with ready attention , and the two fair rival be thus seate side by side at the same table , and , with the utmost harmony , engage in forward the same work . the pianoforte at which , wrap up in she own music and she own thought , have by this time forgote that any body be in the room besides herself , be luckily so near they that now jud she might safely , under the shelter of its noise , introduce the interesting subject , without any risk of be hear at the card - table . chapter 24 in a firm , though cautious tone , thus begin . " I should be undeserving of the confidence you have honoure I with , if I feel no desire for its continuance , or no farther curiosity on its subject . I will not apologize therefore for bring it forward again . " " thank you , " cry warmly , " for break
break the ice ; you have set my heart at ease by it ; for I be somehow or other afraid I have offend you by what I tell you that . " " offend I ! how could you suppose so ? believe I , " and speak it with the truest sincerity , " nothing could be farther from my intention than to give you such a idea . could you have a motive for the trust , that be not honourable and flatter to I ? " " and yet I do assure you , " reply , she little sharp eye full of meaning , " there seem to I to be a coldness and displeasure in you manner that make I quite uncomfortable . I feel sure that you be angry with I ; and have be quarrell with myself ever since , for have take such a liberty as to trouble you with my affair . but I be very glad to find it be only my own fancy , and that you really do not blame I . if you know what a consolation it be to I to relieve my heart speak to you of what I be always think of every moment of my life , you compassion would make you overlook every thing else I be sure . " " indeed , I can easily believe that it be a very great relief to you , to acknowledge you situation to I , and be assure that you shall never have reason to repent it . you case be a very unfortunate one ; you seem to I to be surround with difficulty , and you will have need of all you mutual affection to support you under they . , I believe , be entirely dependent on he mother . " " he have only two thousand pound of he own ; it would be madness to marry upon that , though for my own part , I could give up every prospect of more without a sigh . I have be always use to a very small income , and could struggle with any poverty for he ; but I love he too well to be the selfish means of rob he , perhaps , of all that he mother might give he if he marry to please she . we must wait , it may be for many year . with almost every other man in the world , it would be a alarming prospect ; but 's affection and constancy nothing can deprive I of I know . " " that conviction must be every thing to you ; and he be undoubtedly support by the same trust in you 's . if the strength of you reciprocal attachment have fail , as between many people , and under many circumstance it naturally would during a four year ' engagement , you situation would have be pitiable , indeed . " here look up ; but be careful in guard she countenance from every expression that could give she word a suspicious tendency . " 's love for I , " say , " have be pretty well put to the test , by we long , very long absence since we be first engage , and it have stand the trial so well , that I should be unpardonable to doubt it now . I can safely say that he have never give I one moment 's alarm on that account from the first . " hardly know whether to smile or sigh at this assertion . go on . " I be rather of a jealous temper too by nature , and from we different situation in life , from he be so much more in the world than I , and we continual separation , I be enough inclin for suspicion , to have find out the truth in a instant , if there have be the slightest alteration in he behaviour to I when we meet , or any lowness of spirit that I could not account for , or if he have talk more of one lady than another , or see in any respect less happy at Longstaple than he use to be . I do not mean to say that I be particularly observant or quick - sight in general , but in such a case I be sure I could not be deceive . " " all this , " think , " be very pretty ; but it can impose upon neither of we . " " but what , " say she after a short silence , " be you view ? or have you none but that of waiting for 's death , which be a melancholy and shocking extremity ?-- be she son determined to submit to this , and to all the tediousness of the many year of suspense in which it may involve you , rather than run the risk of she displeasure for a while by own the truth ? " " if we could be certain that it would be only for a while ! but be a very headstrong proud woman , and in she first fit of anger upon hear it , would very likely secure every thing to , and the idea of that , for 's sake , frightens away all my inclination for hasty measure . " " and for you own sake too , or you be carry you disinterestedness beyond reason . " look at again , and be silent . " do you know ? " ask . " not at all -- I never see he ; but I fancy he be very unlike he brother -- silly and a great coxcomb . " " a great coxcomb ! " repeat , whose ear have catch those word by a sudden pause
pause in 's music .-- " oh , they be talk of they favourite beaux , I dare say . " " no sister , " cry , " you be mistake there , we favourite beaux be not great coxcomb . " " I can answer for it that 's be not , " say , laugh heartily ; " for he be one of the modestest , prettiest behave young man I ever see ; but as for , she be such a sly little creature , there be no finding out who she like . " " oh , " cry , look significantly round at they , " I dare say 's beau be quite as modest and pretty behave as 's . " blush in spite of herself . Lucy bit she lip , and look angrily at she sister . a mutual silence take place for some time . first put a end to it by say in a lower tone , though be then give they the powerful protection of a very magnificent concerto -- " I will honestly tell you of one scheme which have lately come into my head , for bring matter to bear ; indeed I be bound to let you into the secret , for you be a party concern . I dare say you have see enough of to know that he would prefer the church to every other profession ; now my plan be that he should take order as soon as he can , and then through you interest , which I be sure you would be kind enough to use out of friendship for he , and I hope out of some regard to I , you brother might be persuade to give he Norland liive ; which I understand be a very good one , and the present incumbent not likely to live a great while . that would be enough for we to marry upon , and we might trust to time and chance for the rest . " " I should always be happy , " reply , " to show any mark of my esteem and friendship for ; but do you not perceive that my interest on such a occasion would be perfectly unnecessary ? he be brother to -- that must be recommendation enough to she husband . " " but would not much approve of 's go into order . " " then I rather suspect that my interest would do very little . " they be again silent for many minute . at length exclaim with a deep sigh , " I believe it would be the wisest way to put a end to the business at once by dissolve the engagement . we seem so beset with difficulty on every side , that though it would make we miserable for a time , we should be happier perhaps in the end . but you will not give I you advice , ? " " no , " answer , with a smile , which conceal very agitated feeling , " on such a subject I certainly will not . you know very well that my opinion would have no weight with you , unless it be on the side of you wish . " " indeed you wrong I , " reply , with great solemnity ; " I know nobody of whose judgment I think so highly as I do of yours ; and I do really believe , that if you be to say to I , 'I advise you by all means to put a end to you engagement with , it will be more for the happiness of both of you ,' I should resolve upon do it immediately . " blush for the insincerity of 's future wife , and reply , " this compliment would effectually frighe I from give any opinion on the subject have I form one . it raise my influence much too high ; the power of divide two people so tenderly attach be too much for a indifferent person . " " 'Ti because you be a indifferent person , " say , with some pique , and lay a particular stress on those word , " that you judgment might justly have such weight with I . if you could be suppose to be biase in any respect by you own feeling , you opinion would not be worth have . " think it wisest to make no answer to this , lest they might provoke each other to a unsuitable increase of ease and unreserve ; and be even partly determined never to mention the subject again . another pause therefore of many minute ' duration , succeed this speech , and be still the first to end it . " shall you be in town this winter , ? " say she with all she accustomary complacency . " certainly not . " " I be sorry for that , " return the other , while she eye brighten at the information , " it would have give I such pleasure to meet you there ! but I dare say you will go for all that . to be sure , you brother and sister will ask you to come to they . " " it will not be in my power to accept they invitation if they do . " " how unlucky that be ! I have quite depend upon meet you there . and I be to go the latter end of to some relation who have be want we to visit they these several year ! but I only go for the sake of see . he will be there in , otherwise would have no charms for I ; I have not spirits for it . " be soon call to the card - table by the
the conclusion of the first rubber , and the confidential discourse of the two lady be therefore at a end , to which both of they submit without any reluctance , for nothing have be say on either side to make they dislike each other less than they have do before ; and sit down to the card table with the melancholy persuasion that be not only without affection for the person who be to be he wife ; but that he have not even the chance of be tolerably happy in marriage , which sincere affection on she side would have give , for self - interest alone could induce a woman to keep a man to a engagement , of which she see so thoroughly aware that he be weary . from this time the subject be never revive by , and when enter on by , who seldom miss a opportunity of introduce it , and be particularly careful to inform she confidante , of she happiness whenever she receive a letter from , it be treat by the former with calmness and caution , and dismiss as soon as civility would allow ; for she feel such conversation to be a indulgence which do not deserve , and which be dangerous to herself . the visit of the at be lengthen far beyond what the first invitation imply . they favour increase ; they could not be spare ; would not hear of they go ; and in spite of they numerous and long arrange engagement in , in spite of the absolute necessity of return to fulfill they immediately , which be in full force at the end of every week , they be prevail on to stay nearly two month at the park , and to assist in the due celebration of that festival which require a more than ordinary share of private ball and large dinner to proclaim its importance . chapter 25 though be in the habit of spend a large portion of the year at the house of she child and friend , she be not without a settled habitation of she own . since the death of she husband , who have trade with success in a less elegant part of the town , she have reside every winter in a house in one of the street near . towards this home , she begin on the approach of to turn she thought , and thither she one day abruptly , and very unexpectedly by they , ask the elder to accompany she . , without obserive the varying complexion of she sister , and the animated look which speak no indifference to the plan , immediately give a grateful but absolute denial for both , in which she believe herself to be speak they united inclination . the reason allege be they determined resolution of not leave they mother at that time of the year . receive the refusal with some surprise , and repeat she invitation immediately . " oh , ! I be sure you mother can spare you very well , and I do beg you will favour I with you company , for I have quite set my heart upon it . do not fancy that you will be any inconvenience to I , for I sha not put myself at all out of my way for you . it will only be send Betty by the coach , and I hope I can afford that . we three shall be able to go very well in my chaise ; and when we be in town , if you do not like to go wherever I do , well and good , you may always go with one of my daughter . I be sure you mother will not object to it ; for I have have such good luck in get my own child off my hand that she will think I a very fit person to have the charge of you ; and if I do not get one of you at least well marry before I have do with you , it shall not be my fault . I shall speak a good word for you to all the young man , you may depend upon it . " " I have a notion , " say , " that would not object to such a scheme , if she elder sister would come into it . it be very hard indeed that she should not have a little pleasure , because do not wish it . so I would advise you two , to set off for town , when you be tired of , without say a word to about it . " " Nay , " cry , " I be sure I shall be monstrous glad of 's company , whether will go or not , only the more the merrier say I , and I think it would be more comfortable for they to be together ; because , if they get tired of I , they might talk to one another , and laugh at my old way behind my back . but one or the other , if not both of they , I must have . bless I ! how do you think I can live pok by myself , I who have be always use till this winter to have with I . come , , let we strike hand upon the bargain , and if will change she mind by and bye , why so much the better . " " I thank you , ma 'am , sincerely thank you , " say , with warmth : " you invitation have insure my gratitude for ever , and it would give I such happiness , yes , almost the greatest happiness I be capable of , to be able to accept it
it . but my mother , my dearest , kindest mother , -- I feel the justice of what have urge , and if she be to be make less happy , less comfortable by we absence -- oh ! no , nothing should tempt I to leave she . it should not , must not be a struggle . " repeat she assurance that could spare they perfectly well ; and , who now understand she sister , and see to what indifference to almost every thing else she be carry by she eagerness to be with again , make no farther direct opposition to the plan , and merely refer it to she mother 's decision , from whom however she scarcely expect to receive any support in she endeavour to prevent a visit , which she could not approve of for , and which on she own account she have particular reason to avoid . whatever be desirous of , she mother would be eager to promote -- she could not expect to influence the latter to cautiousness of conduct in a affair respect which she have never be able to inspire she with distrust ; and she da not explain the motive of she own disinclination for go to . that , fastidious as she be , thoroughly acquaint with 's manners , and invariably disgust by they , should overlook every inconvenience of that kind , should disregard whatever must be most wounding to she irritable feeling , in she pursuit of one object , be such a proof , so strong , so full , of the importance of that object to she , as , in spite of all that have pass , be not prepare to witness . on be inform of the invitation , , persuade that such a excursion would be productive of much amusement to both she daughter , and perceive through all she affectionate attention to herself , how much the heart of be in it , would not hear of they decline the offer upon Her account ; insist on they both accept it directly ; and then begin to foresee , with she usual cheerfulness , a variety of advantage that would accrue to they all , from this separation . " I be delighte with the plan , " she cry , " it be exactly what I could wish . and I shall be as much benefit by it as yourselves . when you and the be gone , we shall go on so quietly and happily together with we book and we music ! you will find so improve when you come back again ! I have a little plan of alteration for you bedrooms too , which may now be perform without any inconvenience to any one . it be very right that you should go to town ; I would have every young woman of you condition in life acquaint with the manners and amusement of . you will be under the care of a motherly good sort of woman , of whose kindness to you I can have no doubt . and in all probability you will see you brother , and whatever may be he fault , or the fault of he wife , when I consider whose son he be , I can not bear to have you so wholly estrange from each other . " " though with you usual anxiety for we happiness , " say , " you have be obviat every impediment to the present scheme which occur to you , there be still one objection which , in my opinion , can not be so easily remove . " 's countenance sunk . " and what , " say , " be my dear prudent Elinor go to suggest ? what formidable obstacle be she now to bring forward ? do let I hear a word about the expense of it . " " my objection be this ; though I think very well of 's heart , she be not a woman whose society can afford we pleasure , or whose protection will give we consequence . " " that be very true , " reply she mother , " but of she society , separately from that of other people , you will scarcely have any thing at all , and you will almost always appear in public with . " " if be frightene away by she dislike of , " say , " at least it need not prevent my accept she invitation . I have no such scruple , and I be sure I could put up with every unpleasantness of that kind with very little effort . " could not help smile at this display of indifference towards the manners of a person , to whom she have often have difficulty in persuading to behave with tolerable politeness ; and resolve within herself , that if she sister persist in go , she would go likewise , as she do not think it proper that should be leave to the sole guidance of she own judgment , or that should be abandon to the mercy of for all the comfort of she domestic hour . to this determination she be the more easily reconcile , by recollect that , by 's account , be not to be in town before ; and that they visit , without any unreasonable abridgement , might be previously finish . " I will have you Both go , " say ; " these objection be nonsensical . you will have much pleasure in be in , and especially in be together ; and if would ever condescmend to anticipate enjoyment , she would foresee it there from a variety of source ; she would , perhaps , expect some from improve she acquaintance with she sister - in - law 's family
family . " have often wished for a opportunity of attempting to weaken she mother 's dependence on the attachment of and herself , that the shock might be less when the whole truth be reveal , and now on this attack , though almost hopeless of success , she force herself to begin she design by say , as calmly as she could , " I like very much , and shall always be glad to see he ; but as to the rest of the family , it be a matter of perfect indifference to I , whether I be ever know to they or not . " smile , and say nothing . lift up she eye in astonishment , and conjecture that she might as well have hold she tongue . after very little farther discourse , it be finally settle that the invitation should be fully accept . receive the information with a great deal of joy , and many assurance of kindness and care ; nor be it a matter of pleasure merely to she . be delighted ; for to a man , whose prevail anxiety be the dread of be alone , the acquisition of two , to the number of inhabitant in , be something . even take the trouble of be delight , which be put herself rather out of she way ; and as for the , especially Lucy , they have never be so happy in they life as this intelligence make they . submit to the arrangement which counteract she wish with less reluctance than she have expect to feel . with regard to herself , it be now a matter of unconcern whether she go to town or not , and when she see she mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan , and she sister exhilarate by it in look , voice , and manner , restore to all she usual animation , and elevate to more than she usual gaiety , she could not be dissatisfie with the cause , and would hardly allow herself to distrust the consequence . 's joy be almost a degree beyond happiness , so great be the perturbation of she spirit and she impatience to be gone . she unwillingness to quit she mother be she only restorative to calmness ; and at the moment of part she grief on that score be excessive . she mother 's affliction be hardly less , and be the only one of the three , who seem to consider the separation as any thing short of eternal . they departure take place in the first week in . the Middletons be to follow in about a week . the keep they station at the park , and be to quit it only with the rest of the family . chapter 26 could not find herself in the carriage with , and begin a journey to under she protection , and as she guest , without wonder at she own situation , so short have they acquaintance with that lady be , so wholly unsuited be they in age and disposition , and so many have be she objection against such a measure only a few day before ! but these objection have all , with that happy ardour of youth which and she mother equally share , be overcome or overlook ; and , in spite of every occasional doubt of 's constancy , could not witness the rapture of delightful expectation which fill the whole soul and beam in the eyes of , without feel how blank be she own prospect , how cheerless she own state of mind in the comparison , and how gladly she would engage in the solicitude of 's situation to have the same animating object in view , the same possibility of hope . a short , a very short time however must now decide what 's intention be ; in all probability he be already in town . 's eagerness to be go declare she dependence on find he there ; and be resolve not only upon gain every new light as to he character which she own observation or the intelligence of other could give she , but likewise upon watch he behaviour to she sister with such zealous attention , as to ascertain what he be and what he mean , before many meeting have take place . should the result of she observation be unfavourable , she be determine at all event to open the eye of she sister ; should it be otherwise , she exertion would be of a different nature -- she must then learn to avoid every selfish comparison , and banish every regret which might lessen she satisfaction in the happiness of . they be three day on they journey , and 's behaviour as they travel be a happy specimen of what future complaisance and companionableness to Jennings might be expect to be . she sit in silence almost all the way , wrapt in she own meditation , and scarcely ever voluntarily speak , except when any object of picturesque beauty within they view draw from she a exclamation of delight exclusively address to she sister . to ato for this conduct therefore , take immediate possession of the post of civility which she have assign herself , behave with the greatest attention to , talk with she , laugh with she , and listen to she whenever she could ; and on she side treat they both with all possible kindness , be solicitous on every occasion for they ease and enjoyment , and only disturb that she could not make they choose they own dinner at the inn , nor extort a confession of they prefer salmon to , or boil fowl to veal cutlet . they reach town by three o'clock the third day , glad to be release , after
after such a journey , from the confinement of a carriage , and ready to enjoy all the luxury of a good fire . the house be handsome , and handsomely fitte up , and the young lady be immediately put in possession of a very comfortable apartment . it have formerly be 's , and over the mantelpiece still hang a landscape in coloured silk of she performance , in proof of she have spend seven year at a great school in town to some effect . as dinner be not to be ready in less than two hour from they arrival , determi to employ the interval in writing to she mother , and sit down for that purpose . in a few moments do the same . " I be write home , , " say ; " have not you better defer you letter for a day or two ? " " I be not go to write to my mother , " reply , hastily , and as if wishing to avoid any farther inquiry . say no more ; it immediately strike she that she must then be write to ; and the conclusion which as instantly follow be , that , however mysteriously they might wish to conduct the affair , they must be engage . this conviction , though not entirely satisfactory , give she pleasure , and she continue she letter with greater alacrity . 's be finish in a very few minute ; in length it could be no more than a note ; it be then fold up , seal , and direct with eager rapidity . think she could distinguish a large w in the direction ; and no sooner be it complete than , ring the bell , request the footman who answer it to get that letter convey for she to the two - penny post . this decide the matter at once . she spirits still continue very high ; but there be a flutter in they which prevent they give much pleasure to she sister , and this agitation increase as the evening draw on . she could scarcely eat any dinner , and when they afterwards return to the drawing room , see anxiously listen to the sound of every carriage . it be a great satisfaction to that , by be much engage in she own room , could see little of what be pass . the tea thing be bring in , and already have be disappoint more than once by a rap at a neighbour door , when a loud one be suddenly hear which could not be mistaken for one at any other house , feel secure of its announcing 's approach , and , start up , move towards the door . every thing be silent ; this could not be borne many seconds ; she open the door , advance a few step towards the stair , and after listen half a minute , return into the room in all the agitation which a conviction of have hear he would naturally produce ; in the ecstasy of she feeling at that instant she could not help exclaim , " oh , , it be , indeed it be ! " and see almost ready to throw herself into he arm , when appear . it be too great a shock to be borne with calmness , and she immediately leave the room . be disappointed too ; but at the same time she regard for ensure he welcome with she ; and she feel particularly hurt that a man so partial to she sister should perceive that she experience nothing but grief and disappointment in see he . she instantly see that it be not unnoticed by he , that he even observe as she quit the room , with such astonishment and concern , as hardly leave he the recollection of what civility demand towards herself . " be you sister ill ? " say he . answer in some distress that she be , and then talk of head - ach , low spirit , and over fatigue ; and of every thing to which she could decently attribute she sister 's behaviour . he hear she with the most earnest attention , but seem to recollect himself , say no more on the subject , and begin directly to speak of he pleasure at see they in , make the usual inquirie about they journey , and the friend they have leave behind . in this calm kind of way , with very little interest on either side , they continue to talk , both of they out of spirit , and the thought of both engage elsewhere . wish very much to ask whether be then in town , but she be afraid of give he pain by any enquiry after he rival ; and at length , by way of say something , she ask if he have be in ever since she have see he last . " yes , " he reply , with some embarrassment , " almost ever since ; I have be once or twice at for a few day , but it have never be in my power to return to . " this , and the manner in which it be say , immediately bring back to she remembrance all the circumstance of he quit that place , with the uneasiness and suspicions they have cause to , and she be fearful that she question have implied much more curiosity on the subject than she have ever feel . soon come in . " oh ! , " say she , with she usual noisy cheerfulness , " I be monstrous glad to see you -- sorry i could not come before -- beg you pardon , but I have be force to look about I
I a little , and settle my matter ; for it be a long while since I have be at home , and you know one have always a world of little odd thing to do after one have be away for any time ; and then I have have to settle with -- , I have be as busy as a bee ever since dinner ! but pray , , how come you to conjure out that I should be in town today ? " " I have the pleasure of hear it at 's , where I have be dine . " " oh , you do ; well , and how do they all do at they house ? how do do ? I warrant you she be a fine size by this time . " " . appear quite well , and I be commission to tell you , that you will certainly see she to - morrow . " " ay , to be sure , I think as much . well , , I have bring two young lady with I , you see -- that be , you see but one of they now , but there be another somewhere . you friend , , too -- which you will not be sorry to hear . I do not know what you and will do between you about she . ay , it be a fine thing to be young and handsome . well ! I be young once , but I never be very handsome -- worse luck for I . however , I get a very good husband , and I do not know what the greatest beauty can do more . ah ! poor man ! he have be dead these eight year and better . but , where have you be to since we part ? and how do you business go on ? come , come , let 's have no secret among friend . " he reply with he accustomary mildness to all she inquiry , but without satisfye she in any . now begin to make the tea , and be oblige to appear again . after she entrance , become more thoughtful and silent than he have be before , and could not prevail on he to stay long . no other visitor appear that evening , and the lady be unanimous in agree to go early to bed . rise the next morning with recovere spirit and happy look . the disappointment of the evening before see forget in the expectation of what be to happen that day . they have not long finish they breakfast before 's barouche stop at the door , and in a few minute she come laugh into the room : so delighted to see they all , that it be hard to say whether she receive most pleasure from meet she mother or the again . so surprised at they come to town , though it be what she have rather expect all along ; so angry at they accept she mother 's invitation after have decline she own , though at the same time she would never have forgive they if they have not come ! " will be so happy to see you , " say she ; " what do you think he say when he hear of you come with ? I forget what it be now , but it be something so droll ! " after a hour or two spend in what she mother call comfortable chat , or in other word , in every variety of inquiry concern all they acquaintance on 's side , and in laughter without cause on 's , it be propose by the latter that they should all accompany she to some shop where she have business that morning , to which and readily consent , as have likewise some purchase to make themselves ; and , though decline it at first be induce to go likewise . wherever they go , she be evidently always on the watch . in especially , where much of they business lay , she eye be in constant inquiry ; and in whatever shop the party be engage , she mind be equally abstract from every thing actually before they , from all that interested and occupy the other . restless and dissatisfie every where , she sister could never obtain she opinion of any article of purchase , however it might equally concern they both : she receive no pleasure from anything ; be only impatient to be at home again , and could with difficulty govern she vexation at the tediousness of , whose eye be catch by every thing pretty , expensive , or new ; who be wild to buy all , could determine on none , and dawdle away she time in rapture and indecision . it be late in the morning before they return home ; and no sooner have they enter the house than fly eagerly up stair , and when follow , she find she turn from the table with a sorrowful countenance , which declare that no Willoughby have be there . " have no letter be leave here for I since we go out ? " say she to the footman who then enter with the parcel . she be answer in the negative . " be you quite sure of it ? " she reply . " be you certain that no servant , no porter have leave any letter or note ? " the man reply that none have . " how very odd ! " say she , in a low and disappointed voice , as she turn away to the window . " how odd , indeed ! " repeat within herself , regard she sister with uneasiness . " if she have not know he
he to be in town she would not have write to he , as she do ; she would have write to ; and if he be in town , how odd that he should neither come nor write ! oh ! my dear mother , you must be wrong in permit a engagement between a daughter so young , a man so little know , to be carry on in so doubtful , so mysterious a manner ! I long to inquire ; and how will my interference be borne . " she determine , after some consideration , that if appearance continue many day longer as unpleasant as they now be , she would represent in the strongest manner to she mother the necessity of some serious enquiry into the affair . and two elderly lady of 's intimate acquaintance , whom she have meet and invite in the morning , dine with they . the former leave they soon after tea to fulfill she evening engagement ; and be obliged to assist in make a whist table for the other . be of no use on these occasion , as she would never learn the game ; but though she time be therefore at she own disposal , the evening be by no means more productive of pleasure to she than to , for it be spend in all the anxiety of expectation and the pain of disappointment . she sometimes endeavoure for a few minute to read ; but the book be soon throw aside , and she return to the more interesting employment of walking backward and forward across the room , pause for a moment whenever she come to the window , in hope of distinguishe the long -expected rap . chapter 27 " if this open weather hold much longer , " say , when they meet at breakfast the follow morning , " will not like leave next week ; ' tis a sad thing for sportsman to lose a day 's pleasure . poor soul ! I always pity they when they do ; they seem to take it so much to heart . " " that be true , " cry , in a cheerful voice , and walk to the window as she speak , to examine the day . " I have not thought of that . this weather will keep many sportsman in the country . " it be a lucky recollection , all she good spirit be restore by it . " it be charme weather for they indeed , " she continue , as she sit down to the breakfast table with a happy countenance . " how much they must enjoy it ! but " ( with a little return of anxiety ) " it can not be expect to last long . at this time of the year , and after such a series of rain , we shall certainly have very little more of it . frosts will soon set in , and in all probability with severity . in another day or two perhaps ; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer -- nay , perhaps it may freeze tonight ! " " at any rate , " say , wish to prevent from see she sister 's thought as clearly as she do , " I dare say we shall have and in town by the end of next week . " " ay , my dear , I will warrant you we do . always have she own way . " " and now , " silently conjecture , " she will write to Combe by this day 's post . " but if she , the letter be write and send away with a privacy which elude all she watchfulness to ascertain the fact . whatever the truth of it might be , and far as be from feeling thorough contentment about it , yet while she see in spirit , she could not be very uncomfortable herself . and be in spirit ; happy in the mildness of the weather , and still happier in she expectation of a frost . the morning be chiefly spend in leave card at the house of 's acquaintance to inform they of she be in town ; and be all the time busy in observe the direction of the wind , watch the variation of the sky and imagine a alteration in the air . " do not you find it colder than it be in the morning , ? there seem to I a very decided difference . I can hardly keep my hand warm even in my muff . it be not so yesterday , I think . the cloud seem part too , the sun will be out in a moment , and we shall have a clear afternoon . " be alternately divert and pain ; but persever , and see every night in the brightness of the fire , and every morning in the appearance of the atmosphere , the certain symptom of approaching frost . the have no greater reason to be dissatisfied with 's style of living , and set of acquaintance , than with she behaviour to themselves , which be invariably kind . every thing in she household arrangement be conduct on the most liberal plan , and except a few old city friend , whom , to 's regret , she have never drop , she visit no one to whom a introduction could at all discompose the feeling of she young companion . pleased to find herself more comfortably situate in that particular than she have expect , be very willing to compound for the want of much real enjoyment from any of they evening party , which , whether at home or abroad , form only for card , could have little to amuse she . , who have
have a general invitation to the house , be with they almost every day ; he come to look at and talk to , who often derive more satisfaction from converse with he than from any other daily occurrence , but who see at the same time with much concern he continue regard for she sister . she fear it be a strengthening regard . it grieve she to see the earnestness with which he often watch , and he spirit be certainly worse than when at . about a week after they arrival , it become certain that be also arrive . he card be on the table when they come in from the morning 's drive . " ! " cry , " he have be here while we be out . " , rejoice to be assure of he be in , now venture to say , " Depend upon it , he will call again tomorrow . " but seem hardly to hear she , and on 's entrance , escape with the precious card . this event , while it raise the spirits of , restore to those of she sister all , and more than all , they former agitation . from this moment she mind be never quiet ; the expectation of see he every hour of the day , make she unfit for any thing . she insist on be leave behind , the next morning , when the other go out . 's thought be full of what might be pass in during they absence ; but a moment 's glance at she sister when they return be enough to inform she , that have pay no second visit there . a note be just then bring in , and lay on the table , " for I ! " cry , step hastily forward . " no , ma 'am , for my mistress . " but , not convince , take it instantly up . " it be indeed for ; how provoke ! " " you be expect a letter , then ? " say , unable to be longer silent . " yes , a little -- not much . " after a short pause . " you have no confidence in I , . " " Nay , , this reproach from you -- you who have confidence in no one ! " " I ! " return in some confusion ; " indeed , , I have nothing to tell . " " nor I , " answer with energy , " we situation then be alike . we have neither of we any thing to tell ; you , because you do not communicate , and I , because I conceal nothing . " , distress by this charge of reserve in herself , which she be not at liberty to do away , know not how , under such circumstance , to press for greater openness in . soon appear , and the note be give she , she read it aloud . it be from , announce they arrival in the night before , and request the company of she mother and cousin the follow evening . business on 's part , and a violent cold on she own , prevent they call in . the invitation be accept ; but when the hour of appointment drew near , necessary as it be in common civility to , that they should both attend she on such a visit , have some difficulty in persuade she sister to go , for still she have see nothing of ; and therefore be not more indispose for amusement abroad , than unwilling to run the risk of he call again in she absence . find , when the evening be over , that disposition be not materially alte by a change of abode , for although scarcely settle in town , have contrive to collect around he , nearly twenty young people , and to amuse they with a ball . this be a affair , however , of which do not approve . in the country , a unpremeditated dance be very allowable ; but in , where the reputation of elegance be more important and less easily attain , it be risk too much for the gratification of a few girl , to have it know that have give a small dance of eight or nine couple , with two violin , and a mere side - board collation . and be of the party ; from the former , whom they have not see before since they arrival in town , as he be careful to avoid the appearance of any attention to he mother - in - law , and therefore never come near she , they receive no mark of recognition on they entrance . he look at they slightly , without seem to know who they be , and merely nod to from the other side of the room . give one glance round the apartment as she enter : it be enough -- he be not there -- and she sit down , equally ill - dispose to receive or communicate pleasure . after they have be assemble about a hour , saunter towards the to express he surprise on see they in town , though have be first inform of they arrival at he house , and he have himself say something very droll on hear that they be to come . " I think you be both in , " say he . " do you ? " reply . " when do you go back again ? " " I do not know . " and thus end they discourse . never have be so unwilling to dance in she life , as she be that evening , and never so much fatigue by the exercise
exercise . she complain of it as they return to . " aye , aye , " say , " we know the reason of all that very well ; if a certain person who shall be nameless , have be there , you would not have be a bit tired : and to say the truth it be not very pretty of he not to give you the meeting when he be invite . " " invite ! " cry . " so my daughter tell I , for it seem meet he somewhere in the street this morning . " say no more , but look exceedingly hurt . impatient in this situation to be do something that might lead to she sister 's relief , resolve to write the next morning to she mother , and hope by awaken she fear for the health of , to procure those inquiry which have be so long delay ; and she be still more eagerly bent on this measure by perceive after breakfast on the morrow , that be again write to , for she could not suppose it to be to any other person . about the middle of the day , go out by herself on business , and begin she letter directly , while , too restless for employment , too anxious for conversation , walk from one window to the other , or sit down by the fire in melancholy meditation . be very earnest in she application to she mother , relate all that have pass , she suspicion of 's inconstancy , urge she by every plea of duty and affection to demand from a account of she real situation with respect to he . she letter be scarcely finish , when a rap foretold a visitor , and be announce . , who have see he from the window , and who hate company of any kind , leave the room before he enter it . he look more than usually grave , and though express satisfaction at find alone , as if he have somewhat in particular to tell she , sat for some time without say a word . , persuade that he have some communication to make in which she sister be concerned , impatiently expect its opening . it be not the first time of she feel the same kind of conviction ; for , more than once before , begin with the observation of " you sister look unwell to - day , " or " you sister seem out of spirit , " he have appear on the point , either of disclosing , or of inquiring , something particular about she . after a pause of several minute , they silence be break , by he ask she in a voice of some agitation , when he be to congratulate she on the acquisition of a brother ? be not prepared for such a question , and have no answer ready , be obliged to adopt the simple and common expedient , of ask what he mean ? he try to smile as he reply , " you sister 's engagement to be very generally know . " " it can not be generally know , " return , " for she own family do not know it . " he look surprised and say , " I beg you pardon , I be afraid my inquiry have be impertinent ; but I have not suppose any secrecy intend , as they openly correspond , and they marriage be universally talk of . " " how can that be ? by whom can you have hear it mention ? " " by many -- by some of whom you know nothing , by other with whom you be most intimate , , , and the Middleton . but still I might not have believe it , for where the mind be perhaps rather unwilling to be convince , it will always find something to support its doubt , if I have not , when the servant let I in today , accidentally see a letter in he hand , direct to in you sister 's writing . I come to inquire , but I be convinced before I could ask the question . be every thing finally settle ? be it impossible to - ? but I have no right , and I could have no chance of succeeding . excuse I , . I believe I have be wrong in say so much , but I hardly know what to do , and on you prudence I have the strongest dependence . tell I that it be all absolutely resolve on , that any attempt , that in short concealment , if concealment be possible , be all that remains . " these word , which convey to a direct avowal of he love for she sister , affect she very much . she be not immediately able to say anything , and even when she spirit be recover , she debat for a short time , on the answer it would be most proper to give . the real state of thing between and she sister be so little know to herself , that in endeavour to explain it , she might be as liable to say too much as too little . yet as she be convince that 's affection for , could leave no hope of 's success , whatever the event of that affection might be , and at the same time wish to shield she conduct from censure , she think it most prudent and kind , after some consideration , to say more than she really know or believe . she acknowledge , therefore , that though she have never be inform by themselves of the term on which they stand with each other , of they mutual affection
affection she have no doubt , and of they correspondence she be not astonished to hear . he listen to she with silent attention , and on she ceasing to speak , rise directly from he seat , and after say in a voice of emotion , " to you sister I wish all imaginable happiness ; to Willoughby that he may endeaavor to deserve she , " -- take leave , and go away . derive no comfortable feeling from this conversation , to lessen the uneasiness of she mind on other point ; she be leave , on the contrary , with a melancholy impression of 's unhappiness , and be prevent even from wish it remove , by she anxiety for the very event that must confirm it . chapter 28 nothing occur during the next three or four day , to make regret what she have do , in apply to she mother ; for neither come nor write . they be engage about the end of that time to attend to a party , from which be keep away by the indisposition of she youngest daughter ; and for this party , , wholly dispirit , careless of she appearance , and see equally indifferent whether she go or stay , prepare , without one look of hope or one expression of pleasure . she sit by the drawing - room fire after tea , till the moment of 's arrival , without once stirr from she seat , or alte she attitude , lose in she own thought , and insensible of she sister 's presence ; and when at last they be tell that wait for they at the door , she start as if she have forgote that any one be expect . they arrive in due time at the place of destination , and as soon as the string of carriage before they would allow , alight , ascend the stair , hear they name announce from one landing - place to another in a audible voice , and enter a room splendidly light up , quite full of company , and insufferably hot . when they have pay they tribute of politeness by curtsying to the lady of the house , they be permit to mingle in the crowd , and take they share of the heat and inconvenience , to which they arrival must necessarily add . after some time spend in say little or do less , sit down to , and as be not in spirit for move about , she and luckily succeed to chair , place themselves at no great distance from the table . they have not remain in this manner long , before perceive , stand within a few yard of they , in earnest conversation with a very fashionable look young woman . she soon catch he eye , and he immediately bow , but without attempt to speak to she , or to approach , though he could not but see she ; and then continue he discourse with the same lady . turn involuntarily to , to see whether it could be unobserve by she . at that moment she first perceive he , and she whole countenance glow with sudden delight , she would have move towards he instantly , have not she sister catch hold of she . " good heaven ! " she exclaim , " he be there -- he be there -- oh ! why do he not look at I ? why can not I speak to he ? " " pray , pray be compose , " cry , " and do not betray what you feel to every body present . perhaps he have not observ you yet . " this however be more than she could believe herself ; and to be compose at such a moment be not only beyond the reach of , it be beyond she wish . she sit in a agony of impatience which affect every feature . at last he turn round again , and regard they both ; she start up , and pronounce he name in a tone of affection , hold out she hand to he . he approach , and address himself rather to than , as if wishing to avoid she eye , and determine not to observe she attitude , inquire in a hurrie manner after , and ask how long they have be in town . be rob of all presence of mind by such a address , and be unable to say a word . but the feeling of she sister be instantly express . she face be crimson over , and she exclaim , in a voice of the greatest emotion , " ! , what be the meaning of this ? have you not receive my letter ? will you not shake hand with I ? " he could not then avoid it , but she touch seem painful to he , and he hold she hand only for a moment . during all this time he be evidently strugg for composure . watch he countenance and see its expression become more tranquil . after a moment 's pause , he speak with calmness . " I do myself the honour of call in last , and very much regret that I be not fortunate enough to find yourselves and at home . my card be not lose , I hope . " " but have you not receive my note ? " cry in the wildest anxiety . " here be some mistake I be sure -- some dreadful mistake . what can be the meaning of it ? tell I , ; for heaven 's sake tell I , what be the matter ? " he make no reply ; he complexion change and all he embarrassment return ; but as if , on
on catch the eye of the young lady with whom he have be previously talk , he feel the necessity of instant exertion , he recover himself again , and after say , " yes , I have the pleasure of receive the information of you arrival in town , which you be so good as to send I , " turn hastily away with a slight bow and join he friend . , now look dreadfully white , and unable to stand , sunk into she chair , and , expect every moment to see she faint , try to scree she from the observation of other , while revive she with lavender water . " go to he , , " she cry , as soon as she could speak , " and force he to come to I . tell he I must see he again -- must speak to he instantly .-- I can not rest -- I shall not have a moment 's peace till this be explained -- some dreadful misapprehension or other .-- oh go to he this moment . " " how can that be do ? no , my dearest , you must wait . this be not the place for explanation . wait only till tomorrow . " with difficulty however could she prevent she from follow he herself ; and to persuade she to check she agitation , to wait , at least , with the appearance of composure , till she might speak to he with more privacy and more effect , be impossible ; for continue incessantly to give way in a low voice to the misery of she feeling , by exclamation of wretchedness . in a short time see quit the room by the door towards the staircase , and tell that he be go , urge the impossibility of speak to he again that even , as a fresh argument for she to be calm . she instantly beg she sister would entreat to take they home , as she be too miserable to stay a minute longer . , though in the middle of a rubber , on be inform that be unwell , be too polite to object for a moment to she wish of go away , and make over she card to a friend , they depart as soon the carriage could be find . Scarcely a word be speak during they return to . be in a silent agony , too much oppress even for tear ; but as be luckily not come home , they could go directly to they own room , where hartshorn restore she a little to herself . she be soon undressed and in bed , and as she seem desirous of be alone , she sister then leave she , and while she wait the return of , have leisure enough for think over the past . that some kind of engagement have subsist between and she could not doubt , and that be weary of it , see equally clear ; for however might still feed she own wish , she could not attribute such behaviour to mistake or misapprehension of any kind . nothing but a thorough change of sentiment could account for it . she indignation would have be still stronger than it be , have she not witness that embarrassment which seem to speak a consciousness of he own misconduct , and prevent she from believe he so unprincipled as to have be sport with the affections of she sister from the first , without any design that would bear investigation . absence might have weaken he regard , and convenience might have determine he to overcome it , but that such a regard have formerly exist she could not bring herself to doubt . as for , on the pang which so unhappy a meeting must already have give she , and on those still more severe which might await she in its probable consequence , she could not reflect without the deepest concern . she own situation gain in the comparison ; for while she could as much as ever , however they might be divide in future , she mind might be always support . but every circumstance that could embitter such a evil seem uniting to heighten the misery of in a final separation from -- in a immediate and irreconcilable rupture with he . chapter 29 before the house -maid have lit they fire the next day , or the sun gain any power over a cold , gloomy morning in , , only half dress , be knee against one of the window - seat for the sake of all the little light she could command from it , and write as fast as a continual flow of tear would permit she . in this situation , , rouse from sleep by she agitation and sob , first perceive she ; and after observe she for a few moment with silent anxiety , say , in a tone of the most considerate gentleness , " , may I ask -? " " no , , " she reply , " ask nothing ; you will soon know all . " the sort of desperate calmness with which this be say , last no longer than while she speak , and be immediately follow by a return of the same excessive affliction . it be some minute before she could go on with she letter , and the frequent bursts of grief which still oblige she , at interval , to withhold she pen , be proof enough of she feel how more than probable it be that she be write for the last time to . pay she every quiet and unobtrusive attention in she power ; and she would have try to sooth and tranquilize she still more , have not entreate she
she , with all the eagerness of the most nervous irritability , not to speak to she for the world . in such circumstance , it be better for both that they should not be long together ; and the restless state of 's mind not only prevent she from remaining in the room a moment after she be dress , but require at once solitude and continual change of place , make she wander about the house till breakfast time , avoid the sight of every body . at breakfast she neither ate , nor attempt to eat any thing ; and 's attention be then all employ , not in urge she , not in pity she , nor in appear to regard she , but in endeavour to engage 's notice entirely to herself . as this be a favourite meal with , it last a considerable time , and they be just set themselves , after it , round the common work table , when a letter be deliver to , which she eagerly catch from the servant , and , turn of a death - like paleness , instantly run out of the room . , who see as plainly by this , as if she have see the direction , that it must come from , feel immediately such a sickness at heart as make she hardly able to hold up she head , and sit in such a general tremour as make she fear it impossible to escape 's notice . that good lady , however , see only that have receive a letter from , which appear to she a very good joke , and which she treat accordingly , by hoping , with a laugh , that she would find it to she liking . of 's distress , she be too busily employ in measuring length of worsted for she rug , to see any thing at all ; and calmly continue she talk , as soon as disappear , she say , " upon my word , I never see a young woman so desperately in love in my life ! my girl be nothing to she , and yet they use to be foolish enough ; but as for , she be quite a alte creature . I hope , from the bottom of my heart , he will not keep she wait much longer , for it be quite grievous to see she look so ill and forlorn . pray , when be they to be marry ? " , though never less dispose to speak than at that moment , oblige herself to answer such a attack as this , and , therefore , try to smile , reply , " and have you really , ma 'am , talk yourself into a persuasion of my sister 's be engage to ? I think it have be only a joke , but so serious a question seem to imply more ; and I must beg , therefore , that you will not deceive yourself any longer . I do assure you that nothing would surprise I more than to hear of they be go to be marry . " " for shame , for shame , ! how can you talk so ? do not we all know that it must be a match , that they be over head and ears in love with each other from the first moment they meet ? do not I see they together in every day , and all day long ; and do not I know that you sister come to tow with I on purpose to buy wedding clothes ? come , come , this will not do . because you be so sly about it yourself , you think nobody else have any sense ; but it be no such thing , I can tell you , for it have be know all over town this ever so long . I tell every body of it and so do . " " indeed , ma 'am , " say , very seriously , " you be mistaken . indeed , you be do a very unkind thing in spread the report , and you will find that you have though you will not believe I now . " laugh again , but have not spirit to say more , and eager at all event to know what have write , hurrie away to they room , where , on open the door , she see stretch on the bed , almost chok by grief , one letter in she hand , and two or three other lay by she . draw near , but without say a word ; and seate herself on the bed , take she hand , kiss she affectionately several time , and then give way to a burst of tear , which at first be scarcely less violent than 's . the latter , though unable to speak , seem to feel all the tenderness of this behaviour , and after some time thus spend in joint affliction , she put all the letter into 's hand ; and then cover she face with she handkerchief , almost scream with agony . , who know that such grief , shock as it be to witness it , must have its course , watch by she till this excess of suffering have somewhat spend itself , and then turn eagerly to 's letter , read as follow : " , . " my , " I have just have the honour of receive you letter , for which I beg to return my sincere acknowledgment . I be much concerned to find there be anything in my behaviour last night that do not meet you approbation ; and though I be quite at a loss to discover in what point I could be
be so unfortunate as to offend you , I entreat you forgiveness of what I can assure you to have be perfectly unintentional . I shall never reflect on my former acquaintance with you family in without the most grateful pleasure , and flatter myself it will not be break by any mistake or misapprehension of my action . my esteem for you whole family be very sincere ; but if I have be so unfortunate as to give rise to a belief of more than I feel , or mean to express , I shall reproach myself for not have be more guard in my profession of that esteem . that I should ever have mean more you will allow to be impossible , when you understand that my affections have be long engage elsewhere , and it will not be many week , I believe , before this engagement be fulfil . it be with great regret that I obey you command in return the letter with which I have be honoure from you , and the lock of hair , which you so obligingly bestow on I . " I be , dear madam , " you most obedient " humble servant , " . " with what indignation such a letter as this must be read by , may be imagine . though aware , before she begin it , that it must bring a confession of he inconstancy , and confirm they separation for ever , she be not aware that such language could be suffer to announce it ; nor could she have suppose capable of depart so far from the appearance of every honourable and delicate feeling -- so far from the common decorum of a gentleman , as to send a letter so impudently cruel : a letter which , instead of bring with he desire of a release any profession of regret , acknowledge no breach of faith , deny all peculiar affection whatever -- a letter of which every line be a insult , and which proclaim its writer to be deep in hardened villainy . she pause over it for some time with indignant astonishment ; then read it again and again ; but every perusal only serve to increase she abhorrence of the man , and so bitter be she feeling against he , that she da not trust herself to speak , lest she might wound still deeper by treat they disengagement , not as a loss to she of any possible good but as a escape from the worst and most irremediable of all evils , a connection , for life , with a unprincipled man , as a deliverance the most real , a bless the most important . in she earnest meditation on the contents of the letter , on the depravity of that mind which could dictate it , and probably , on the very different mind of a very different person , who have no other connection whatever with the affair than what she heart give he with every thing that pass , forget the immediate distress of she sister , forgot that she have three letter on she lap yet unread , and so entirely forget how long she have be in the room , that when on hear a carriage drive up to the door , she go to the window to see who could be come so unreasonably early , she be all astonishment to perceive 's chariot , which she know have not be order till one . Determine not to quit , though hopeless of contributing , at present , to she ease , she hurrie away to excuse herself from attend , on account of she sister be indispose . , with a thoroughly good - humoured concern for its cause , admit the excuse most readily , and , after see she safe off , return to , whom she find attempt to rise from the bed , and whom she reach just in time to prevent she from falling on the floor , faint and giddy from a long want of proper rest and food ; for it be many day since she have any appetite , and many night since she have really sleep ; and now , when she mind be no longer support by the fever of suspense , the consequence of all this be feel in a aching head , a weaken stomach , and a general nervous faintness . a glass of wine , which procure for she directly , make she more comfortable , and she be at last able to express some sense of she kindness , by say , " poor ! how unhappy I make you ! " " I only wish , " reply she sister , " there be any thing I could do , which might be of comfort to you . " this , as every thing else would have be , be too much for , who could only exclaim , in the anguish of she heart , " oh ! , I be miserable , indeed , " before she voice be entirely lose in sob . could no longer witness this torrent of unresisted grief in silence . " Exert yourself , dear , " she cry , " if you would not kill yourself and all who love you . think of you mother ; think of she misery while you suffer : for she sake you must exert yourself . " " I can not , I can not , " cry ; " leave I , leave I , if I distress you ; leave I , hate I , forget I ! but do not torture I so . oh ! how easy for those , who have no sorrow of they own to talk of exertion ! happy , happy , you can not
not have a idea of what I suffer . " " do you call I happy , ? ah ! if you know ! -- and can you believe I to be so , while I see you so wretch ! " " forgive I , forgive I , " throw she arm round she sister 's neck ; " I know you feel for I ; I know what a heart you have ; but yet you be -- you must be happy ; love you -- what , oh what , can do away such happiness as that ? " " many , many circumstance , " say , solemnly . " no , no , no , " cry wildly , " he love you , and only you . you can have no grief . " " I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state . " " and you will never see I otherwise . mine be a misery which nothing can do away . " " you must not talk so , . have you no comfort ? no friend ? be you loss such as leave no opening for consolation ? much as you suffer now , think of what you would have suffer if the discovery of he character have be delay to a later period -- if you engagement have be carry on for month and month , as it might have be , before he choose to put a end to it . every additional day of unhappy confidence , on you side , would have make the blow more dreadful . " " engagement ! " cry , " there have be no engagement . " " no engagement ! " " no , he be not so unworthy as you believe he . he have break no faith with I . " " but he tell you that he love you . " " yes -- no -- never absolutely . it be every day imply , but never professedly declare . sometimes I think it have be -- but it never be . " " yet you write to he ? " -- " yes -- could that be wrong after all that have pass ?-- but I can not talk . " say no more , and turn again to the three letter which now raise a much stronger curiosity than before , directly run over the contents of all . the first , which be what she sister have send he on they arrival in town , be to this effect . , . " how surprised you will be , , on receive this ; and I think you will feel something more than surprise , when you know that I be in town . a opportunity of come hither , though with , be a temptation we could not resist . I wish you may receive this in time to come here to - night , but I will not depend on it . at any rate I shall expect you to - morrow . for the present , adieu. " . " she second note , which have be write on the morning after the dance at the ' , be in these word :-- " I can not express my disappointment in have miss you the day before yesterday , nor my astonishment at not have receive any answer to a note which I send you above a week ago . I have be expect to hear from you , and still more to see you , every hour of the day . pray call again as soon as possible , and explain the reason of my have expect this in vain . you have better come earlier another time , because we be generally out by one . we be last night at 's , where there be a dance . I have be tell that you be ask to be of the party . but could it be so ? you must be very much alter indeed since we part , if that could be the case , and you not there . but I will not suppose this possible , and I hope very soon to receive you personal assurance of its be otherwise . " . " the contents of she last note to he be these :-- " what be I to imagine , , by you behaviour last night ? again I demand a explanation of it . I be prepared to meet you with the pleasure which we separation naturally produce , with the familiarity which we intimacy at appear to I to justify . I be repulse indeed ! I have pass a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse a conduct which can scarcely be call less than insulting ; but though I have not yet be able to form any reasonable apology for you behaviour , I be perfectly ready to hear you justification of it . you have perhaps be misinform , or purposely deceive , in something concern I , which may have lower I in you opinion . tell I what it be , explain the grounds on which you act , and I shall be satisfied , in be able to satisfy you . it would grieve I indeed to be oblige to think ill of you ; but if I be to do it , if I be to learn that you be not what we have hithertoo believe you , that you regard for we all be insincere , that you behaviour to I be intend only to deceive , let it be tell as soon as possible . my feeling be at present in a state of dreadful indecision ; I wish to acquit you , but certainty on either side will be ease to what I now suffer . if you
you sentiment be no longer what they be , you will return my note , and the lock of my hair which be in you possession . " . " that such letter , so full of affection and confidence , could have be so answer , , for 's sake , would have be unwilling to believe . but she condemnation of he do not blind she to the impropriety of they have be write at all ; and she be silently grieve over the imprudence which have hazard such unsolicited proof of tenderness , not warrant by anything preced , and most severely condemn by the event , when , perceive that she have finish the letter , observe to she that they contain nothing but what any one would have write in the same situation . " I feel myself , " she add , " to be as solemnly engage to he , as if the strictest legal covenant have bound we to each other . " " I can believe it , " say ; " but unfortunately he do not feel the same . " " he do feel the same , -- for week and week he feel it . I know he do . whatever may have change he now , ( and nothing but the blackest art employ against I can have do it ) , I be once as dear to he as my own soul could wish . this lock of hair , which now he can so readily give up , be begge of I with the most earnest supplication . have you see he look , he manner , have you hear he voice at that moment ! have you forget the last evening of we be together at ? the morning that we parte too ! when he tell I that it might be many week before we meet again -- he distress -- can I ever forget he distress ? " for a moment or two she could say no more ; but when this emotion have pass away , she add , in a firmer tone , " , I have be cruelly use ; but not by . " " , who but himself ? by whom can he have be instigate ? " " by all the world , rather than by he own heart . I could rather believe every creature of my acquaintance leagu together to ruin I in he opinion , than believe he nature capable of such cruelty . this woman of whom he write -- whoever she be -- or any one , in short , but you own dear self , mama , and , may have be so barbarous to bely I . you three , be there a creature in the world whom I would not rather suspect of evil than , whose heart I know so well ? " would not contend , and only reply , " whoever may have be so detestably you enemy , let they be cheat of they malignant triumph , my dear sister , by see how nobly the consciousness of you own innocence and good intention support you spirits . it be a reasonable and laudable pride which resist such malevolence . " " no , no , " cry , " misery such as mine have no pride . I care not who know that I be wretch . the triumph of see I so may be open to all the world . , , they who suffer little may be proud and independent as they like -- may resist insult , or return mortification -- but I cannot . I must feel -- I must be wretch -- and they be welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it that can . " " but for my mother 's sake and mine -- " " I would do more than for my own . but to appear happy when I be so miserable -- oh ! who can require it ? " again they be both silent . be employ in walking thoughtfully from the fire to the window , from the window to the fire , without know that she receive warmth from one , or discern object through the other ; and , seat at the foot of the bed , with she head lean against one of its post , again take up 's letter , and , after shudder over every sentence , exclaim -- " it be too much ! oh , , , could this be yours ! , cruel --nothing can acquit you . , nothing can . whatever he might have hear against I -- ought he not to have suspend he belief ? ought he not to have tell I of it , to have give I the power of clearing myself ? ' the lock of hair , ( repeat it from the letter , ) which you so obligingly bestow on me'-- that be unpardonable . , where be you heart when you write those word ? oh , barbarously insolent !-- , can he be justifi ? " " no , , in no possible way . " " and yet this woman -- who know what she art may have be ?-- how long it may have be premeditate , and how deeply contrive by she !-- who be she ?-- who can she be ?-- whom do I ever hear he talk of as young and attractive among he female acquaintance ?--Oh ! no one , no one -- he talk to I only of myself . " another pause ensue ; be greatly agitate , and it end thus . " , I must go home . I must go and comfort mama . can not we be go to - morrow ? " " to -morrow , ! " "
" yes , why should I stay here ? I come only for 's sake -- and now who care for I ? who regard I ? " " it would be impossible to go to - morrow . we owe much more than civility ; and civility of the commonest kind must prevent such a hasty removal as that . " " well then , another day or two , perhaps ; but I can not stay here long , I can not stay to endure the question and remark of all these people . the Middletons and Palmers -- how be I to bear they pity ? the pity of such a woman as ! oh , what would he say to that ! " advise she to lie down again , and for a moment she do so ; but no attitude could give she ease ; and in restless pain of mind and body she move from one posture to another , till grow more and more hysterical , she sister could with difficulty keep she on the bed at all , and for some time be fearful of be constrain to call for assistance . some lavender drop , however , which she be at length persuade to take , be of use ; and from that time till return , she continue on the bed quiet and motionless . chapter 30 . come immediately to they room on she return , and without wait to have she request of admittance answer , open the door and walk in with a look of real concern . " how do you do my dear ? " --say she in a voice of great compassion to , who turn away she face without attempt to answer . " how be she , ? -- poor thing ! she look very bad .-- no wonder . ay , it be but too true . he be to be marry very soon -- a good - for - nothing fellow ! I have no patience with he . tell I of it half a hour ago , and she be tell it by a particular friend of herself , else I be sure I should not have believe it ; and I be almost ready to sink as it be . well , say I , all I can say be , that if this be true , he have use a young lady of my acquaintance abominably ill , and I wish with all my soul he wife may plague he heart out . and so I shall always say , my dear , you may depend on it . I have no notion of man 's go on in this way ; and if ever I meet he again , I will give he such a dressing as he have not have this many a day . but there be one comfort , my dear ; he be not the only young man in the world worth have ; and with you pretty face you will never want admirer . well , poor thing ! I will not disturb she any longer , for she have better have she cry out at once and have do with . the and luckily be come tonight you know , and that will amuse she . " she then go away , walk on tiptoe out of the room , as if she suppose she young friend 's affliction could be increase by noise . , to the surprise of she sister , determine on dining with they . Elinor even advise she against it . but " no , she would go down ; she could bear it very well , and the bustle about she would be less . " , please to have she governed for a moment by such a motive , though believe it hardly possible that she could sit out the dinner , say no more ; and adjust she dress for she as well as she could , while still remain on the bed , be ready to assist she into the dining room as soon as they be summon to it . when there , though look most wretchedly , she eat more and be calmer than she sister have expect . have she try to speak , or have she be conscious of half 's well - meant but ill - judge attention to she , this calmness could not have be maintain ; but not a syllable escape she lip ; and the abstraction of she thought preserve she in ignorance of every thing that be pass before she . , who do justice to 's kindness , though its effusion be often distressing , and sometimes almost ridiculous , make she those acknowledgment , and return she those civility , which she sister could not make or return for herself . they good friend see that be unhappy , and feel that every thing be due to she which might make she at all less so . she treat she therefore , with all the indulgent fondness of a parent towards a favourite child on the last day of its holiday . be to have the best place by the fire , be to be temp to eat by every delicacy in the house , and to be amuse by the relation of all the news of the day . have not , in the sad countenance of she sister , see a check to all mirth , she could have be entertain by 's endeavour to cure a disappointment in love , by a variety of sweetmeat and olive , and a good fire . as soon , however , as the consciousness of all this be force by continual repetition on , she could stay no longer . with a hasty exclamation of , and a sign to
to she sister not to follow she , she directly get up and hurrie out of the room . " poor soul ! " cry , as soon as she be go , " how it grieve I to see she ! and I declare if she be not go away without finish she wine ! and the dry cherry too ! ! nothing seem to do she any good . I be sure if I know of any thing she would like , I would send all over the town for it . well , it be the oddest thing to I , that a man should use such a pretty girl so ill ! but when there be plenty of money on one side , and next to no on the other , bless you ! they care no more about such thing !-- " " the lady then -- I think you call she -- be very rich ? " " fifty thousand pound , my dear . do you ever see she ? a smart , stylish girl they say , but not handsome . I remember she aunt very well , ; she marry a very wealthy man . but the family be all rich together . fifty thousand pound ! and by all account , it will not come before it be want ; for they say he be all to piece . no wonder ! dash about with he curricle and hunter ! well , it do not signify talk ; but when a young man , be who he will , come and make love to a pretty girl , and promise marriage , he have no business to fly off from he word only because he grow poor , and a richer girl be ready to have he . why do not he , in such a case , sell he horse , let he house , turn off he servants , and make a thorough reform at once ? I warrant you , would have be ready to wait till matter come round . but that will not do now - a - day ; nothing in the way of pleasure can ever be give up by the young man of this age . " " do you know what kind of a girl miss be ? be she say to be amiable ? " " I never hear any harm of she ; indeed I hardly ever hear she mention ; except that do say this morning , that one day hint to she , that she believe and would not be sorry to have married , for she and could never agree ." -- " and who be the Ellisons ? " " she guardian , my dear . but now she be of age and may choose for herself ; and a pretty choice she have make !-- what now , " after pause a moment --" you poor sister be go to she own room , I suppose , to moan by herself . be there nothing one can get to comfort she ? poor dear , it seem quite cruel to let she be alone . well , by - and - by we shall have a few friend , and that will amuse she a little . what shall we play at ? she hate whist I know ; but be there no round game she care for ? " " dear ma 'am , this kindness be quite unnecessary . , I dare say , will not leave she room again this evening . I shall persuade she if I can to go early to bed , for I be sure she want rest . " " aye , I believe that will be best for she . let she name she own supper , and go to bed . ! no wonder she have be look so bad and so cast down this last week or two , for this matter I suppose have be hang over she head as long as that . and so the letter that come today finish it ! poor soul ! I be sure if I have have a notion of it , I would not have joke she about it for all my money . but then you know , how should I guess such a thing ? I make sure of its be nothing but a common love letter , and you know young people like to be laugh at about they . ! how concerned and my daughter will be when they hear it ! if I have my sense about I I might have call in in my way home , and tell they of it . but I shall see they tomorrow . " " it would be unnecessary I be sure , for you to caution and against ever name , or make the slightest allusion to what have pass , before my sister . they own good - nature must point out to they the real cruelty of appear to know any thing about it when she be present ; and the less that may ever be say to myself on the subject , the more my feeling will be spare , as you my dear madam will easily believe . " " oh ! ! yes , that I do indeed . it must be terrible for you to hear it talk of ; and as for you sister , I be sure I would not mention a word about it to she for the world . you see I do not all dinner time . no more would , nor my daughter , for they be all very thoughtful and considerate ; especially if I give they a hint , as I certainly will . for my part , I think the less that be say about such
such thing , the better , the sooner ' tis blow over and forgot . and what do talk ever do you know ? " " in this affair it can only do harm ; more so perhaps than in many case of a similar kind , for it have be attend by circumstance which , for the sake of every one concerned in it , make it unfit to become the public conversation . I must do this justice to -- he have break no positive engagement with my sister . " " law , my dear ! do not pretend to defend he . no positive engagement indeed ! after take she all over , and fix on the very room they be to live in hereafter ! " , for she sister 's sake , could not press the subject farther , and she hope it be not require of she for 's ; since , though might lose much , he could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth . after a short silence on both side , , with all she natural hilarity , burst forth again . " well , my dear , ' ti a true say about a ill - wind , for it will be all the better for . he will have she at last ; aye , that he will . mind I , now , if they can not marry by . ! how he will chuckle over this news ! I hope he will come tonight . it will be all to one a better match for you sister . two thousand a year without debt or drawback -- except the little love - child , indeed ; aye , I have forget she ; but she may be ' prentice out at a small cost , and then what do it signify ? be a nice place , I can tell you ; exactly what I call a nice old fashioned place , full of comforts and convenience ; quite shut in with great garden wall that be cover with the best fruit - tree in the country ; and such a mulberry tree in one corner ! ! how and I do stuff the only time we be there ! then , there be a dove - cote , some delightful stew - ponds , and a very pretty canal ; and every thing , in short , that one could wish for ; and , moreover , it be close to the church , and only a quarter of a mile from the turnpike - road , so ' ttis never dull , for if you only go and sit up in a old yew arbour behind the house , you may see all the carriage that pass along . oh ! ' ttis a nice place ! a butcher hard by in the village , and the parsonage - house within a stone 's throw . to my fancy , a thousand time prettier than , where they be force to send three mile for they meat , and have not a neighbour nearer than you mother . well , I shall spirit up the as soon as I can . one shoulder of mutton , you know , drive another down . if we can but put out of she head ! " " ay , if we can do that , ma 'am , " say , " we shall do very well with or without . " and then rise , she go away to join , whom she find , as she expect , in she own room , lean , in silent misery , over the small remains of a fire , which , till 's entrance , have be she only light . " you have better leave I , " be all the notice that she sister receive from she . " I will leave you , " say , " if you will go to bed . " but this , from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering , she at first refuse to do . she sister 's earnest , though gentle persuasion , however , soon soften she to compliance , and see she lay she ach head on the pillow , and as she hope , in a way to get some quiet rest before she leave she . in the drawing - room , whither she then repair , she be soon join by , with a wine - glass , full of something , in she hand . " my dear , " say she , enter , " I have just recollect that I have some of the finest old wine in the house that ever be taste , so I have bring a glass of it for you sister . my poor husband ! how fond he be of it ! whenever he have a touch of he old colicky gout , he say it do he more good than any thing else in the world . do take it to you sister . " " dear ma 'am , " reply , smile at the difference of the complaint for which it be recommend , " how good you be ! but I have just leave in bed , and , I hope , almost asleep ; and as I think nothing will be of so much service to she as rest , if you will give I leave , I will drink the wine myself . " , though regrett that she have not be five minute earlier , be satisfied with the compromise ; and , as she swallow the chief of it , reflecte , that though its effect on a colicky gout be , at present , of little importance to she , it be heal power , on a disappointed
disappointed heart might be as reasonably try on herself as on she sister . come in while the party be at tea , and by he manner of look round the room for , immediately fancie that he neither expect nor wish to see she there , and , in short , that he be already aware of what occasion she absence . be not strike by the same thought ; for soon after he entrance , she walk across the room to the tea - table where preside , and whisper -- " the look as grave as ever you see . he know nothing of it ; do tell he , my dear . " he shortly afterwards draw a chair close to she 's , and , with a look which perfectly assure she of he good information , inquire after she sister . " be not well , " say she . " she have be indispose all day , and we have persuade she to go to bed . " " perhaps , then , " he hesitatingly reply , " what I hear this morning may be -- there may be more truth in it than I could believe possible at first . " " what do you hear ? " " that a gentleman , whom I have reason to think -- in short , that a man , whom I know to be engage -- but how shall I tell you ? if you know it already , as surely you must , I may be spare . " " you mean , " answer , with force calmness , " 's marriage with . yes , we do know it all . this seem to have be a day of general elucidation , for this very morning first unfold it to we . be unfathomable ! where do you hear it ? " " in a stationer 's shop in , where I have business . two lady be wait for they carriage , and one of they be give the other a account of the intend match , in a voice so little attempt concealment , that it be impossible for I not to hear all . the name of , , frequently repeat , first catch my attention ; and what follow be a positive assertion that every thing be now finally settle respect he marriage with -- it be no longer to be a secret -- it would take place even within a few week , with many particulars of preparation and other matters . one thing , especially , I remember , because it serve to identify the man still more :-- as soon as the ceremony be over , they be to go to , he seat in . my astonishment !-- but it would be impossible to describe what I feel . the communicative lady I learn , on inquiry , for I stay in the shop till they be go , be a , and that , as I have be since inform , be the name of 's guardian . " " it be . but have you likewise hear that have fifty thousand pound ? in that , if in any thing , we may find a explanation . " " it may be so ; but be capable -- at least I think " -- he stop a moment ; then add in a voice which seem to distrust itself , " and you sister -- how do she -- " " she suffering have be very severe . I have only to hope that they may be proportionately short . it have be , it be a most cruel affliction . yesterday , I believe , she never doubt he regard ; and even now , perhaps -- but I be almost convinced that he never be really attach to she . he have be very deceitful ! and , in some point , there seem a hardness of heart about he . " " ah ! " say , " there be , indeed ! but you sister do not -- I think you say so -- she do not consider quite as you do ? " " you know she disposition , and may believe how eagerly she would still justify he if she could . " he make no answer ; and soon afterwards , by the removal of the tea - thing , and the arrangement of the card party , the subject be necessarily drop . , who have watch they with pleasure while they be talk , and who expect to see the effect of 's communication , in such a instantaneous gaiety on 's side , as might have become a man in the bloom of youth , of hope and happiness , see he , with amazement , remain the whole evening more serious and thoughtful than usual . 31 From a night of more sleep than she have expect , awoke the next morning to the same consciousness of misery in which she have close she eye . encourage she as much as possible to talk of what she feel ; and before breakfast be ready , they have go through the subject again and again ; and with the same steady conviction and affectionate counsel on 's side , the same impetuous feeling and varie opinion on 's , as before . sometimes she could believe to be as unfortunate and as innocent as herself , and at other , lose every consolation in the impossibility of acquitt he . at one moment she be absolutely indifferent to the observation of all the world , at another she would seclude herself from it for ever , and at a third could resist it with energy . in one thing , however , she be uniform , when it come to the
the point , in avoiding , where it be possible , the presence of , and in a determined silence when oblige to endure it . she heart be harden against the belief of 's enter into she sorrow with any compassion . " no , no , no , it can not be , " she cry ; " she can not feel . she kindness be not sympathy ; she good - nature be not tenderness . all that she want be gossip , and she only like I now because I supply it . " have not need this to be assure of the injustice to which she sister be often lead in she opinion of other , by the irritable refinement of she own mind , and the too great importance place by she on the delicacies of a strong sensibility , and the graces of a polished manner . like half the rest of the world , if more than half there be that be clever and gand , , with excellent ability and a excellent disposition , be neither reasonable nor candid . she expect from other people the same opinion and feeling as she own , and she judge of they motives by the immediate effect of they action on herself . thus a circumstance occur , while the sister be together in they own room after breakfast , which sink the heart of still lower in she estimation ; because , through she own weakness , it chance to prove a source of fresh pain to herself , though be governed in it by a impulse of the utmost goodwill . with a letter in she outstretched hand , and countenance gaily smile , from the persuasion of bring comfort , she enter they room , say , " now , my dear , I bring you something that I be sure will do you good . " hear enough . in one moment she imagination place before she a letter from , full of tenderness and contrition , explanatory of all that have pass , satisfactory , convincing ; and instantly follow by himself , rush eagerly into the room to inforce , at she foot , by the eloquence of he eye , the assurance of he letter . the work of one moment be destroy by the next . the hand write of she mother , never till then unwelcome , be before she ; and , in the acuteness of the disappointment which follow such a ecstasy of more than hope , she feel as if , till that instant , she have never suffer . the cruelty of no language , within she reach in she moment of happiest eloquence , could have express ; and now she could reproach she only by the tear which stream from she eye with passionate violence -- a reproach , however , so entirely lose on its object , that after many expression of pity , she withdraw , still refer she to the letter of comfort . but the letter , when she be calm enough to read it , bring little comfort . fill every page . she mother , still confident of they engagement , and rely as warmly as ever on he constancy , have only be rouse by 's application , to intreat from greater openness towards they both ; and this , with such tenderness towards she , such affection for , and such a conviction of they future happiness in each other , that she weep with agony through the whole of it . all she impatience to be at home again now return ; she mother be dearer to she than ever ; dearer through the very excess of she mistaken confidence in , and she be wildly urgent to be gone . , unable herself to determine whether it be better for to be in or at , offer no counsel of she own except of patience till they mother 's wish could be know ; and at length she obtain she sister 's consent to wait for that knowledge . leave they earlier than usual ; for she could not be easy till the and be able to grieve as much as herself ; and positively refuse 's offer attendance , go out alone for the rest of the morning . , with a very heavy heart , aware of the pain she be go to communicate , and perceive , by 's letter , how ill she have succeed in lay any foundation for it , then sit down to write she mother a account of what have pass , and entreat she direction for the future ; while , who come into the drawing - room on 's go away , remain fix at the table where wrote , watch the advancement of she pen , grieve over she for the hardship of such a task , and grieve still more fondly over its effect on she mother . in this manner they have continue about a quarter of a hour , when , whose nerve could not then bear any sudden noise , be start by a rap at the door . " who can this be ? " cry . " so early too ! I think we have be safe . " move to the window -- " it be ! " say she , with vexation . " we be never safe from . " " he will not come in , as be from home . " " I will not trust to that , " retreat to she own room . " a man who have nothing to do with he own time have no conscience in he intrusion on that of other . " the event prove she conjecture right , though it be found on injustice and error ; for do
do come in ; and , who be convince that solicitude for bring he thither , and who see that solicitude in he disturbed and melancholy look , and in he anxious though brief inquiry after she , could not forgive she sister for esteem he so lightly . " I meet in , " say he , after the first salutation , " and she encourage I to come on ; and I be the more easily encourage , because I think it probable that I might find you alone , which I be very desirous of do . my object -- my wish -- my sole wish in desire it -- I hope , I believe it be -- be to be a means of give comfort ;-- no , I must not say comfort -- not present comfort -- but conviction , last conviction to you sister 's mind . my regard for she , for yourself , for you mother -- will you allow I to prove it , by relate some circumstance which nothing but a very sincere regard -- nothing but a earnest desire of be useful -- I think I be justifi -- though where so many hour have be spend in convincing myself that I be right , be there not some reason to fear I may be wrong ? " he stop . " I understand you , " say . " you have something to tell I of , that will open he character farther . you tell it will be the greatest act of friendship that can be shew . my gratitude will be insure immediately by any information tend to that end , and must be gain by it in time . pray , pray let I hear it . " " you shall ; and , to be brief , when I quit last , -- but this will give you no idea -- I must go farther back . you will find I a very awkward narrator , ; I hardly know where to begin . a short account of myself , I believe , will be necessary , and it shall be a short one . on such a subject , " sigh heavily , " can I have little temptation to be diffuse . " he stopt a moment for recollection , and then , with another sigh , go on . " you have probably entirely forget a conversation --( it be not to be suppose that it could make any impression on you ) -- a conversation between we one evening at -- it be the evening of a dance -- in which I allude to a lady I have once know , as resembling , in some measure , you sister . " " indeed , " answer , " I have not forget it . " he look pleased by this remembrance , and add , " if I be not deceive by the uncertainty , the partiality of tender recollection , there be a very strong resemblance between they , as well in mind as person . the same warmth of heart , the same eagerness of fancy and spirit . this lady be one of my nearest relation , a orphan from she infancy , and under the guardianship of my father . we ag be nearly the same , and from we earliest year we be playfellow and friends . I can not remember the time when I do not love ; and my affection for she , as we grow up , be such , as perhaps , judge from my present forlorn and cheerless gravity , you might think I incapable of have ever feel . she be , for I , be , I believe , fervent as the attachment of you sister to and it be , though from a different cause , no less unfortunate . at seventeen she be lose to I for ever . she be married -- marry against she inclination to my brother . she fortune be large , and we family estate much encumber . and this , I fear , be all that can be say for the conduct of one , who be at once she uncle and guardian . my brother do not deserve she ; he do not even love she . I have hope that she regard for I would support she under any difficulty , and for some time it do ; but at last the misery of she situation , for she experienced great unkindness , overcame all she resolution , and though she have promise I that nothing -- but how blindly I relate ! I have never tell you how this be bring on . we be within a few hour of elop together for . the treachery , or the folly , of my cousin 's maid betraye we . I be banish to the house of a relation far distant , and she be allow no liberty , no society , no amusement , till my father 's point be gai . I have depend on she fortitude too far , and the blow be a severe one -- but have she marriage be happy , so young as I then be , a few month must have reconcile I to it , or at least I should not have now to lament it . this however be not the case . my brother have no regard for she ; he pleasure be not what they ought to have been , and from the first he treat she unkindly . the consequence of this , upon a mind so young , so lively , so inexperienced as 's , be but too natural . she resign herself at first to all the misery of she situation ; and happy have it be if she have not live
live to overcome those regret which the remembrance of I occasion . but can we wonder that , with such a husband to provoke inconstancy , and without a friend to advise or restrain she ( for my father liv only a few month after they marriage , and I be with my regiment in the ) she should fall ? have I remain in , perhaps -- but I mean to promote the happiness of both by remove from she for year , and for that purpose have procure my exchange . the shock which she marriage have give I , " he continue , in a voice of great agitation , " be of trifling weight -- be nothing to what I feel when I hear , about two year afterwards , of she divorce . it be that which throw this gloom ,-- even now the recollection of what I suffer -- " he could say no more , and rise hastily walk for a few minute about the room . , affect by he relation , and still more by he distress , could not speak . he see she concern , and come to she , take she hand , press it , and kiss it with grateful respect . a few minute more of silent exertion enable he to proceed with composure . " it be nearly three year after this unhappy period before I return to . my first care , when I do arrive , be of course to seek for she ; but the search be as fruitless as it be melancholy . I could not trace she beyond she first seducer , and there be every reason to fear that she have remove from he only to sink deeper in a life of sin . she legal allowance be not adequate to she fortune , nor sufficient for she comfortable maintenance , and I lear not from my brother that the power of receive it have be make over some month before to another person . he imagine , and calmly could he imagine it , that she extravagance , and consequent distress , have oblige she to dispose of it for some immediate relief . at last , however , and after I have be six month in , I do find she . regard for a former servant of my own , who have since fall into misfortune , carry I to visit he in a spunging - house , where he be confine for debt ; and there , the same house , under a similar confinement , be my unfortunate sister . so altered -- so faded -- wear down by acute suffering of every kind ! hardly could I believe the melancholy and sickly figure before I , to be the remains of the lovely , blooming , healthful girl , on whom I have once do . what I endure in so behold she -- but I have no right to wound you feeling by attempting to describe it -- I have pain you too much already . that she be , to all appearance , in the last stage of a consumption , be -- yes , in such a situation it be my greatest comfort . life could do nothing for she , beyond give time for a better preparation for death ; and that be give . I see she place in comfortable lodging , and under proper attendants ; I visit she every day during the rest of she short life : I be with she in she last moment . " again he stop to recover himself ; and speak she feeling in a exclamation of tender concern , at the fate of he unfortunate friend . " you sister , I hope , can not be offend , " say he , " by the resemblance I have fancie between she and my poor disgrac relation . they fate , they fortune , can not be the same ; and have the natural sweet disposition of the one be guard by a firmer mind , or a happier marriage , she might have be all that you will live to see the other be . but to what do all this lead ? I seem to have be distresse you for nothing . ah ! -- a subject such as this -- untouched for fourteen year -- it be dangerous to handle it at all ! I will be more collected -- more concise . she leave to my care she only child , a little girl , the offspring of she first guilty connection , who be then about three year old . she love the child , and have always keep it with she . it be a value , a precious trust to I ; and gladly would I have discharge it in the strictest sense , by watch over she education myself , have the nature of we situation allow it ; but I have no family , no home ; and my little be therefore place at school . I see she there whenever I could , and after the death of my brother , ( which happen about five year ago , and which leave to I the possession of the family property , ) she visit I at . I call she a distant relation ; but I be well aware that I have in general be suspect of a much nearer connection with she . it be now three year ago ( she have just reach she fourteenth year , ) that I remove she from school , to place she under the care of a very respectable woman , reside in , who have the charge of four or five other girl of about the same time of life ; and for two year I have every reason to be
be pleased with she situation . but last , almost a twelvemonth back , she suddenly disappear . I have allow she , ( imprudently , as it have since turn out , ) at she earnest desire , to go to with one of she young friend , who be attend she father there for he health . I know he to be a very good sort of man , and I think well of he daughter -- better than she deserv , for , with a most obstinate and ill - judge secrecy , she would tell nothing , would give no clue , though she certainly know all . he , she father , a well - mean , but not a quick - sighted man , could really , I believe , give no information ; for he have be generally confin to the house , while the girl be range over the town and make what acquaintance they choose ; and he try to convince I , as thoroughly as he be convince himself , of he daughter 's be entirely unconcerned in the business . in short , I could learn nothing but that she be go ; all the rest , for eight long month , be leave to conjecture . what I think , what I fear , may be imagine ; and what I suffer too . " " good heaven ! " cry , " could it be -- wcould ! " -- " the first news that reach I of she , " he continue , " come in a letter from herself , last . it be forward to I from , and I receive it on the very morning of we intend party to ; and this be the reason of my leave so suddenly , which I be sure must at the time have appear strange to every body , and which I believe give offence to some . do imagine , I suppose , when he look censure I for incivility in break up the party , that I be call away to the relief of one whom he have make poor and miserable ; but have he know it , what would it have avail ? would he have be less gay or less happy in the smile of you sister ? no , he have already do that , which no man who can feel for another would do . he have leave the girl whose youth and innocence he have seduce , in a situation of the utmost distress , with no creditable home , no help , no friend , ignorant of he address ! he have leave she , promise to return ; he neither return , nor write , nor relieve she . " " this be beyond every thing ! " exclaim . " he character be now before you ; expensive , dissipate , and worse than both . know all this , as I have now know it many week , guess what I must have feel on see you sister as fond of he as ever , and on be assure that she be to marry he : guess what I must have felt for all you sake . when I come to you last week and find you alone , I come determined to know the truth ; though irresolute what to do when it be know . my behaviour must have seem strange to you then ; but now you will comprehend it . to suffer you all to be so deceive ; to see you sister -- but what could I do ? I have no hope of interfering with success ; and sometimes I think you sister 's influence might yet reclaim he . but now , after such dishonorable usage , who can tell what be he design on she . whatever they may have be , however , she may now , and hereafter doubtless will turn with gratitude towards she own condition , when she compare it with that of my poor , when she consider the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor girl , and picture she to herself , with a affection for he so strong , still as strong as she own , and with a mind torment by self - reproach , which must attend she through life . surely this comparison must have its use with she . she will feel she own suffering to be nothing . they proceed from no misconduct , and can bring no disgrace . on the contrary , every friend must be make still more she friend by they . Concern for she unhappiness , and respect for she fortitude under it , must strengthen every attachment . use you own discretion , however , in communicate to she what I have tell you . you must know best what will be its effect ; but have I not seriously , and from my heart believe it might be of service , might lessen she regret , I would not have suffer myself to trouble you with this account of my family affliction , with a recital which may seem to have be intend to raise myself at the expense of other . " 's thanks follow this speech with grateful earnestness ; attend too with the assurance of she expect material advantage to , from the communication of what have pass . " I have be more pained , " say she , " by she endeavors to acquit he than by all the rest ; for it irritate she mind more than the most perfect conviction of he unworthiness can do . now , though at first she will suffer much , I be sure she will soon become easier . have you , " she continue , after a short silence , " ever
ever see since you leave he at ? " " yes , " he reply gravely , " once I have . one meeting be unavoidable . " , start by he manner , look at he anxiously , say , " what ? have you meet he to -- " " I could meet he no other way . have confess to I , though most reluctantly , the name of she lover ; and when he return to town , which be within a fortnight after myself , we meet by appointment , he to defend , I to punish he conduct . we return unwounded , and the meeting , therefore , never get abroad . " sigh over the fancied necessity of this ; but to a man and a soldier she presume not to censure it . " , " say , after a pause , " have be the unhappy resemblance between the fate of mother and daughter ! and so imperfectly have I discharge my trust ! " " be she still in town ? " " no ; as soon as she recovere from she lie - in , for I find she near she delivery , I remove she and she child into the country , and there she remain . " Recollect , soon afterwards , that he be probably divide from she sister , he put a end to he visit , receive from she again the same grateful acknowledgment , and leave she full of compassion and esteem for he . chapter 32 when the particular of this conversation be repeat by to she sister , as they very soon were , the effect on she be not entirely such as the former have hope to see . not that appear to distrust the truth of any part of it , for she listen to it all with the most steady and submissive attention , make neither objection nor remark , attempt no vindication of , and seem to show by she tear that she feel it to be impossible . but though this behaviour assure Elinor that the conviction of this guilt be carry home to she mind , though she see with satisfaction the effect of it , in she no longer avoid when he call , in she speak to he , even voluntarily speak , with a kind of compassionate respect , and though she see she spirits less violently irritate than before , she do not see she less wretch . she mind do become settled , but it be settle in a gloomy dejection . she feel the loss of 's character yet more heavily than she have feel the loss of he heart ; he seduction and desertion of , the misery of that poor girl , and the doubt of what he design might have be on herself , prey altogether so much on she spirit , that she could not bring herself to speak of what she feel even to ; and , brood over she sorrow in silence , give more pain to she sister than could have be communicate by the most open and most frequent confession of they . to give the feeling or the language of on receive and answer 's letter would be only to give a repetition of what she daughter have already feel and say ; of a disappointment hardly less painful than 's , and a indignation even greater than 's . long letter from she , quickly succeed each other , arrive to tell all that she suffer and think ; to express she anxious solicitude for , and entreat she would bear up with fortitude under this misfortune . bad indeed must the nature of 's affliction be , when she mother could talk of fortitude ! mortify and humiliate must be the origin of those regret , which she could wish she not to indulge ! against the interest of she own individual comfort , have determine that it would be better for to be any where , at that time , than at , where every thing within she view would be bring back the past in the strongest and most afflict manner , by constantly place before she , such as she have always see he there . she recommend it to she daughter , therefore , by all means not to shorten they visit to ; the length of which , though never exactly fix , have be expect by all to comprise at least five or six week . a variety of occupation , of object , and of company , which could not be procure at , would be inevitable there , and might yet , she hope , cheat , at time , into some interest beyond herself , and even into some amusement , much as the idea of both might now be spur by she . from all danger of see again , she mother consider she to be at least equally safe in town as in the country , since he acquaintance must now be drop by all who call themselves she friend . Design could never bring they in each other 's way : negligence could never leave they expose to a surprise ; and chance have less in its favour in the crowd of than even in the retirement of , where it might force he before she while pay that visit at on he marriage , which , from foresee at first as a probable event , have bring herself to expect as a certain one . she have yet another reason for wish she child to remain where they be ; a letter from she son - in - law have tell she that he and he wife be to be in town before the middle of , and she judge it right that they should
should sometimes see they brother . have promise to be guide by she mother 's opinion , and she submit to it therefore without opposition , though it prove perfectly different from what she wish and expect , though she feel it to be entirely wrong , form on mistaken grounds , and that by require she longer continuance in it deprive she of the only possible alleviation of she wretchedness , the personal sympathy of she mother , and doom she to such society and such scene as must prevent she ever know a moment 's rest . but it be a matter of great consolation to she , that what bring evil to herself would bring good to she sister ; and , on the other hand , suspect that it would not be in she power to avoid entirely , comforte herself by think , that though they longer stay would therefore militate against she own happiness , it would be better for than a immediate return into . she carefulness in guard she sister from ever hear 's name mention , be not throw away . , though without know it herself , reap all its advantage ; for neither , nor , nor even herself , ever speak of he before she . wish that the same forbearance could have extend towards herself , but that be impossible , and she be oblige to listen day after day to the indignation of they all . , could not have think it possible . " a man of whom he have always have such reason to think well ! such a good - natured fellow ! he do not believe there be a bolder rider in ! it be a unaccountable business . he wish he at the devil with all he heart . he would not speak another word to he , meet he where he might , for all the world ! no , not if it be to be by the side of covert , and they be keep watch for two hour together . such a scoundrel of a fellow ! such a deceitful dog ! it be only the last time they meet that he have offer he one of 's puppies ! and this be the end of it ! " , in she way , be equally angry . " she be determined to drop he acquaintance immediately , and she be very thankful that she have never be acquaint with he at all . she wish with all she heart be not so near ; but it do not signify , for it be a great deal too far off to visit ; she hate he so much that she be resolve never to mention he name again , and she should tell everybody she see , how good - for - nothing he be . " the rest of 's sympathy be shewn in procure all the particular in she power of the approaching marriage , and communicate they to . she could soon tell at what coachmaker 's the new carriage be build , by what painter 's portrait be draw , and at what warehouse 's clothes might be see . the calm and polite unconcern of on the occasion be a happy relief to 's spirit , oppress as they often be by the clamorous kindness of the other . it be a great comfort to she to be sure of excite no interest in one person at least among they circle of friend : a great comfort to know that there be one who would meet she without feel any curiosity after particular , or any anxiety for she sister 's health . every qualification be raise at time , by the circumstance of the moment , to more than its real value ; and she be sometimes worried down by officious condolence to rate good - breed as more indispensable to comfort than good - nature . express she sense of the affair about once every day , or twice , if the subject occur very often , by say , " it be very shocking , indeed ! " and by the means of this continual though gentle vent , be able not only to see the from the first without the smallest emotion , but very soon to see they without recollect a word of the matter ; and have thus support the dignity of she own sex , and speak she decide censure of what be wrong in the other , she think herself at liberty to attend to the interest of she own assemblie , and therefore determine ( though rather against the opinion of ) that as . would at once be a woman of elegance and fortune , to leave she card with she as soon as she marry . 's delicate , unobtrusive enquirie be never unwelcome to . he have abundantly earn the privilege of intimate discussion of she sister 's disappointment , by the friendly zeal with which he have endeavoure to soften it , and they always converse with confidence . he chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing past sorrow and present humiliation , be give in the pitying eye with which sometimes observe he , and the gentleness of she voice whenever ( though it do not often happen ) she be oblige , or could oblige herself to speak to he . these assure he that he exertion have produce a increase of good - will towards himself , and these give hope of its be farther augment hereafter ; but , who know nothing of all this , who know only that the continue as grave as ever , and that she could neither prevail on he to make the offer himself , nor commission she to make it for he , begin , at the end of
of two day , to think that , instead of , they would not be marry till , and by the end of a week that it would not be a match at all . the good understanding between the and seem rather to declare that the honour of the mulberry - tree , the canal , and the yew arbour , would all be make over to she ; and have , for some time cease to think at all of . Early in , within a fortnight from the receipt of 's letter , have the painful office of inform she sister that he be marry . she have take care to have the intelligence convey to herself , as soon as it be know that the ceremony be over , as she be desirous that should not receive the first notice of it from the public papers , which she see she eagerly examine every morning . she receive the news with resolute composure ; make no observation on it , and at first she no tear ; but after a short time they would burst out , and for the rest of the day , she be in a state hardly less pitiable than when she first learn to expect the event . the leave town as soon as they be marry ; and now hope , as there could be no danger of she see either of they , to prevail on she sister , who have never yet leave the house since the blow first fall , to go out again by degree as she have do before . about this time the two , lately arrive at they cousin 's house in 's , , present themselves again before they more grand relation in and ; and be welcome by they all with great cordiality . only be sorry to see they . they presence always give she pain , and she hardly know how to make a very gracious return to the overpower delight of in find she Still in town . " I should have be quite disappointed if I have not find you here Still , " say she repeatedly , with a strong emphasis on the word . " but I always think I . I be almost sure you would not leave yet awhile ; though you tell I , you know , at , that you should not stay above a month . but I think , at the time , that you would most likely change you mind when it come to the point . it would have be such a great pity to have go away before you brother and sister come . and now to be sure you will be in no hurry to be gone . I be amazingly glad you do not keep to you Word . " perfectly understand she , and be force to use all she self - command to make it appear that she do not . " well , my dear , " say , " and how do you travel ? " " not in the stage , I assure you , " reply , with quick exultation ; " we come post all the way , and have a very smart beau to attend we . be come to town , and so we think we would join he in a post-chaise ; and he behave very genteelly , and pay ten or twelve shilling more than we do . " " oh , oh ! " cry ; " very pretty , indeed ! and the Doctor be a single man , I warrant you . " " there now , " say , affectedly simper , " everybody laugh at I so about the Doctor , and I can not think why . my cousin say they be sure I have make a conquest ; but for my part I declare I never think about he from one hour 's end to another . ' ! here come you beau , , ' my cousin say t'other day , when she see he cross the street to the house . my beau , indeed ! say I -- I can not think who you mean . the Doctor be no beau of mine . " " aye , aye , that be very pretty talk -- but it will not do -- the Doctor be the man , I see . " " no , indeed ! " reply she cousin , with affected earnestness , " and I beg you will contradict it , if you ever hear it talk of . " directly give she the gratify assurance that she certainly would not , and be make completely happy . " I suppose you will go and stay with you brother and sister , , when they come to town , " say , return , after a cessation of hostile hints , to the charge . " no , I do not think we shall . " " oh , yes , I dare say you will . " would not humour she by farther opposition . " what a charme thing it be that can spare you both for so long a time together ! " " long a time , indeed ! " interpose . " why , they visit be but just begin ! " be silenced . " I be sorry we can not see you sister , , " say . " I be sorry she be not well -- " for have leave the room on they arrival . " you be very good . my sister will be equally sorry to miss the pleasure of see you ; but she have be very much plague lately with nervous head - ach , which make she unfit for company or conversation . " " oh
oh , dear , that be a great pity ! but such old friend as and I !-- I think she might see ; and I be sure we would not speak a word . " , with great civility , decline the proposal . she sister be perhaps laid down upon the bed , or in she dressing gow , and therefore not able to come to they . " oh , if that be all , " cry , " we can just as well go and see she . " begin to find this impertinence too much for she temper ; but she be save the trouble of check it , by 's sharp reprimand , which now , as on many occasion , though it do not give much sweetness to the manners of one sister , be of advantage in govern those of the other . chapter 33 after some opposition , yield to she sister 's entreaty , and consent to go out with she and one morning for half a hour . she expressly condition , however , for pay no visit , and would do no more than accompany they to 's in , where be carry on a negotiation for the exchange of a few old - fashioned jewel of she mother . when they stop at the door , recollect that there be a lady at the other end of the street on whom she ought to call ; and as she have no business at 's , it be resolved , that while she young friend transact they 's , she should pay she visit and return for they . on ascend the stair , the find so many people before they in the room , that there be not a person at liberty to tend to they order ; and they be oblige to wait . all that could be do be , to sit down at that end of the counter which seem to promise the quickest succession ; one gentleman only be stand there , and it be probable that be not without hope of excit he politeness to a quicker despatch . but the correctness of he eye , and the delicacy of he taste , prove to be beyond he politeness . he be give order for a toothpick - case for himself , and till its size , shape , and ornament be determine , all of which , after examine and debat for a quarter of a hour over every toothpick - case in the shop , be finally arrange by he own inventive fancy , he have no leisure to bestow any other attention on the two lady , than what be comprise in three or four very broad stare ; a kind of notice which serve to imprint on the remembrance of a person and face , of strong , natural , sterl insignificance , though adorn in the first style of fashion . be spare from the troublesome feeling of contempt and resentment , on this impertinent examination of they feature , and on the puppyism of he manner in decide on all the different horror of the different toothpick - case present to he inspection , by remain unconscious of it all ; for she be as well able to collect she thought within herself , and be as ignorant of what be pass around she , in 's shop , as in she own bedroom . at last the affair be decide . the ivory , the gold , and the pearl , all receive they appointment , and the gentleman have name the last day on which he existence could be continue without the possession of the toothpick - case , draw on he glove with leisurely care , and bestow another glance on the , but such a one as see rather to demand than express admiration , walk off with a happy air of real conceit and affect indifference . lose no time in bring she business forward , be on the point of conclude it , when another gentleman present himself at she side . she turn she eye towards he face , and find he with some surprise to be she brother . they affection and pleasure in meeting be just enough to make a very creditable appearance in 's shop . be really far from be sorry to see he sister again ; it rather give they satisfaction ; and he inquirie after they mother be respectful and attentive . find that he and have be in town two day . " I wish very much to call upon you yesterday , " say he , " but it be impossible , for we be oblige to take to see the wild beasts at ; and we spend the rest of the day with . be vastly pleased . this morning I have fully intended to call on you , if I could possibly find a spare half hour , but one have always so much to do on first come to town . I be come here to bespeak Fanny a seal . but tomorrow I think I shall certainly be able to call in , and be introduce to you friend . I understand she be a woman of very good fortune . and the too , you must introduce I to they . as my mother - in - law 's relation , I shall be happy to show they every respect . they be excellent neighbour to you in the country , I understand . " " excellent indeed . they attention to we comfort , they friendliness in every particular , be more than I can express . " " I be extremely glad to hear it , upon my word ; extremely glad indeed . but so it ought to be ; they be people of
of large fortune , they be related to you , and every civility and accommodation that can serve to make you situation pleasant might be reasonably expect . and so you be most comfortably settle in you little cottage and want for nothing ! bring we a most charming account of the place : the most complete thing of its kind , he say , that ever be , and you all seem to enjoy it beyond any thing . it be a great satisfaction to we to hear it , I assure you . " do feel a little ashamed of she brother ; and be not sorry to be spare the necessity of answer he , by the arrival of 's servant , who come to tell she that he mistress wait for they at the door . attend they down stair , be introduce to at the door of she carriage , and repeat he hope of be able to call on they the next day , take leave . he visit be duly pay . he come with a pretence at a apology from they sister - in - law , for not come too ; " but she be so much engage with she mother , that really she have no leisure for go any where . " , however , assure he directly , that she should not stand upon ceremony , for they be all cousin , or something like it , and she should certainly wait on very soon , and bring she sister to see she . he manners to they , though calm , be perfectly kind ; to , most attentively civil ; and on 's come in soon after himself , he eye he with a curiosity which seem to say , that he only want to know he to be rich , to be equally civil to he . after stay with they half a hour , he ask to walk with he to conduit , and introduce he to and . the weather be remarkably fine , and she readily consent . as soon as they be out of the house , he enquiry begin . " who be ? be he a man of fortune ? " " yes ; he have very good property in . " " I be glad of it . he seem a most gentlemanlike man ; and I think , , I may congratulate you on the prospect of a very respectable establishment in life . " " I , brother ! what do you mean ? " " he like you . I observ he narrowly , and be convince of it . what be the amount of he fortune ? " " I believe about two thousand a year . " " two thousand a - year ; " and then work himself up to a pitch of enthusiastic generosity , he add , " , I wish with all my heart it be twice as much , for you sake . " " indeed I believe you , " reply ; " but I be very sure that have not the smallest wish of marrying Me . " " you be mistaken , ; you be very much mistaken . a very little trouble on you side secure he . perhaps just at present he may be undecided ; the smallness of you fortune may make he hang back ; he friend may all advise he against it . but some of those little attention and encouragement which lady can so easily give will fix he , in spite of himself . and there can be no reason why you should not try for he . it be not to be suppose that any prior attachment on you side -- in short , you know as to a attachment of that kind , it be quite out of the question , the objection be insurmountable -- you have too much sense not to see all that . must be the man ; and no civility shall be want on my part to make he pleased with you and you family . it be a match that must give universal satisfaction . in short , it be a kind of thing that " -- lowere he voice to a important whisper --" will be exceedingly welcome to all party . " Recollect himself , however , he add , " that be , I mean to say -- you friend be all truly anxious to see you well settle ; Fanny particularly , for she have you interest very much at heart , I assure you . and she mother too , , a very good - natured woman , I be sure it would give she great pleasure ; she say as much the other day . " would not vouchsafe any answer . " it would be something remarkable , now , " he continue , " something droll , if should have a brother and I a sister settling at the same time . and yet it be not very unlikely . " " be , " say , with resolution , " go to be marry ? " " it be not actually settle , but there be such a thing in agitation . he have a most excellent mother . , with the utmost liberality , will come forward , and settle on he a thousand a year , if the match take place . the lady be the Hon . , only daughter of the late , with thirty thousand pound . a very desirable connection on both side , and I have not a doubt of its take place in time . a thousand a - year be a great deal for a mother to give away , to make over for ever ; but have a noble spirit . to
to give you another instance of she liberality :-- the other day , as soon as we come to town , aware that money could not be very plenty with we just now , she put bank - note into 's hand to the amount of two hundred pound . and extremely acceptable it be , for we must live at a great expense while we be here . " he pause for she assent and compassion ; and she force herself to say , " you expense both in town and country must certainly be considerable ; but you income be a large one . " " not so large , I dare say , as many people suppose . I do not mean to complain , however ; it be undoubtedly a comfortable one , and I hope will in time be better . the enclosure of , now carry on , be a most serious drain . and then I have make a little purchase within this half year ; , you must remember the place , where old use to live . the land be so very desirable for I in every respect , so immediately adjoin my own property , that I feel it my duty to buy it . I could not have answer it to my conscience to let it fall into any other hand . a man must pay for he convenience ; and it have cost I a vast deal of money . " " more than you think it really and intrinsically worth . " " why , I hope not that . I might have sell it again , the next day , for more than I give : but , with regard to the purchase - money , I might have be very unfortunate indeed ; for the stock be at that time so low , that if I have not happen to have the necessary sum in my banker 's hand , I must have sell out to very great loss . " could only smile . " other great and inevitable expensis too we have have on first come to . we respecte father , as you well know , bequeath all the effect that remain at ( and very valuable they be ) to you mother . far be it from I to repine at he do so ; he have a undoubted right to dispose of he own property as he choose , but , in consequence of it , we have be oblige to make large purchase of linen , china , &c. to supply the place of what be take away . you may guess , after all these expense , how very far we must be from be rich , and how acceptable 's kindness be . " " certainly , " say ; " and assist by she liberality , I hope you may yet live to be in easy circumstance . " " another year or two may do much towards it , " he gravely reply ; " but however there be still a great deal to be do . there be not a stone laid of 's green - house , and nothing but the plan of the flower - garden mark out . " " where be the green - house to be ? " " upon the knoll behind the house . the old walnut tree be all come down to make room for it . it will be a very fine object from many part of the park , and the flower - garden will slope down just before it , and be exceedingly pretty . we have clear away all the old thorn that grow in patch over the brow . " keep she concern and she censure to herself ; and be very thankful that be not present , to share the provocation . have now say enough to make he poverty clear , and to do away the necessity of buy a pair of ear- ring for each of he sister , in he next visit at 's he thought take a cheerfuller turn , and he begin to congratulate on have such a friend as . " she seem a most valuable woman indeed -- she house , she style of living , all bespeak a exceed good income ; and it be a acquaintance that have not only be of great use to you hitherto , but in the end may prove materially advantageous . -- she invite you to town be certainly a vast thing in you favour ; and indeed , it speak altogether so great a regard for you , that in all probability when she die you will not be forgote .-- she must have a great deal to leave . " " nothing at all , I should rather suppose ; for she have only she jointure , which will descmend to she child . " " but it be not to be imagine that she live up to she income . few people of common prudence will do that ; and whatever she save , she will be able to dispose off . " " and do you not think it more likely that she should leave it to she daughter , than to we ? " " she daughter be both exceedingly well marry , and therefore I can not perceive the necessity of she remember they farther . whereas , in my opinion , by she take so much notice of you , and treat you in this kind of way , she have give you a sort of claim on she future consideration , which a conscientious woman would not disregard . nothing can be kinder than she behaviour ; and she can hardly do all this , without be aware of the expectation it raise . " " but she
she raise none in those most concerned . indeed , brother , you anxiety for we welfare and prosperity carry you too far . " " why , to be sure , " say he , seem to recollect himself , " people have little , have very little in they power . but , my dear , what be the matter with ?-- she look very unwell , have lose she colour , and be grow quite thing . be she ill ? " " she be not well , she have have a nervous complaint on she for several week . " " I be sorry for that . at she time of life , any thing of a illness destroy the bloom for ever ! she be have be a very short one ! she be as handsome a girl last , as I ever see ; and as likely to attract the man . there be something in she style of beauty , to please they particularly . I remember use to say that she would marry sooner and better than you do ; not but what she be exceedingly fond of you , but so it happen to strike she . she will be mistaken , however . I question whether now , will marry a man worth more than five or six hundred a - year , at the utmost , and I be very much deceive if you do not do better . ! I know very little of ; but , my dear , I shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it ; and I think I can answer for you have and myself among the earliest and best pleased of you visitor . " try very seriously to convince he that there be no likelihood of she marry ; but it be a expectation of too much pleasure to himself to be relinquish , and he be really resolve on seek a intimacy with that gentleman , and promote the marriage by every possible attention . he have just compunction enough for have do nothing for he sister himself , to be exceedingly anxious that everybody else should do a great deal ; and a offer from , or a legacy from , be the easiest means of atoning for he own neglect . they be lucky enough to find at home , and come in before they visit end . abundance of civility pass on all side . be ready to like anybody , and though do not seem to know much about horse , he soon set he down as a very good - natured fellow : while see enough of fashion in he appearance to think he acquaintance worth have ; and go away delighted with both . " I shall have a charming account to carry to , " say he , as he walk back with he sister . " be really a most elegant woman ! such a woman as I be sure will be glad to know . and too , a exceedingly well - behave woman , though not so elegant as she daughter . you sister need not have any scruple even of visiting , which , to say the truth , have be a little the case , and very naturally ; for we only know that Jennings be the widow of a man who have get all he money in a low way ; and and be both strongly prepossessed , that neither she nor she daughter be such kind of woman as would like to associate with . but now I can carry she a most satisfactory account of both . " chapter 34 Mrs . have so much confidence in she husband 's judgment , that she wait the very next day both on and she daughter ; and she confidence be reward by finde even the former , even the woman with whom she sister be stay , by no means unworthy she notice ; and as for , she find she one of the most charming woman in the world ! be equally pleased with . there be a kind of could hear selfishness on both side , which mutually attract they ; and they sympathise with each other in a insipid propriety of demeanor , and a general want of understanding . the same manners , however , which recommend to the good opinion of do not suit the fancy of , and to she she appear nothing more than a little proud -looking woman of uncordial address , who meet she husband 's sister without any affection , and almost without have anything to say to they ; for of the quarter of a hour bestow on , she sit at least seven minute and a half in silence . want very much to know , though she do not chuse to ask , whether be then in town ; but nothing would have induce voluntarily to mention he name before she , till able to tell she that he marriage with be resolve on , or till she husband 's expectation on be answer ; because she believe they still so very much attach to each other , that they could not be too sedulously divide in word and deed on every occasion . the intelligence however , which she would not give , soon flow from another quarter . come very shortly to 's compassion on be unable to see , though he have arrive in town with and . he da not come to 's buildings for fear of detection , and though they mutual impatience to meet , be not to be tell , they could do nothing at present but write . assure they himself of he be in town , within a very short time , by twice call in . twice be he card find on
on the table , when they return from they morning 's engagement . be please that he have call ; and still more pleased that she have miss he . the Dashwood be so prodigiously delighted with the , that , though not much in the habit of give anything , they determine to give they -- a dinner ; and soon after they acquaintance begin , invite they to dine in , where they have take a very good house for three month . they sister and be invite likewise , and be careful to secure , who , always glad to be where the be , receive he eager civility with some surprise , but much more pleasure . they be to meet ; but could not learn whether she son be to be of the party . the expectation of see she , however , be enough to make she interested in the engagement ; for though she could now meet 's mother without that strong anxiety which have once promise to attend such a introduction , though she could now see she with perfect indifference as to she opinion of herself , she desire of be in company with , she curiosity to know what she be like , be as lively as ever . the interest with which she thus anticipate the party , be soon afterwards increase , more powerfully than pleasantly , by she hear that the be also to be at it . so well have they recommend themselves to , so agreeable have they assiduity make they to she , that though be certainly not so elegant , and she sister not even genteel , she be as ready as to ask they to spend a week or two in ; and it happen to be particularly convenient to the , as soon as the 's invitation be know , that they visit should begin a few day before the party take place . they claim to the notice of , as the niece of the gentleman who for many year have have the care of she brother , might not have do much , however , towards procure they seat at she table ; but as 's guest they must be welcome ; and , who have long want to be personally know to the family , to have a nearer view of they character and she own difficulty , and to have a opportunity of endeavouring to please they , have seldom be happier in she life , than she be on receive 's card . on it be effect be very different . she begin immediately to determine , that who live with he mother , must be ask as he mother be , to a party give by he sister ; and to see he for the first time , after all that pass , in the company of !-- she hardly know how she could bear it ! these apprehension , perhaps , be not founde entirely on reason , and certainly not at all on truth . they be relieved however , not by she own recollection , but by the good will of , who believe herself to be inflict a severe disappointment when she tell she that certainly would not be in on , and even hope to be carry the pain still farther by persuade she that he be keep away by the extreme affection for herself , which he could not conceal when they be together . the important come that be to introduce the two young lady to this formidable mother - in - law . " Pity I , dear ! " say , as they walk up the stair together -- for the arrive so directly after , that they all follow the servant at the same time -- " there be nobody here but you , that can feel for I .-- I declare I can hardly stand . good gracious !-- in a moment I shall see the person that all my happiness depend on -- that be to be my mother ! " -- could have give she immediate relief by suggest the possibility of its be 's mother , rather than she own , whom they be about to behold ; but instead of do that , she assure she , and with great sincerity , that she do pity she -- to the utter amazement of , who , though really uncomfortable herself , hope at least to be a object of irrepressible envy to . be a little , thin woman , upright , even to formality , in she figure , and serious , even to sourness , in she aspect . she complexion be sallow ; and she feature small , without beauty , and naturally without expression ; but a lucky contraction of the brow have rescue she countenance from the disgrace of insipidity , by give it the strong character of pride and ill nature . she be not a woman of many word ; for , unlike people in general , she proportion they to the number of she idea ; and of the few syllable that do escape she , not one fell to the share of , whom she eye with the spirited determination of dislik she at all event . could not now be make unhappy by this behaviour .-- a few month ago it would have hurt she exceedingly ; but it be not in ' power to distress she by it now ; -- and the difference of she manners to the , a difference which see purposely make to humble she more , only amuse she . she could not but smile to see the graciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very person -- for be particularly distinguished -- whom of all other , have they know as much as
as she do , they would have be most anxious to mortify ; while she herself , who have comparatively no power to wound they , sit pointedly slighte by both . but while she smile at a graciousness so misapply , she could not reflect on the mean - spirit folly from which it spring , nor observe the study attention with which the courte its continuance , without thoroughly despise they all four . Lucy be all exultation on be so honorably distinguished ; and want only to be teaze about to be perfectly happy . the dinner be a grand one , the servant be numerous , and every thing bespeak the 's inclination for show , and the master 's ability to support it . in spite of the improvements and addition which be make to the estate , and in spite of its owner have once be within some thousand pound of be oblige to sell out at a loss , nothing give any symptom of that indigence which he have try to infer from it ;-- no poverty of any kind , except of conversation , appear -- but there , the deficiency be considerable . have not much to say for himself that be worth hearing , and he wife have still less . but there be no peculiar disgrace in this ; for it be very much the case with the chief of they visitor , who almost all laboure under one or other of these disqualification for be agreeable -- want of sense , either natural or improve -- want of elegance -- want of spirits -- or want of temper . when the lady withdraw to the drawing - room after dinner , this poverty be particularly evident , for the gentleman have supply the discourse with some variety -- the variety of politics , inclose land , and break horse -- but then it be all over ; and one subject only engage the lady till coffee come in , which be the comparative height of , and 's second son , who be nearly of the same age . have both the child be there , the affair might have be determine too easily by measure they at once ; but as only be present , it be all conjectural assertion on both side ; and every body have a right to be equally positive in they opinion , and to repeat it over and over again as often as they like . the party stood thus : the two mother , though each really convince that she own son be the tallest , politely decide in favour of the other . the two grandmother , with not less partiality , but more sincerity , be equally earnest in support of they own descendant . , who be hardly less anxious to please one parent than the other , think the boy be both remarkably tall for they age , and could not conceive that there could be the smallest difference in the world between they ; and , with yet greater address give it , as fast as she could , in favour of each . , have once deliver she opinion on 's side , by which she offend and still more , do not see the necessity of enforce it by any farther assertion ; and , when call on for she 's , offend they all , by declare that she have no opinion to give , as she have never think about it . before she remove from , have paint a very pretty pair of screen for she sister - in - law , which be now just mount and bring home , ornament she present draw room ; and these screen , catch the eye of on he follow the other gentleman into the room , be officiously hand by he to for he admiration . " these be do by my eldest sister , " say he ; " and you , as a man of taste , will , I dare say , be pleased with they . I do not know whether you have ever happen to see any of she performance before , but she be in general reckon to draw extremely well . " the Colonel , though disclaim all pretension to connoisseurship , warmly admire the screen , as he would have do any thing pain by ; and on the curiosity of the other be of course excited , they be hand round for general inspection . , not aware of they be 's work , particularly request to look at they ; and after they have receive gratify testimony of 's approbation , present they to she mother , considerately inform she , at the same time , that they be do by . " " -- say -- " very pretty , " -- and without regard they at all , return they to she daughter . perhaps think for a moment that she mother have be quite rude enough , -- for , colour a little , she immediately say , " they be very pretty , ma 'am - - a not they ? " but then again , the dread of have be too civil , too encourage herself , probably come over she , for she presently add , " do you not think they be something in 's style of painting , ? -- she do paint most delightfully !-- how beautifully she last landscape be do ! " " beautifully indeed ! but she do every thing well . " could not bear this .-- she be already greatly displease with ; and such ill - time praise of another , at 's expense , though she have not any notion of what be principally mean by it , provoke she immediately to say with warmth ,
, " this be admiration of a very particular kind !-- what be to we ?-- who know , or who care , for she ?-- it be of whom we think and speak . " and so say , she take the screen out of she sister - in - law 's hand , to admire they herself as they ink to be admire . look exceedingly angry , and draw herself up more stifinitely than ever , pronounce in retort this bitter philippic , " be 's daughter . " look very angry too , and she husband be all in a fright at he sister 's audacity . be much more hurt by 's warmth than she have be by what produce it ; but 's eye , as they be fix on , declare that he notice only what be amiable in it , the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a sister slighte in the smallest point . 's feeling do not stop here . the cold insolence of 's general behaviour to she sister , seem , to she , to foretell such difficulty and distress to , as she own wounded heart teach she to think of with horror ; and urge by a strong impulse of affectionate sensibility , she move after a moment , to she sister 's chair , and put one arm round she neck , and one cheek close to hers , say in a low , but eager , voice , " dear , dear , do not mind they . do not let they make you unhappy . " she could say no more ; she spirit be quite overcome , and hide she face on 's shoulder , she burst into tear . every body 's attention be call , and almost every body be concerned .-- rise up and go to they without know what he do .-- , with a very intelligent " ah ! poor dear , " immediately give she she salt ; and felt so desperately enrage against the author of this nervous distress , that he instantly change he seat to one close by , and give she , in a whisper , a brief account of the whole shocking affair . in a few minute , however , be recovere enough to put a end to the bustle , and sit down among the rest ; though she spirit retain the impression of what have pass , the whole evening . " poor ! " say she brother to , in a low voice , as soon as he could secure he attention ,-- " she have not such good health as she sister , -- she be very nervous , -- she have not 's constitution ; -- and one must allow that there be something very try to a young woman who have be a beauty in the loss of she personal attraction . you would not think it perhaps , but be remarkably handsome a few month ago ; quite as handsome as .-- now you see it be all gone . " chapter 35 's curiosity to see be satisfied .-- she have find in she every thing that could tend to make a farther connection between the family undesirable .-- she have see enough of she pride , she meanness , and she determine prejudice against herself , to comprehend all the difficulty that must have perplex the engagement , and retarde the marriage , of and herself , have he be otherwise free ; -- and she have see almost enough to be thankful for she own sake , that one greater obstacle preserve she from suffer under any other of 's creation , preserve she from all dependence upon she caprice , or any solicitude for she good opinion . or at least , if she do not bring herself quite to rejoice in 's be fetter to , she determine , that have be more amiable , she ink to have rejoice . she wonder that 's spirit could be so very much elevate by the civility of ; -- that she interest and she vanity should so very much blind she as to make the attention which see only pay she because she be not Elinor , appear a compliment to herself -- or to allow she to derive encouragement from a preference only give she , because she real situation be unknown . but that it be so , have not only be declare by 's eye at the time , but be declare over again the next morning more openly , for at she particular desire , set she down in on the chance of see alone , to tell she how happy she be . the chance prove a lucky one , for a message from soon after she arrive , carry away . " my dear friend , " cry , as soon as they be by themselves , " I come to talk to you of my happiness . could anything be so flatter as 's way of treat I yesterday ? so exceed affable as she be ! -- you know how I dread the thought of see she ; -- but the very moment I be introduce , there be such a affability in she behaviour as really should seem to say , she have quite take a fancy to I . now be not it so ?-- you see it all ; and be not you quite struck with it ? " " she be certainly very civil to you . " " civil !-- do you see nothing but only civility ?-- I see a vast deal more . such kindness as fall to the share of nobody but I !-- no pride , no hauteur , and you sister just the same -- all sweetness and affability !
! " wish to talk of something else , but still press she to own that she have reason for she happiness ; and be obliged to go on .-- " undoubtedly , if they have know you engagement , " say she , " nothing could be more flattering than they treatment of you ; -- but as that be not the case " -- " I guess you would say so " -- reply quickly -- " but there be no reason in the world why should seem to like I , if she do not , and she like I be every thing . you sha not talk I out of my satisfaction . I be sure it will all end well , and there will be no difficulty at all , to what I use to think . be a charming woman , and so be you sister . they be both delightful woman , indeed !-- I wonder I should never hear you say how agreeable be ! " to this have no answer to make , and do not attempt any . " be you ill , ?-- you seem low -- you do not speak ; -- sure you can not well . " " I never be in better health . " " I be glad of it with all my heart ; but really you do not look it . I should be sorry to have you ill ; you , that have be the greatest comfort to I in the world ! -- know what I should have do without you friendship. " -- try to make a civil answer , though doubt she own success . but it seem to satisfy , for she directly reply , " indeed I be perfectly convinced of you regard for I , and next to 's love , it be the greatest comfort I have .-- poor ! -- but now there be one good thing , we shall be able to meet , and meet pretty often , for 's delighte with , so we shall be a good deal in , I dare say , and spend half he time with he sister -- besides , and will visit now ; -- and and you sister be both so good to say more than once , they should always be glad to see I .-- they be such charming woman !-- I be sure if ever you tell you sister what I think of she , you can not speak too high . " but would not give she any encouragement to hope that she should tell she sister . continue . " I be sure I should have see it in a moment , if Ferrars have take a dislike to I . if she have only make I a formal courtesy , for instance , without say a word , and never after have take any notice of I , and never look at I in a pleasant way -- you know what i mean -- if I have be treat in that forbid sort of way , I should have give it all up in despair . I could not have stand it . for where she do dislike , I know it be most violent . " be prevent from make any reply to this civil triumph , by the door 's be thrown open , the servant 's announcing , and be immediately walk in . it be a very awkward moment ; and the countenance of each shew that it be so . they all look exceedingly foolish ; and seem to have as great a inclination to walk out of the room again , as to advance farther into it . the very circumstance , in its unpleasantest form , which they would each have be most anxious to avoid , have fall on they .-- they be not only all three together , but be together without the relief of any other person . the lady recovere themselves first . it be not 's business to put herself forward , and the appearance of secrecy must still be keep up . she could therefore only look she tenderness , and after slightly address he , say no more . but have more to do ; and so anxious be she , for he sake and she own , to do it well , that she force herself , after a moment 's recollection , to welcome he , with a look and manner that be almost easy , and almost open ; and another struggle , another effort still improve they . she would not allow the presence of , nor the consciousness of some injustice towards herself , to deter she from say that she be happy to see he , and that she have very much regret be from home , when he call before in . she would not be frightene from pay he those attention which , as a friend and almost a relation , be he due , by the observant eye of , though she soon perceive they to be narrowly watch she . she manners give some re-assurance to , and he have courage enough to sit down ; but he embarrassment still exceed that of the ladie in a proportion , which the case render reasonable , though he sex might make it rare ; for he heart have not the indifference of 's , nor could he conscience have quite the ease of 's . , with a demure and settle air , seem determined to make no contribution to the comfort of the other , and would not say a word ; and almost every thing that be say , proceed from , who be obliged to volunteer all the information about she mother 's health , they come to town , &
& c. which ought to have inquire about , but never do . she exertion do not stop here ; for she soon afterwards feel herself so heroically disposed as to determine , under pretence of fetching , to leave the other by themselves ; and she really do it , and that in the handsomest manner , for she loiter away several minute on the landing - place , with the most high - minded fortitude , before she go to she sister . when that be once do , however , it be time for the rapture of to cease ; for 's joy hurrie she into the drawing - room immediately . she pleasure in see he be like every other of she feeling , strong in itself , and strongly spoken . she meet he with a hand that would be take , and a voice that express the affection of a sister . " dear ! " she cry , " this be a moment of great happiness !-- this would almost make amend for every thing ? " try to return she kindness as it deserv , but before such witness he da not say half what he really feel . again they all sit down , and for a moment or two all be silent ; while be look with the most speak tenderness , sometimes at and sometimes at , regret only that they delight in each other should be check by 's unwelcome presence . be the first to speak , and it be to notice 's altered look , and express he fear of she not find agree with she . " oh , do not think of I ! " she reply with spirited earnestness , though she eye be fill with tear as she speak , " do not think of my health . be well , you see . that must be enough for we both . " this remark be not calculate to make or more easy , nor to conciliate the good will of , who look up at with no very benignant expression . " do you like ? " say , willing to say any thing that might introduce another subject . " not at all . I expect much pleasure in it , but I have find none . the sight of you , , be the only comfort it have afford ; and thank ! you be what you always be ! " she pause -- no one spoke . " I think , , " she presently add , " we must employ to take care of we in we return to . in a week or two , I suppose , we shall be go ; and , I trust , will not be very unwilling to accept the charge . " poor mutter something , but what it be , nobody know , not even himself . but , who see he agitation , and could easily trace it to whatever cause best pleased herself , be perfectly satisfied , and soon talk of something else . " we spend such a day , , in yesterday ! so dull , so wretchedly dull ! -- but I have much to say to you on that head , which can not be say now . " and with this admirable discretion do she defer the assurance of she finde they mutual relative more disagreeable than ever , and of she be particularly disgust with he mother , till they be more in private . " but why be you not there , ?-- why do you not come ? " " I be engage elsewhere . " " engage ! but what be that , when such friend be to be meet ? " " perhaps , , " cry , eager to take some revenge on she , " you think young man never stand upon engagement , if they have no mind to keep they , little as well as great . " be very angry , but seem entirely insensible of the sting ; for she calmly reply , " not so , indeed ; for , seriously speak , I be very sure that conscience only keep from . and I really believe he have the most delicate conscience in the world ; the most scrupulous in perform every engagement , however minute , and however it may make against he interest or pleasure . he be the most fearful of give pain , of wounding expectation , and the most incapable of be selfish , of any body I ever see . , it be so , and I will say it . what ! be you never to hear yourself praise !-- then you must be no friend of mine ; for those who will accept of my love and esteem , must submit to my open commendation . " the nature of she commendation , in the present case , however , happen to be particularly ill - suit to the feeling of two thirds of she auditor , and be so very unexhilarating to , that he very soon get up to go away . " go so soon ! " say ; " my dear , this must not be . " and draw he a little aside , she whisper she persuasion that could not stay much longer . but even this encouragement fail , for he would go ; and , who would have outstay he , have he visit last two hour , soon afterwards go away . " what can bring she here so often ? " say , on she leave they . " could not she see that we want she gone !-- how tea to ! " " why so ?-- we be all he friend , and have be the longest know
know to he of any . it be but natural that he should like to see she as well as ourselves . " look at she steadily , and say , " you know , , that this be a kind of talking which I can not bear . if you only hope to have you assertion contradict , as I must suppose to be the case , you ought to recollect that I be the last person in the world to do it . I can not descend to be tricke out of assurances , that be not really want . " she then leave the room ; and da not follow she to say more , for bound as she be by she promise of secrecy to , she could give no information that would convince ; and painful as the consequence of she still continue in a error might be , she be oblige to submit to it . all that she could hope , be that would not often expose she or himself to the distress of hear 's mistaken warmth , nor to the repetition of any other part of the pain that have attend they recent meeting -- and this she have every reason to expect . chapter 36 within a few day after this meeting , the newspaper announce to the world , that the lady of , be safely deliver of a son and heir ; a very interesting and satisfactory paragraph , at least to all those intimate connection who know it before . this event , highly important to 's happiness , produce a temporary alteration in the disposal of she time , and influence , in a like degree , the engagement of she young friend ; for as she wish to be as much as possible with , she go thither every morning as soon as she be dress , and do not return till late in the evening ; and the , at the particular request of the , spend the whole of every day , in every day in . for they own comfort they would much rather have remain , at least all the morning , in 's house ; but it be not a thing to be urge against the wish of everybody . they hour be therefore make over to and the two , by whom they company , in fact be as little value , as it be professedly seek . they have too much sense to be desirable companion to the former ; and by the latter they be consider with a jealous eye , as intrud on they ground , and share the kindness which they want to monopolize . though nothing could be more polite than 's behaviour to and , she do not really like they at all . because they neither flatter herself nor she child , she could not believe they good - nature ; and because they be fond of reading , she fancie they satirical : perhaps without exactly know what it be to be satirical ; but that do not signify . it be censure in common use , and easily give . they presence be a restraint both on she and on Lucy . it check the idleness of one , and the business of the other . be asham of do nothing before they , and the flattery which be proud to think of and administer at other time , she fear they would despise she for offering . Steele be the least discompose of the three , by they presence ; and it be in they power to reconcile she to it entirely . would either of they only have give she a full and minute account of the whole affair between and , she would have think herself amply reward for the sacrifice of the best place by the fire after dinner , which they arrival occasion . but this conciliation be not grant ; for though she often throw out expression of pity for she sister to , and more than once dropt a reflection on the inconstancy of beaux before , no effect be produce , but a look of indifference from the former , or of disgust in the latter . a effort even yet lighter might have make she they friend . would they only have laugh at she about the doctor ! but so little be they , anymore than the other , inclin to oblige she , that if dine from home , she might spend a whole day without hear any other raillery on the subject , than what she be kind enough to bestow on herself . all these jealousy and discontent , however , be so totally unsuspect by , that she think it a delightful thing for the girl to be together ; and generally congratulate she young friend every night , on have escape the company of a stupid old woman so long . she join they sometimes at 's , sometimes at she own house ; but wherever it be , she always come in excellent spirit , full of delight and importance , attribute 's well do to she own care , and ready to give so exact , so minute a detail of she situation , as only have curiosity enough to desire . one thing do disturb she ; and of that she make she daily complaint . maintain the common , but unfatherly opinion among he sex , of all infant be alike ; and though she could plainly perceive , at different time , the most strike resemblance between this baby and every one of he relation on both side , there be no convincing he father of it ; no persuade he to believe that it be not exactly like every other baby of the same age ; nor could he even
even be bring to acknowledge the simple proposition of its be the finest child in the world . I come now to the relation of a misfortune , which about this time befell . it so happen that while she two sister with be first call on she in , another of she acquaintance have dropt in -- a circumstance in itself not apparently likely to produce evil to she . but while the imagination of other people will carry they away to form wrong judgment of we conduct , and to decide on it by slight appearance , one 's happiness must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance . in the present instance , this last - arrive lady allow she fancy to so far outrun truth and probability , that on merely hear the name of the , and understand they to be 's sister , she immediately conclude they to be stay in ; and this misconstruction produce within a day or two afterwards , card of invitation for they as well as for they brother and sister , to a small musical party at she house . the consequence of which be , that be obliged to submit not only to the exceedingly great inconvenience of send she carriage for the , but , what be still worse , must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appear to treat they with attention : and who could tell that they might not expect to go out with she a second time ? the power of disappoint they , it be true , must always be she 's . but that be not enough ; for when people be determine on a mode of conduct which they know to be wrong , they feel injure by the expectation of any thing better from they . have now be bring by degree , so much into the habit of go out every day , that it be become a matter of indifference to she , whether she go or not : and she prepare quietly and mechanically for every evening 's engagement , though without expect the smallest amusement from any , and very often without know , till the last moment , where it be to take she . to she dress and appearance she be grow so perfectly indifferent , as not to bestow half the consideration on it , during the whole of she toilet , which it receive from Steele in the first five minute of they be together , when it be finished . nothing escape she minute observation and general curiosity ; she see every thing , and ask every thing ; be never easy till she know the price of every part of 's dress ; could have guess the number of she gown altogether with better judgment than herself , and be not without hope of find out before they part , how much she wash cost per week , and how much she have every year to spend upon herself . the impertinence of these kind of scrutiny , moreover , be generally conclude with a compliment , which though mean as its douceur , be consider by as the greatest impertinence of all ; for after undergo a examination into the value and make of she gown , the colour of she shoe , and the arrangement of she hair , she be almost sure of be tell that upon " she word she look vastly smart , and she da to say she would make a great many conquest . " with such encouragement as this , be she dismiss on the present occasion , to she brother 's carriage ; which they be ready to enter five minute after it stop at the door , a punctuality not very agreeable to they sister - in - law , who have proceed they to the house of she acquaintance , and be there hope for some delay on they part that might inconvenience either herself or she coachman . the event of this evening be not very remarkable . the party , like other musical party , comprehend a great many people who have real taste for the performance , and a great many more who have none at all ; and the performer themselves be , as usual , in they own estimation , and that of they immediate friend , the first private performer in . as be neither musical , nor affecte to be so , she make no scruple of turn she eye from the grand pianoforte , whenever it sui she , and unrestrained even by the presence of a harp , and violoncello , would fix they at pleasure on any other object in the room . in one of these excursive glance she perceive among a group of young man , the very he , who have give they a lecture on toothpick - casis at 's . she perceive he soon afterwards look at herself , and speak familiarly to she brother ; and have just determined to find out he name from the latter , when they both come towards she , and introduce he to she as . he address she with easy civility , and twist he head into a bow which assure she as plainly as word could have do , that he be exactly the coxcomb she have hear he describe to be by . happy have it be for she , if she regard for have depend less on he own merit , than on the merit of he nearest relation ! for then he brother 's bow must have give the finishing streak to what the ill - humour of he mother and sister would have begin . but while she wonder at the difference of the two young man , she do not find that the emptiness of
of conceit of the one , put she out of all charity with the modesty and worth of the other . why they be different , exclaim to she himself in the course of a quarter of a hour 's conversation ; for , talking of he brother , and lament the extreme Gaucherie which he really believe keep he from mixing in proper society , he candidly and generously attribute it much less to any natural deficiency , than to the misfortune of a private education ; while he himself , though probably without any particular , any material superiority by nature , merely from the advantage of a public school , be as well fit to mix in the world as any other man . " upon my soul , " he add , " I believe it be nothing more ; and so I often tell my mother , when she be grieve about it . ' my dear madam ,' I always say to she , ' you must make yourself easy . the evil be now irremediable , and it have be entirely you own do . why would you be persuade by my uncle , , against you own judgment , to place under private tuition , at the most critical time of he life ? if you have only send he to as well as myself , instead of send he to 's , all this would have be prevent . ' this be the way in which I always consider the matter , and my mother be perfectly convinced of she error . " would not oppose he opinion , because , whatever might be she general estimation of the advantage of a public school , she could not think of 's abode in 's family , with any satisfaction . " you reside in , I think , " -- be he next observation , " in a cottage near . " set he right as to its situation ; and it seem rather surprising to he that anybody could live in , without live near . he bestow he hearty approbation however on they species of house . " for my own part , " say he , " I be excessively fond of a cottage ; there be always so much comfort , so much elegance about they . and I protest , if I have any money to spare , I should buy a little land and build one myself , within a short distance of , where I might drive myself down at any time , and collect a few friend about I , and be happy . I advise every body who be go to build , to build a cottage . my friend come to I the other day on purpose to ask my advice , and laid before I three different plan of 's . I be to decide on the best of they . ' my dear , ' say I , immediately throw they all into the fire , 'do not adopt either of they , but by all means build a cottage . ' and that I fancy , will be the end of it . " some people imagine that there can be no accommodation , no space in a cottage ; but this be all a mistake . I be last month at my friend 's , near . wish to give a dance . ' but how can it be do ? ' say she ; 'my dear , do tell I how it be to be manage . there be not a room in this cottage that will hold ten couple , and where can the supper be ? ' I immediately see that there could be no difficulty in it , so I say , ' my dear , do not be uneasy . the dining parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease ; card - table may be place in the drawing - room ; the library may be open for tea and other refreshment ; and let the supper be set out in the saloon . ' be delighted with the thought . we measure the dining - room , and find it would hold exactly eighteen couple , and the affair be arrange precisely after my plan . so that , in fact , you see , if people do but know how to set about it , every comfort may be as well enjoy in a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling . " agree to it all , for she do not think he deserve the compliment of rational opposition . as have no more pleasure in music than he eldest sister , he mind be equally at liberty to fix on any thing else ; and a thought strike he during the evening , which he communicate to he wife , for she approbation , when they get home . the consideration of 's mistake , in suppose he sister they guest , have suggest the propriety of they be really invite to become such , while 's engagement keep she from home . the expense would be nothing , the inconvenience not more ; and it be altogether a attention which the delicacy of he conscience point out to be requisite to its complete enfranchisement from he promise to he father . be start at the proposal . " I do not see how it can be do , " say she , " without affront , for they spend every day with she ; otherwise I should be exceedingly glad to do it . you know I be always ready to pay they any attention in my power , as my take they out this evening shew . but they be 's visitor . how can I ask they away from she ? " she husband , but
but with great humility , do not see the force of she objection . " they have already spend a week in this manner in , and could not be displease at they give the same number of day to such near relation . " pause a moment , and then , with fresh vigor , say , " my love I would ask they with all my heart , if it be in my power . but I have just settle within myself to ask the to spend a few day with we . they be very well behave , good kind of girl ; and I think the attention be due to they , as they uncle do so very well by . we can ask you sister some other year , you know ; but the may not be in town any more . I be sure you will like they ; indeed , you do like they , you know , very much already , and so do my mother ; and they be such favourite with ! " be convinced . he see the necessity of invite the immediately , and he conscience be pacify by the resolution of invite he sister another year ; at the same time , however , slyly suspect that another year would make the invitation needless , by bring to town as 's wife , and as they visitor . Fanny , rejoice in she escape , and proud of the ready wit that have procure it , write the next morning to , to request she company and she sister 's , for some day , in , as soon as could spare they . this be enough to make really and reasonably happy . seem actually work for she , herself ; cherish all she hope , and promote all she view ! such a opportunity of be with and he family be , above all thing , the most material to she interest , and such a invitation the most gratify to she feeling ! it be a advantage that could not be too gratefully acknowledge , nor too speedily make use of ; and the visit to , which have not before have any precise limit , be instantly discover to have be always mean to end in two day ' time . when the note be show to , as it be within ten minute after its arrival , it give she , for the first time , some share in the expectation of ; for such a mark of uncommon kindness , vouchsaf on so short a acquaintance , seem to declare that the good - will towards she arose from something more than merely malice against herself ; and might be bring , by time and address , to do every thing that wish . she flattery have already subdue the pride of , and make a entry into the close heart of ; and these be effect that laid open the probability of greater . the remove to , and all that reach of they influence there , strengthen she expectation of the event . , who call on they more than once , bring home such account of the favour they be in , as must be universally strike . have never be so much pleased with any young woman in she life , as she be with they ; have give each of they a needle book make by some emigrant ; call by she Christian name ; and do not know whether she should ever be able to part with they . [ at this point in the first and second edition , end . ] chapter 37 be so well at the end of a fortnight , that she mother feel it no longer necessary to give up the whole of she time to she ; and , contente herself with visit she once or twice a day , return from that period to she own home , and she own habit , in which she find the very ready to resume they former share . about the third or fourth morning after they be thus resettle in , , on return from she ordinary visit to , enter the drawing - room , where be sit by herself , with a air of such hurrie importance as prepare she to hear something wonderful ; and give she time only to form that idea , begin directly to justify it , by say , " ! my dear ! have you hear the news ? " " no , ma 'am . what be it ? " " something so strange ! but you shall hear it all .-- when I get to 's , I find quite in a fuss about the child . she be sure it be very ill -- it cry , and fret , and be all over pimple . so I look at it directly , and , ' ! my dear , ' say I , ' it be nothing in the world , but the red gum -- ' and nurse say just the same . but , she would not be satisfied , so be send for ; and luckily he happen to just come in from , so he step over directly , and as soon as ever he see the child , be say just as we do , that it be nothing in the world but the red gum , and then be easy . and so , just as he be go away again , it come into my head , I be sure I do not know how I happen to think of it , but it come into my head to ask he if there be any news . so upon that , he smirk , and simper , and look grave ,
, and seem to know something or other , and at last he say in a whisper , ' for fear any unpleasant report should reach the young lady under you care as to they sister 's indisposition , I think it advisable to say , that I believe there be no great reason for alarm ; I hope will do very well . ' " " what ! be Fanny ill ? " " that be exactely what I say , my dear . ' ! ' say I , 'i ill ? ' so then it all come out ; and the long and the short of the matter , by all I can learn , seem to be this . , the very young man I use to joke with you about ( but however , as it turn out , I be monstrous glad there be never any thing in it ) , , it seem , have be engage above this twelvemonth to my cousin Lucy !-- there be for you , my dear ! -- and not a creature know a syllable of the matter , except !-- could you have believe such a thing possible ?-- there be no great wonder in they like one another ; but that matter should be bring so forward between they , and nobody suspect it !-- that be strange !-- I never happen to see they together , or I be sure I should have find it out directly . well , and so this be keep a great secret , for fear of , and neither she nor you brother or sister suspect a word of the matter ; -- till this very morning , poor , who , you know , be a well - mean creature , but no conjurer , popt it all out . ' ! ' think she to herself , ' they be all so fond of , to be sure they will make no difficulty about it ;' and so , away she go to you sister , who be sit all alone at she carpet - work , little suspect what be to come -- for she have just be say to you brother , only five minute before , that she think to make a match between and some 's daughter or other , I forget who . so you may think what a blow it be to all she vanity and pride . she fall into violent hysteric immediately , with such scream as reach you brother 's ears , as he be sit in he own dressing - room down stair , think about write a letter to he steward in the country . so up he flow directly , and a terrible scene take place , for be come to they by that time , little dream what be go on . poor soul ! I pity her . and I must say , I think she be use very hardly ; for you sister scold like any fury , and soon drive she into a fainting fit . , she fall upon she knee , and cry bitterly ; and you brother , he walk about the room , and say he do not know what to do . declare they should not stay a minute longer in the house , and you brother be force to go down upon this knee too , to persuade she to let they stay till they have pack up they clothes . then she fall into hysteric again , and he be so frightened that he would send for , and find the house in all this uproar . the carriage be at the door ready to take my poor cousins away , and they be just step in as he come off ; poor Lucy in such a condition , he say , she could hardly walk ; and , she be almost as bad . I declare , I have no patience with you sister ; and I hope , with all my heart , it will be a match in spite of she . ! what a take poor will be in when he hear of it ! to have he love use so scornfully ! for they say he be monstrous fond of she , as well he may . I should not wonder , if he be to be in the greatest passion !-- and think just the same . he and I have a great deal of talk about it ; and the best of all be , that he be go back again to , that he may be within call when be tell of it , for she be send for as soon as ever my cousin leave the house , for you sister be sure she would be in hysteric too ; and so she may , for what I care . I have no pity for either of they . I have no notion of people 's make such a to - do about money and greatness . there be no reason on earth why and should not marry ; for I be sure Ferrars may afford to do very well by she son , and though have next to nothing herself , she know better than any body how to make the most of every thing ; I dare say , if Ferrars would only allow he five hundr a - year , she would make as good a appearance with it as any body else wwould with eight . ! how snug they might live in such another cottage as yours -- or a little bigger -- with two maid , and two man ; and I believe I could help they to a housemaid , for my have a sister out of place , that would fit they exactly . " here cease
cease , and as have have time enough to collect she thought , she be able to give such a answer , and make such observation , as the subject might naturally be suppose to produce . happy to find that she be not suspect of any extraordinary interest in it ; that ( as she have of late often hope might be the case ) have cease to imagine she at all attach to ; and happy above all the rest , in the absence of , she feel very well able to speak of the affair without embarrassment , and to give she judgment , as she believe , with impartiality on the conduct of every one concerned in it . she could hardly determine what she own expectation of it be event really be ; though she earnestly try to drive away the notion of its be possible to mend otherwise at last , than in the marriage of and . what would say and do , though there could not be a doubt of its nature , she be anxious to hear ; and still more anxious to know how would conduct himself . for he she feel much compassion ; -- for very little -- and it cost she some pain to procure that little ; -- for the rest of the party none at all . as could talk on no other subject , soon see the necessity of prepare for its discussion . no time be to be lose in undeceive she , in make she acquaint with the real truth , and in endeavouring to bring she to hear it talk of by other , without betraie that she feel any uneasiness for she sister , or any resentment against . 's office be a painful one .-- she be go to remove what she really believe to be she sister 's chief consolation , -- to give such particular of as she fear would ruin he for ever in she good opinion , - and to make , by a resemblance in they situation , which to she fancy would seem strong , feel all she own disappointment over again . but unwelcome as such a task must be , it be necessary to be do , and therefore hasten to perform it . she be very far from wish to dwell on she own feeling , or to represent herself as suffer much , any otherwise than as the self - command she have practise since she first knowledge of 's engagement , might suggest a hint of what be practicable to . she narration be clear and simple ; and though it could not be give without emotion , it be not accompany by violent agitation , nor impetuous grief .-- that belong rather to the hearer , for listen with horror , and cry excessively . be to be the comforter of other in she own distress , no less than in theirs ; and all the comfort that could be give by assurance of she own composure of mind , and a very earnest vindication of from every charge but of imprudence , be readily ofer . but for some time would give credit to neither . seem a second Willoughby ; and acknowledge as do , that she have love he most sincerely , could she feel less than herself ! as for , she consider she so totally unamiable , so absolutely incapable of attach a sensible man , that she could not be persuade at first to believe , and afterwards to pardon , any former affection of for she . she would not even admit it to have be natural ; and leave she to be convince that it be so , by that which only could convince she , a better knowledge of mankind . she first communication have reach no farther than to state the fact of the engagement , and the length of time it have exist .-- 's feeling have then break in , and put a end to all regularity of detail ; and for some time all that could be do be to soothe she distress , lessen she alarm , and combat she resentment . the first question on she side , which lead to farther particular , be , " how long have this be know to you , ? have he write to you ? " " I have know it these four month . when first come to last , she tell I in confidence of she engagement . " at these word , 's eye express the astonishment which she lip could not utter . after a pause of , she exclaim -- " four month !-- have you know of this four month ? " confirm it . " what !-- while attend I in all my misery , have this be on you heart ?-- and I have reproach you for be happy ! " -- " it be not fit that you should then know how much I be the reverse ! " " four months ! " -- cry again .--" so calm !--so cheerful !-- how have you be support ?" -- " by feel that I be do my duty .-- my promise to , oblige I to be secret . I owed it to she , therefore , to avoid give any hint of the truth ; and I owed it to my family and friend , not to create in they a solicitude about I , which it could not be in my power to satisfy . " seem much struck . " I have very often wish to undeceive yourself and my mother , " add ; " and once or twice I have attempt it ; -- but without betraie my trust , I never could have convince you . " " four
four months !-- and yet you love he ! " -- " yes . but I do not love only he ; -- and while the comfort of other be dear to I , I be glad to spare they from know how much I feel . now , I can think and speak of it with little emotion . I would not have you suffer on my account ; for I assure you I no longer suffer materially myself . I have many thing to support I . I be not conscious of have provoke the disappointment by any imprudence of my own , I have borne it as much as possible without spread it farther . I acquit of essential misconduct . I wish he very happy ; and I be so sure of he always do he duty , that though now he may harbour some regret , in the end he must become so . do not want sense , and that be the foundation on which every thing good may be build . -- and after all , , after all that be bewitch in the idea of a single and constant attachment , and all that can be say of one 's happiness depend entirely on any particular person , it be not mean -- it be not fit -- it be not possible that it should be so .-- will marry ; he will marry a woman superior in person and understanding to half she sex ; and time and habit will teach he to forget that he ever think another superior to she . " -- " if such be you way of think , " say , " if the loss of what be most value be so easily to be make up by something else , you resolution , you self - command , be , perhaps , a little less to be wonder at .-- they be bring more within my comprehension . " " I understand you .-- you do not suppose that I have ever feel much .-- for four month , , I have have all this hanging on my mind , without be at liberty to speak of it to a single creature ; know that it would make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it be explain to you , yet unable to prepare you for it in the least .-- it be tell I , -- it be in a manner force on I by the very person herself , whose prior engagement ruin all my prospect ; and tell I , as I think , with triumph .-- this person 's suspicion , therefore , I have have to oppose , by endeavouring to appear indifferent where I have be most deeply interested ; -- and it have not be only once ;-- I have have she hope and exultation to listen to again and again .-- I have know myself to be divide from for ever , without hear one circumstance that could make I less desire the connection .-- nothing have prove he unworthy ; nor have anything declare he indifferent to I .-- I have have to contend against the unkindness of he sister , and the insolence of he mother ; and have suffer the punishment of a attachment , without enjoy its advantages .-- and all this have be go on at a time , when , as you know too well , it have not be my only unhappiness .-- if you can think I capable of ever feel -- surely you may suppose that I have suffer now . the composure of mind with which I have bring myself at present to consider the matter , the consolation that I have be willing to admit , have be the effect of constant and painful exertion ; -- they do not spre up of themselves ; -- they do not occur to relieve my spirits at first .-- no , .-- then , if I have not be bound to silence , perhaps nothing could have keep I entirely -- not even what I owed to my dearest friend -- from openly shew that I be very unhappy . " -- be quite subdue .-- " oh ! , " she cry , " you have make I hate myself for ever .-- how barbarous have I be to you !-- you , who have be my only comfort , who have borne with I in all my misery , who have seem to be only suffer for I !-- be this my gratitude ?-- be this the only return I can make you ?-- because you merit cry out upon myself , I have be try to do it away . " the tenderest caress follow this confession . in such a frame of mind as she be now in , have no difficulty in obtain from she whatever promise she require ; and at she request , engage never to speak of the affair to any one with the least appearance of bitterness ; -- to meet without betraie the smallest increase of dislike to she ; -- and even to see himself , if chance should bring they together , without any diminution of she usual cordiality .-- these be great concession ; -- but where feel that she have injur , no reparation could be too much for she to make . she perform she promise of be discreet , to admiration .-- she attend to all that Jennings have to say upon the subject , with a unchanging complexion , dissent from she in nothing , and be hear three time to say , " yes , ma 'am . " -- she listen to she praise of Lucy with only move from one chair to another , and when talk of 's affection , it cost she only a spasm
spasm in she throat .-- such advance towards heroism in she sister , make feel equal to any thing herself . the next morning bring a farther trial of it , in a visit from they brother , who come with a most serious aspect to talk over the dreadful affair , and bring they news of he wife . " you have hear , I suppose , " say he with great solemnity , as soon as he be seat , " of the very shocking discovery that take place under we roof yesterday . " they all look they assent ; it see too awful a moment for speech . " you sister , " he continue , " have suffer dreadfully . too -- in short it have be a scene of such complicated distress -- but I will hope that the storm may be weathere without we be any of we quite overcome . poor Fanny ! she be in hysteric all yesterday . but I would not alarm you too much . say there be nothing materially to be apprehend ; she constitution be a good one , and she resolution equal to any thing . she have borne it all , with the fortitude of a angel ! she say she never shall think well of anybody again ; and one can not wonder at it , after be so deceive !--meeting with such ingratitude , where so much kindness have be shewn , so much confidence have be place ! it be quite out of the benevolence of she heart , that she have ask these young woman to she house ; merely because she think they deserv some attention , be harmless , well - behave girl , and would be pleasant companion ; for otherwise we both wish very much to have invite you and to be with we , while you kind friend there , be attend she daughter . and now to be so rewarde ! 'I wish , with all my heart , ' say poor Fanny in she affectionate way , ' that we have ask you sister instead of they . ' " here he stop to be thanke ; which be do , he go on . " what poor suffer , when first Fanny break it to she , be not to be describe . while she with the truest affection have be plan a most eligible connection for he , be it to be suppose that he could be all the time secretly engage to another person !--such a suspicion could never have enter she head ! if she suspect any prepossession elsewhere , it could not be in that quarter . 'there , to be sure , ' say she , ' I might have think myself safe . ' she be quite in a agony . we consult together , however , as to what should be do , and at last she determin to send for . he come . but I be sorry to relate what ensue . all that could say to make he put a end to the engagement , assist too as you may well suppose by my argument , and 's entreaty , be of no avail . duty , affection , every thing be disregarde . I never think so stubborn , so unfeeling before . he mother explain to he she liberal design , in case of he marry ; tell he she would settle on he the estate , which , clear of land - tax , bring in a good thousand a - year ; offer even , when matter grow desperate , to make it twelve hundr ; and in opposition to this , if he still persist in this low connection , represent to he the certain penury that must attend the match . he own two thousand pound she protest should be he all ; she would never see he again ; and so far would she be from afforde he the smallest assistance , that if he be to enter into any profession with a view of better support , she would do all in she power to prevent he advancing in it . " here , in a ecstasy of indignation , clap she hand together , and cry , " ! can this be possible ! " " well may you wonder , , " reply she brother , " at the obstinacy which could resist such argument as these . you exclamation be very natural . " be go to retort , but she remember she promise , and forbore . " all this , however , " he continue , " be urge in vain . say very little ; but what he do say , be in the most determined manner . nothing should prevail on he to give up he engagement . he would stand to it , cost he what it might . " " then , " cry with blunt sincerity , no longer able to be silent , " he have act like a honest man ! I beg you pardon , , but if he have do otherwise , I should have think he a rascal . I have some little concern in the business , as well as yourself , for be my cousin , and I believe there be not a better kind of girl in the world , nor one who more deserve a good husband . " be greatly astonish ; but he nature be calm , not open to provocation , and he never wish to offend anybody , especially anybody of good fortune . he therefore reply , without any resentment , " I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours , madam . Steele be , I dare say , a very deserving young woman , but
but in the present case you know , the connection must be impossible . and to have enter into a secret engagement with a young man under she uncle 's care , the son of a woman especially of such very large fortune as , be perhaps , altogether a little extraordinary . in short , I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any person whom you have a regard for , . we all wish she extremely happy ; and 's conduct throughout the whole , have be such as every conscientious , good mother , in like circumstance , would adopt . it have be dignify and liberal . have draw he own lot , and I fear it will be a bad one . " sigh out she similar apprehension ; and 's heart wrung for the feeling of , while brave he mother 's threat , for a woman who could not reward he . " well , sir , " say , " and how do it end ? " " I be sorry to say , ma 'am , in a most unhappy rupture :-- be dismiss for ever from he mother 's notice . he leave she house yesterday , but where he be go , or whether he be still in town , I do not know ; for we of course can make no inquiry . " " poor young man !-- and what be to become of he ? " " what , indeed , ma 'am ! it be a melancholy consideration . bear to the prospect of such affluence ! I can not conceive a situation more deplorable . the interest of two thousand pound -- how can a man live on it ?-- and when to that be add the recollection , that he might , but for he own folly , within three month have be in the receipt of two thousand , five hundred a - year ( for have thirty thousand pound , ) I can not picture to myself a more wretched condition . we must all feel for he ; and the more so , because it be totally out of we power to assist he . " " poor young man ! " cry , " I be sure he should be very welcome to bed and board at my house ; and so I would tell he if I could see he . it be not fit that he should be live about at he own charge now , at lodging and tavern . " 's heart thank she for such kindness towards , though she could not forbear smile at the form of it . " if he would only have do as well by himself , " say , " as all he friend be dispose to do by he , he might now have be in he proper situation , and would have want for nothing . but as it be , it must be out of anybody be power to assist he . and there be one thing more prepare against he , which must be worse than all -- he mother have determine , with a very natural kind of spirit , to settle that estate upon immediately , which might have be 's , on proper condition . I leave she this morning with she lawyer , talk over the business . " " well ! " say , " that be she revenge . everybody have a way of they own . but I do not think mine would be , to make one son independent , because another have plague I . " get up and walk about the room . " can anything be more galle to the spirit of a man , " continue , " than to see he younger brother in possession of a estate which might have be he own ? poor ! I feel for he sincerely . " a few minute more spend in the same kind of effusion , conclude he visit ; and with repeat assurances to he sister that he really believe there be no material danger in 's indisposition , and that they need not therefore be very uneasy about it , he go away ; leave the three lady unanimous in they sentiment on the present occasion , as far at least as it regard 's conduct , the ' , and 's . 's indignation burst forth as soon as he quit the room ; and as she vehemence make reserve impossible in , and unnecessary in , they all join in a very spirited critique upon the party . chapter 38 be very warm in she praise of 's conduct , but only and understand its true merit . they only know how little he have have to tempt he to be disobedient , and how small be the consolation , beyond the consciousness of do right , that could remain to he in the loss of friend and fortune . glory in he integrity ; and forgave all he offence in compassion for he punishment . but though confidence between they be , by this public discovery , restore to its proper state , it be not a subject on which either of they be fond of dwelling when alone . avoid it upon principle , as tend to fix still more upon she thought , by the too warm , too positive assurance of , that belief of 's continue affection for herself which she rather wish to do away ; and 's courage soon fail she , in try to converse upon a topic which always leave she more dissatisfied with herself than ever , by the comparison it necessarily produce between 's conduct and she own . she feel all the force of that comparison ; but not as she sister have
have hope , to urge she to exertion now ; she feel it with all the pain of continual self - reproach , regret most bitterly that she have never exert herself before ; but it bring only the torture of penitence , without the hope of amendment . she mind be so much weaken that she still fancie present exertion impossible , and therefore it only dispirit she more . nothing new be hear by they , for a day or two afterwards , of affair in , or 's . but though so much of the matter be know to they already , that Jennings might have have enough to do in spreading that knowledge farther , without seek after more , she have resolve from the first to pay a visit of comfort and inquiry to she cousin as soon as she could ; and nothing but the hindrance of more visitor than usual , have prevent she go to they within that time . the third day succeed they knowledge of the particular , be so fine , so beautiful a as to draw many to , though it be only the second week in . and be of the number ; but , who know that the be again in town , and have a constant dread of meet they , choose rather to stay at home , than venture into so public a place . a intimate acquaintance of join they soon after they enter the , and be not sorry that by she continue with they , and engage all 's conversation , she be herself leave to quiet reflection . she see nothing of the , nothing of , and for some time nothing of anybody who could by any chance whether grave or gay , be interesting to she . but at last she find herself with some surprise , accost by , who , though look rather shy , express great satisfaction in meet they , and on receive encouragement from the particular kindness of , leave she own party for a short time , to join they 's . immediately whisper to , " get it all out of she , my dear . she will tell you any thing if you ask . you see I can not leave . " it be lucky , however , for 's curiosity and 's too , that she would tell any thing without be ask ; for nothing would otherwise have be learn . " I be so glad to meet you ; " say , take she familiarly by the arm --" for I want to see you of all thing in the world . " and then lowere she voice , " I suppose have hear all about it . be she angry ? " " not at all , I believe , with you . " " that be a good thing . and , be She angry ? " " I can not suppose it possible that she should . " " I be monstrous glad of it . good gracious ! I have have such a time of it ! I never see in such a rage in my life . she vow at first she would never trim I up a new bonnet , nor do any thing else for I again , so long as she liv ; but now she be quite come to , and we be as good friend as ever . look , she make I this bow to my hat , and put in the feather last night . there now , you be go to laugh at I too . but why should not I wear pink ribbon ? I do not care if it be the Doctor 's favourite colour . I be sure , for my part , I should never have know he do like it better than any other colour , if he have not happen to say so . my cousin have be so plagu I ! I declare sometimes I do not know which way to look before they . " she have wander away to a subject on which have nothing to say , and therefore soon judge it expedient to find she way back again to the first . " well , but , " speak triumphantly , " people may say what they chuse about 's declaring he would not have Lucy , for it be no such thing I can tell you ; and it be quite a shame for such ill - natured report to be spread abroad . whatever Lucy might think about it herself , you know , it be no business of other people to set it down for certain . " " I never hear any thing of the kind hint at before , I assure you , " say . " oh , do not you ? but it be say , I know , very well , and by more than one ; for tell , that nobody in they sense could expect to give up a woman like , with thirty thousand pound to she fortune , for Lucy Steele that have nothing at all ; and I have it from myself . and besides that , my cousin say himself , that when it come to the point he be afraid would be off ; and when do not come near we for three day , I could not tell what to think myself ; and I believe in my heart give it up all for lost ; for we come away from you brother 's , and we see nothing of he not all , , and , and do not know what be become of he . once think to write to he , but then she spirit rise against that . however this morning he come
come just as we come home from church ; and then it all come out , how he have be send for to , and be talk to by he mother and all of they , and how he have declare before they all that he love nobody but , and nobody but would he have . and how he have be so worried by what pass , that as soon as he have go away from he mother 's house , he have get upon he horse , and ry into the country , some where or other ; and how he have stay about at a inn all and , on purpose to get the better of it . and after think it all over and over again , he say , it seem to he as if , now he have no fortune , and no nothing at all , it would be quite unkind to keep she on to the engagement , because it must be for she loss , for he have nothing but two thousand pound , and no hope of any thing else ; and if he be to go into order , as he have some thought , he could get nothing but a curacy , and how be they to live upon that ?-- he could not bear to think of she do no better , and so he beg , if she have the least mind for it , to put a end to the matter directly , and leave he shift for himself . I hear he say all this as plain as could possibly be . and it be entirely for Her sake , and upon Her account , that he say a word about be off , and not upon he own . I will take my oath he never dropt a syllable of be tired of she , or of wishing to marry , or any thing like it . but , to be sure , would not give ear to such kind of talking ; so she tell he directly ( with a great deal about sweet and love , you know , and all that -- oh , la ! one can not repeat such kind of thing you know ) -- she tell he directly , she have not the least mind in the world to be off , for she could live with he upon a trifle , and how little so ever he might have , she should be very glad to have it all , you know , or something of the kind . so then he be monstrous happy , and talk on some time about what they should do , and they agree he should take order directly , and they must wait to be marry till he get a living . and just then I could not hear any more , for my cousin call from below to tell I be come in she coach , and would take one of we to ; so I be force to go into the room and interrupt they , to ask if she would like to go , but she do not care to leave ; so I just run up stair and put on a pair of silk stocking and come off with the . " " I do not understand what you mean by interrupt they , " say ; " you be all in the same room together , be not you ? " " no , indeed , not we . ! , do you think people make love when any body else be by ? oh , for shame !-- to be sure you must know better than that . ( laugh affectedly . ) -- no , no ; they be shut up in the drawing - room together , and all I hear be only by listen at the door . " " how ! " cry ; " have you be repeat to I what you only lear not yourself by listen at the door ? I be sorry I do not know it before ; for I certainly would not have suffer you to give I particular of a conversation which you ought not to have know yourself . how could you behave so unfairly by you sister ? " " oh , la ! there be nothing in that . I only stand at the door , and hear what I could . and I be sure would have do just the same by I ; for a year or two back , when and I have so many secret together , she never make any bone of hide in a closet , or behind a chimney - board , on purpose to hear what we say . " try to talk of something else ; but Steele could not be keep beyond a couple of minute , from what be uppermost in she mind . " talk of go to Oxford soon , " say she ; " but now he be lod at . -- , . what a ill - natured woman he mother be , a not she ? and you brother and sister be not very kind ! however , I sha not say anything against they to you ; and to be sure they do send we home in they own chariot , which be more than I look for . and for my part , I be all in a fright for fear you sister should ask we for the huswife she have give we a day or two before ; but , however , nothing be say about they , and I take care to keep mine out of sight . have get some business at , he say ; so he must go there for a time ; and after that
that , as soon as he can light upon a Bishop , he will be ordain . I wonder what curacy he will get !-- good gracious ! ( giggle as she speak ) I would lay my life I know what my cousin will say , when they hear of it . they will tell I I should write to the Doctor , to get the curacy of he new living . I know they will ; but I be sure I would not do such a thing for all the world . -- ! ' I shall say directly , 'I wonder how you could think of such a thing ? I write to the Doctor , indeed ! ' " " well , " say , " it be a comfort to be prepare against the worst . you have get you answer ready . " be go to reply on the same subject , but the approach of she own party make another more necessary . " oh , la ! here come the Richardsons . I have a vast deal more to say to you , but I must not stay away from they not any longer . I assure you they be very genteel people . he make a monstrous deal of money , and they keep they own coach . I have not time to speak to about it myself , but pray tell she I be quite happy to hear she be not in anger against we , and the same ; and if anything should happen to take you and you sister away , and should want company , I be sure we should be very glad to come and stay with she for as long a time as she like . I suppose will not ask we any more this bout . good - by ; I be sorry be not here . remember I kindly to she . ! if you have not get you spotted muslin on !-- I wonder you be not afraid of its be tear . " be she parte concern ; for after this , she have time only to pay she farewell compliment to , before she company be claim by ; and be leave in possession of knowledge which might feed she power of reflection some time , though she have learn very little more than what have be already foresee and foreplan in she own mind . 's marriage with be as firmly determine on , and the time of its take place remain as absolutely uncertain , as she have conclude it would be ;-- every thing depend , exactly after she expectation , on he get that preferment , of which , at present , there seem not the smallest chance . as soon as they return to the carriage , be eager for information ; but as wish to spread as little as possible intelligence that have in the first place be so unfairly obtained , she confin herself to the brief repetition of such simple particular , as she feel assure that , for the sake of she own consequence , would choose to have know . the continuance of they engagement , and the means that be able to be take for promote its end , be all she communication ; and this produce from the follow natural remark . " wait for he have a living !-- ay , we all know how that will end :-- they will wait a twelvemonth , and find no good come of it , will set down upon a curacy of fifty pound a - year , with the interest of he two thousand pound , and what little matter and can give she .-- then they will have a child every year ! and help th'ey ! how poor they will be !-- I must see what I can give they towards furnish they house . two maid and two man , indeed !-- as I talk of t'other day .-- no , no , they must get a stout girl of all work .-- 's sister would never do for they now . " the next morning bring a letter by the two - penny post from herself . it be as follow : " 's , . " I hope my dear miss Dashwood will excuse the liberty I take of writing to she ; but I know you friendship for I will make you pleased to hear such a good account of myself and my dear , after all the trouble we have go through lately , therefore will make no more apology , but proceed to say that , thank ! though we have suffer dreadfully , we be both quite well now , and as happy as we must always be in one another 's love . we have have great trial , and great persecution , but however , at the same time , gratefully acknowledge many friend , yourself not the least among they , whose great kindness I shall always thankfully remember , as will too , who I have tell of it . I be sure you will be glad to hear , as likewise dear , I spend two happy hour with he yesterday afternoon , he would not hear of we parting , though earnestly do I , as I think my duty require , urge he to it for prudence sake , and would have part for ever on the spot , would he consent to it ; but he say it should never be , he do not regard he mother 's anger , while he could have my affections ; we prospect be not very bright , to be sure , but we must wait , and hope for the best ; he will be ordain shortly ; and should it ever be in
in you power to recommend he to any body that have a living to bestow , be very sure you will not forget we , and dear Jennings too , trust she will speak a good word for we to , or , or any friend that may be able to assist we .-- poor be much to blame for what she do , but she do it for the best , so I say nothing ; hope will not think it too much trouble to give we a call , should she come this way any morning , ' twould be a great kindness , and my cousin would be proud to know she .-- my paper remind I to conclude ; and beg to be most gratefully and respectfully remember to she , and to , and , and the dear child , when you chance to see they , and love to , " I be , & c . " as soon as have finish it , she perform what she conclude to be its writer 's real design , by place it in the hand of , who read it aloud with many comment of satisfaction and praise . " very well indeed !-- how prettily she write !-- aye , that be quite proper to let he be off if he would . that be just like .-- poor soul ! I wish I could get he a living , with all my heart .-- she call I dear , you see . she be a good - hear girl as ever liv .-- very well upon my word . that sentence be very prettily turn . yes , yes , I will go and see she , sure enough . how attentive she be , to think of every body !-- thank you , my dear , for shew it I . it be as pretty a letter as ever I see , and do 's head and heart great credit . " chapter 39 the have now be rather more than two month in town , and 's impatience to be go increase every day . she sigh for the air , the liberty , the quiet of the country ; and fancie that if any place could give she ease , must do it . be hardly less anxious than herself for they removal , and only so much less bent on its be effect immediately , as that she be conscious of the difficulty of so long a journey , which could not be bring to acknowledge . she begin , however , seriously to turn she thought towards its accomplishment , and have already mention they wish to they kind hostess , who resist they with all the eloquence of she good -will , when a plan be suggest , which , though detain they from home yet a few week longer , appear to altogether much more eligible than any other . the Palmer be to remove to about the end of , for the Easter holiday ; and , with both she friend , receive a very warm invitation from to go with they . this would not , in itself , have be sufficient for the delicacy of ; -- but it be inforce with so much real politeness by himself , as , join to the very great amendment of he manners towards they since she sister have be know to be unhappy , induce she to accept it with pleasure . when she tell what she have do , however , she first reply be not very auspicious . " ! " -- she cry , with great agitation . " no , I can not go to . " -- " you forget , " say gently , " that its situation be not ... that it be not in the neighbourhood of ... " " but it be in .-- I can not go into .-- there , where I look forward to go ... no , , you can not expect I to go there . " would not argue upon the propriety of overcoming such feeling ; -- she only endeavoure to counteract they by work on other ;-- represent it , therefore , as a measure which would fix the time of she return to that dear mother , whom she so much wish to see , in a more eligible , more comfortable manner , than any other plan could do , and perhaps without any greater delay . from , which be within a few miles of , the distance to be not beyond one day , though a long day 's journey ; and they mother 's servant might easily come there to attend they down ; and as there could be no occasion of they stay above a week at , they might now be at home in little more than three week ' time . as 's affection for she mother be sincere , it must triumph with little difficulty , over the imaginary evils she have start . be so far from be weary of she guest , that she press they very earnestly to return with she again from . be grateful for the attention , but it could not alter she design ; and they mother 's concurrence be readily gain , every thing relative to they return be arrange as far as it could be ;-- and find some relief in draw up a statement of the hour that be yet to divide she from . " ah ! , I do not know what you and I shall do without the ; " --be 's address to he when he first call on she , after they leave she be settle -- " for they be quite resolve upon go home from the Palmer ; -- and how forlorn we
we shall be , when I come back !-- ! we shall sit and gape at one another as dull as two cat . " perhaps be in hope , by this vigorous sketch of they future ennui , to provoke he to make that offer , which might give himself a escape from it ;-- and if so , she have soon afterwards good reason to think she object gai ; for , on 's move to the window to take more expeditiously the dimension of a print , which she be go to copy for she friend , he follow she to it with a look of particular meaning , and converse with she there for several minute . the effect of he discourse on the lady too , could not escape she observation , for though she be too honorable to listen , and have even change she seat , on purpose that she might not hear , to one close by the piano forte on which be play , she could not keep herself from see that change colour , attend with agitation , and be too intent on what he say to pursue she employment .-- still farther in confirmation of she hope , in the interval of 's turn from one lesson to another , some word of the 's inevitably reach she ear , in which he seem to be apologise for the badness of he house . this set the matter beyond a doubt . she wonder , indeed , at he think it necessary to do so ; but suppose it to be the proper etiquette . what say in reply she could not distinguish , but judge from the motion of she lip , that she do not think that any material objection ; -- and commend she in she heart for be so honest . they then talk on for a few minute longer without she catch a syllable , when another lucky stop in 's performance bring she these word in the 's calm voice ,-- " I be afraid it can not take place very soon . " astonish and shock at so unlover - like a speech , she be almost ready to cry out , " ! what should hinder it ? " -- but check she desire , confin herself to this silent ejaculation . " this be very strange !-- sure he need not wait to be older . " this delay on the 's side , however , do not seem to offend or mortify he fair companion in the least , for on they break up the conference soon afterwards , and move different way , very plainly hear say , and with a voice which shew she to feel what she say , " I shall always think myself very much oblige to you . " be delighte with she gratitude , and only wonder that after hear such a sentence , the should be able to take leave of they , as he immediately do , with the utmost sang - froid , and go away without make she any reply !-- she have not think she old friend could have make so indifferent a suitor . what have really pass between they be to this effect . " I have hear , " say he , with great compassion , " of the injustice you friend have suffer from he family ; for if I understand the matter right , he have be entirely cast off by they for persevering in he engagement with a very deserving young woman .-- have I be rightly inform ?-- be it so ?--" tell he that it be . " the cruelty , the impolitic cruelty , " -- he reply , with great feeling , -- " of dividing , or attempt to divide , two young people long attach to each other , be terrible .-- do not know what she may be do -- what she may drive she son to . I have see two or three time in , and be much pleased with he . he be not a young man with whom one can be intimately acquaint in a short time , but I have see enough of he to wish he well for he own sake , and as a friend of yours , I wish it still more . I understand that he intend to take order . will you be so good as to tell he that the living of , now just vacant , as I be inform by this day 's post , be he , if he think it worth he acceptance -- but that , perhaps , so unfortunately circumstance as he be now , it may be nonsense to appear to doubt ; I only wish it be more valuable .-- it be a rectory , but a small one ; the late incumbent , I believe , do not make more than 200 l per annum , and though it be certainly capable of improvement , I fear , not to such a amount as to afford he a very comfortable income . such as it be , however , my pleasure in present he to it , will be very great . pray assure he of it . " 's astonishment at this commission could hardly have be greater , have the Colonel be really make she a offer of he hand . the preferment , which only two day before she have consider as hopeless for , be already provide to enable he to marry ; -- and she , of all people in the world , be fix on to bestow it ! -- she emotion be such as have attribute to a very different cause ; -- but whatever minor feeling less pure , less pleasing , might have a share in
in that emotion , she esteem for the general benevolence , and she gratitude for the particular friendship , which together prompt to this act , be strongly feel , and warmly express . she thank he for it with all she heart , spoke of 's principle and disposition with that praise which she know they to deserve ; and promise to undertake the commission with pleasure , if it be really he wish to put off so agreeable a office to another . but at the same time , she could not help think that no one could so well perform it as himself . it be a office in short , from which , unwill to give the pain of receive a obligation from , she would have be very glad to be spare herself ; -- but , on motives of equal delicacy , decline it likewise , still see so desirous of its be give through she means , that she would not on any account make farther opposition . , she believe , be still in town , and fortunately she have hear he address from . she could undertake therefore to inform he of it , in the course of the day . after this have be settle , begin to talk of he own advantage in secure so respectable and agreeable a neighbour , and then it be that he mention with regret , that the house be small and indifferent ; -- a evil which , as Jennings have suppose she to do , make very light of , at least as far as regard its size . " the smallness of the house , " say she , " I can not imagine any inconvenience to they , for it will be in proportion to they family and income . " by which the be surprised to find that she be consider 's marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation ; for he do not suppose it possible that Delaford liive could supply such a income , as anybody in he style of life would venture to settle on -- and he say so . " this little rectory can do no more than make comfortable as a bachelor ; it can not enable he to marry . I be sorry to say that my patronage end with this ; and my interest be hardly more extensive . if , however , by a unforeseen chance it should be in my power to serve he farther , I must think very differently of he from what I now do , if I be not as ready to be useful to he then as I sincerely wish I could be at present . what I be now do indeed , seem nothing at all , since it can advance he so little towards what must be he principal , he only object of happiness . he marriage must still be a distant good ; -- at least , I be afraid it can not take place very soon .-- " such be the sentence which , when misunderstood , so justly offen the delicate feeling of ; but after this narration of what really pass between and , while they stand at the window , the gratitude express by the latter on they parting , may perhaps appear in general , not less reasonably excited , nor less properly word than if it have arisen from a offer of marriage . chapter 40 " well , , " say , sagaciously smile , as soon as the gentleman have withdraw , " I do not ask you what the Colonel have be say to you ; for though , upon my honour , I try to keep out of hearing , I could not help catche enough to understand he business . and I assure you I never be better pleased in my life , and I wish you joy of it with all my heart . " " thank you , ma 'am , " say . " it be a matter of great joy to I ; and I feel the goodness of most sensibly . there be not many man who would act as he have do . few people who have so compassionate a heart ! I never be more astonish in my life . " " ! my dear , you be very modest . I can not the least astonish at it in the world , for I have often think of late , there be nothing more likely to happen . " " you judge from you knowledge of the 's general benevolence ; but at least you could not foresee that the opportunity would so very soon occur . " " opportunity ! " repeat Jennings --" oh ! as to that , when a man have once make up he mind to such a thing , somehow or other he will soon find a opportunity . well , my dear , I wish you joy of it again and again ; and if ever there be a happy couple in the world , I think I shall soon know where to look for they . " " you mean to go to after they I suppose , " say , with a faint smile . " aye , my dear , that I do , indeed . and as to the house be a bad one , I do not know what the would be at , for it be as good a one as ever I see . " " he speak of its be out of repair . " " well , and whose fault be that ? why do not he repair it ?-- who should do it but himself ? " they be interrupt by the servant 's come in to announce the carriage be at the door
door ; and immediately prepare to go , say ,-- " well , my dear , I must be gone before I have have half my talk out . but , however , we may have it all over in the evening ; for we shall be quite alone . I do not ask you to go with I , for I dare say you mind be too full of the matter to care for company ; and besides , you must long to tell you sister all about it . " have leave the room before the conversation begin . " certainly , ma 'am , I shall tell of it ; but I shall not mention it at present to any body else . " " oh ! very well , " say rather disappoint . " then you would not have I tell it to , for I think of go as far as to - day . " " no , ma 'am , not even Lucy if you please . one day 's delay will not be very material ; and till I have write to , I think it ought not to be mention to any body else . I shall do that directly . it be of importance that no time should be lose with he , for he will of course have much to do relative to he ordination . " this speech at first puzzl exceedingly . why be to have be write to about it in such a hurry , she could not immediately comprehend . a few moment ' reflection , however , produce a very happy idea , and she exclaim ;-- " oh , ho !-- I understand you . be to be the man . well , so much the better for he . ay , to be sure , he must be ordain in readiness ; and I be very glad to find thing be so forward between you . but , my dear , be not this rather out of character ? should not the write himself ?--sure , he be the proper person . " do not quite understand the beginning of 's speech , neither do she think it worth inquire into ; and therefore only replie to its conclusion . " be so delicate a man , that he rather wish any one to announce he intentions to than himself . " " and so you be force to do it . well that be a odd kind of delicacy ! however , I will not disturb you ( see she prepare to write . ) you know you own concern best . so goodby , my dear . I have not hear of any thing to please I so well since be bring to bed . " and away she go ; but return again in a moment , " I have just be think of 's sister , my dear . I should be very glad to get she so good a mistress . but whether she would do for a lady 's maid , I be sure I can not tell . she be a excellent housemaid , and work very well at she needle . however , you will think of all that at you leisure . " " certainly , ma 'am , " reply , not hear much of what she say , and more anxious to be alone , than to be mistress of the subject . how she should begin -- how she should express herself in she note to , be now all she concern . the particular circumstance between they make a difficulty of that which to any other person would have be the easiest thing in the world ; but she equally fear to say too much or too little , and sit deliberating over she paper , with the pen in she hand , till break in on by the entrance of himself . he have meet Jennings at the door in she way to the carriage , as he come to leave he farewell card ; and she , after apologise for not return herself , have oblige he to enter , by say that be above , and want to speak with he on very particular business . have just be congratulate herself , in the midst of she perplexity , that however difficult it might be to express herself properly by letter , it be at least preferable to give the information by word of mouth , when she visitor enter , to force she upon this greatest exertion of all . she astonishment and confusion be very great on he so sudden appearance . she have not see he before since he engagement become public , and therefore not since he know she to be acquaint with it ; which , with the consciousness of what she have be think of , and what she have to tell he , make she feel particularly uncomfortable for some minute . he too be much distressed ; and they sit down together in a most promising state of embarrassment .-- whether he have ask she pardon for he intrusion on first come into the room , he could not recollect ; but determine to be on the safe side , he make he apology in form as soon as he could say any thing , after take a chair . " . tell I , " say he , " that you wish to speak with I , at least I understand she so -- or I certainly should not have intrude on you in such a manner ; though at the same time , I should have be extremely sorry to leave without see you and you sister ; especially as it will most likely be some time -- it be not probable that I should soon
soon have the pleasure of meet you again . I go to tomorrow . " " you would not have go , however , " say , recover herself , and determined to get over what she so much dread as soon as possible , " without receive we good wish , even if we have not be able to give they in person . be quite right in what she say . I have something of consequence to inform you of , which I be on the point of communicating by paper . I be charge with a most agreeable office ( breathe rather faster than usual as she speak . ) , who be here only ten minute ago , have desire I to say , that understand you mean to take order , he have great pleasure in offer you the living of now just vacant , and only wish it be more valuable . allow I to congratulate you on have so respectable and well - judge a friend , and to join in he wish that the living -- it be about two hundred a - year -- be much more considerable , and such as might better enable you to -- as might be more than a temporary accommodation to yourself -- such , in short , as might establish all you view of happiness . " what feel , as he could not say it himself , it can not be expect that any one else should say for he . he look all the astonishment which such unexpected , such unthotch - of information could not fail of exciting ; but he say only these two word , " ! " " yes , " continue , gather more resolution , as some of the worst be over , " mean it as a testimony of he concern for what have lately pass -- for the cruel situation in which the unjustifiable conduct of you family have place you -- a concern which I be sure , myself , and all you friend , must share ; and likewise as a proof of he high esteem for you general character , and he particular approbation of you behaviour on the present occasion . " " give I a living ! -- can it be possible ? " " the unkindness of you own relation have make you astonished to find friendship any where . " " no , " reply be , with sudden consciousness , " not to find it in you ; for I can not be ignorant that to you , to you goodness , I owe it all .-- I feel it -- I would express it if I could -- but , as you well know , I be no orator . " " you be very much mistaken . I do assure you that you owe it entirely , at least almost entirely , to you own merit , and 's discernment of it . I have have no hand in it . I do not even know , till I understand he design , that the living be vacant ; nor have it ever occur to I that he might have have such a living in he gift . as a friend of mine , of my family , he may , perhaps -- indeed I know he have , still greater pleasure in bestow it ; but , upon my word , you owe nothing to my solicitation . " oblige she to acknowledge some small share in the action , but she be at the same time so unwilling to appear as the benefactress of , that she acknowledge it with hesitation ; which probably contribute to fix that suspicion in he mind which have recently enter it . for a short time he sit deep in thought , after have cease to speak ; -- at last , and as if it be rather a effort , he say , " seem a man of great worth and respectability . I have always hear he speak of as such , and you brother I know esteem he highly . he be undoubtedly a sensible man , and in he manners perfectly the gentleman . " " indeed , " reply , " I believe that you will find he , on farther acquaintance , all that you have hear he to be , and as you will be such very near neighbour ( for I understand the parsonage be almost close to the mansion - house , ) it be particularly important that he should be all this . " make no answer ; but when she have turn away she head , give she a look so serious , so earnest , so uncheerful , as seem to say , that he might hereafter wish the distance between the parsonage and the mansion - house much greater . " , I think , lodge in , " say he , soon afterwards , rise from he chair . tell he the number of the house . " I must hurry away then , to give he those thanks which you will not allow I to give you ; to assure he that he have make I a very -- a exceedingly happy man . " do not offer to detain he ; and they part , with a very earnest assurance on she side of she unceasing good wish for he happiness in every change of situation that might befall he ; on he , with rather a attempt to return the same good will , than the power of express it . " when I see he again , " say to herself , as the door shut he out , " I shall see he the husband of . " and with this pleasing anticipation , she sit down to
to reconsider the past , recall the word and endeavour to comprehend all the feeling of ; and , of course , to reflect on she own with discontent . when come home , though she return from see people whom she have never see before , and of whom therefore she must have a great deal to say , she mind be so much more occupy by the important secret in she possession , than by anything else , that she revert to it again as soon as appear . " well , my dear , " she cry , " I send you up to the young man . do not I do right ? -- and I suppose you have no great difficulty -- you do not find he very unwilling to accept you proposal ? " " no , ma 'am ; that be not very likely . " " well , and how soon will he be ready ?-- for it seem all to depend upon that . " " really , " say , " I know so little of these kind of form , that I can hardly even conjecture as to the time , or the preparation necessary ; but I suppose two or three month will complete he ordination . " " two or three month ! " cry ; " ! my dear , how calmly you talk of it ; and can the wait two or three month ! bless I !--I be sure it would put I quite out of patience ! -- and though one would be very glad to do a kindness by poor , I do think it be not worth while to wait two or three month for he . sure somebody else might be find that would do as well ; somebody that be in order already . " " my dear ma 'am , " say , " what can you be think of ?-- why , 's only object be to be of use to . " " bless you , my dear ! -- sure you do not mean to persuade I that the Colonel only marry you for the sake of give ten guinea to ! " the deception could not continue after this ; and a explanation immediately take place , by which both gain considerable amusement for the moment , without any material loss of happiness to either , for Jennings only exchange one form of delight for another , and still without forfeit she expectation of the first . " aye , aye , the parsonage be but a small one , " say she , after the first ebullition of surprise and satisfaction be over , " and very likely may be out of repair ; but to hear a man apologising , as I think , for a house that to my knowledge have five sitting room on the ground - floor , and I think the housekeeper tell I could make up fifteen bed !-- and to you too , that have be use to live in cottage !-- it seem quite ridiculous . but , my dear , we must touch up the to do some thing to the parsonage , and make it comfortable for they , before go to it . " " but do not seem to have any idea of the living 's be enough to allow they to marry . " " the be a ninny , my dear ; because he have two thousand a - year himself , he think that nobody else can marry on less . take my word for it , that , if I be alive , I shall be pay a visit at before ; and I be sure I sha not go if can not there . " be quite of she opinion , as to the probability of they not wait for any thing more . chapter 41 , have carry he thanks to , proceed with he happiness to ; and such be the excess of it by the time he reach 's , that she be able to assure , who call on she again the next day with she congratulation , that she have never see he in such spirits before in she life . she own happiness , and she own spirit , be at least very certain ; and she join most heartily in she expectation of they be all comfortably together in before . so far be she , at the same time , from any backwardness to give Elinor that credit which would give she , that she speak of she friendship for they both with the most grateful warmth , be ready to own all they obligation to she , and openly declare that no exertion for they good on 's part , either present or future , would ever surprise she , for she believe she capable of do any thing in the world for those she really value . as for , she be not only ready to worship he as a saint , but be moreover truly anxious that he should be treat as one in all worldly concern ; anxious that he tithes should be raise to the utmost ; and scarcely resolve to avail herself , at , as far as she possibly could , of he servants , he carriage , he cow , and he poultry . it be now above a week since have call in , and as since that time no notice have be take by they of he wife 's indisposition , beyond one verbal enquiry , begin to feel it necessary to pay she a visit .-- this be a obligation , however , which not only oppos she own inclination , but which have not the assistance of any encouragement from she companion . , not contente with
with absolutely refuse to go herself , be very urgent to prevent she sister 's go at all ; and , though she carriage be always at 's service , so very much dislike , that not even she curiosity to see how she look after the late discovery , nor she strong desire to affront she by take 's part , could overcome she unwillingness to be in she company again . the consequence be , that set out by herself to pay a visit , for which no one could really have less inclination , and to run the risk of a tete - a - tete with a woman , whom neither of the other have so much reason to dislike . be deny ; but before the carriage could turn from the house , she husband accidentally come out . he express great pleasure in meet , tell she that he have be just go to call in , and , assure she that would be very glad to see she , invite she to come in . they walk up stair in to the drawing - room .-- nobody be there . " Fanny be in she own room , I suppose , " say he :--" I will go to she presently , for I be sure she will not have the least objection in the world to see you .-- very far from it , indeed . now especially there can not be -- but however , you and be always great favourite .-- why would not Marianne come ? " -- make what excuse she could for she . " I be not sorry to see you alone , " he reply , " for I have a good deal to say to you . this living of 's -- can it be true ?--have he really give it to ?-- I hear it yesterday by chance , and be come to you on purpose to enquire farther about it . " " it be perfectly true .-- have give the living of to . " " really !-- well , this be very astonishing !-- no relationship !-- no connection between they !-- and now that livings fetch such a price !-- what be the value of this ? " " about two hundred a year . " " very well -- and for the next presentation to a living of that value -- suppose the late incumbent to have be old and sickly , and likely to vacate it soon -- he might have get I dare say -- fourteen hundred pound . and how come he not to have settle that matter before this person 's death ?-- now indeed it would be too late to sell it , but a man of 's sense !-- I wonder he should be so improvident in a point of such common , such natural , concern !-- well , I be convinced that there be a vast deal of inconsistency in almost every human character . I suppose , however -- on recollection -- that the case may probably be this . be only to hold the living till the person to whom the Colonel have really sell the presentation , be old enough to take it . -- aye , aye , that be the fact , depend upon it . " contradict it , however , very positively ; and by relate that she have herself be employ in convey the offer from to , and , therefore , must understand the term on which it be give , oblige he to submit to she authority . " it be truly astonish ! " -- he cry , after hear what she say --" what could be the 's motive ? " " a very simple one -- to be of use to . " " well , well ; whatever may be , be a very lucky man .-- you will not mention the matter to , however , for though I have break it to she , and she bear it vastly well , -- she will not like to hear it much talk of . " have some difficulty here to refrain from observe , that she think might have borne with composure , a acquisition of wealth to she brother , by which neither she nor she child could be possibly impoverished . " , " add he , lower he voice to the tone become so important a subject , " know nothing about it at present , and I believe it will be best to keep it entirely conceal from she as long as may be .-- when the marriage take place , I fear she must hear of it all . " " but why should such precaution be use ?-- though it be not to be suppose that Ferrars can have the smallest satisfaction in know that she son have money enough to live upon , -- for that must be quite out of the question ; yet why , upon she late behaviour , be she suppose to feel at all ?-- she have do with she son , she cast he off for ever , and have make all those over whom she have any influence , cast he off likewise . surely , after do so , she can not be imagine liable to any impression of sorrow or of joy on he account -- she can not be interested in any thing that befall he .-- she would not be so weak as to throw away the comfort of a child , and yet retain the anxiety of a parent ! " " ah ! , " say , " you reasoning be very good , but it be found on ignorance of human nature . when 's unhappy match take place , depend upon it he mother
mother will feel as much as if she have never discard he ; and , therefore every circumstance that may accelerate that dreadful event , must be conceal from she as much as possible . can never forget that be she son . " " you surprise I ; I should think it must nearly have escape she memory by this time . " " you wrong she exceedingly . be one of the most affectionate mother in the world . " be silent . " we think now , " -- say , after a short pause , " of 's marry . " , smile at the grave and decisive importance of she brother 's tone , calmly reply , " the lady , I suppose , have no choice in the affair . " " choice !-- how do you mean ? " " I only mean that I suppose , from you manner of speak , it must be the same to whether she or . " " certainly , there can be no difference ; for will now to all intent and purpose be consider as the eldest son ; -- and as to any thing else , they be both very agreeable young man : I do not know that one be superior to the other . " say no more , and be also for a short time silent . -- he reflection end thus . " of one thing , my dear sister , " kindly take she hand , and speak in a awful whisper , -- " I may assure you ;-- and I will do it , because I know it must gratify you . I have good reason to think -- indeed I have it from the best authority , or I should not repeat it , for otherwise it would be very wrong to say any thing about it -- but I have it from the very best authority -- not that I ever precisely hear say it herself -- but she daughter do , and I have it from she -- that in short , whatever objection there might be against a certain -- a certain connection -- you understand I -- it would have be far preferable to she , it would not have give she half the vexation that this doe . I be exceedingly pleased to hear that consider it in that light -- a very gratifying circumstance you know to we all . ' it would have be beyond comparison , ' she say , ' the least evil of the two , and she would be glad to compound now for nothing worse . ' but however , all that be quite out of the question -- not to be think of or mention -- as to any attachment you know -- it never could be -- all that be go by . but I think I would just tell you of this , because I know how much it must please you . not that you have any reason to regret , my dear . there be no doubt of you do exceedingly well -- quite as well , or better , perhaps , all thing consider . have be with you lately ? " have hear enough , if not to gratify she vanity , and raise she self - importance , to agitate she nerve and fill she mind ; -- and she be therefore glad to be spare from the necessity of say much in reply herself , and from the danger of hear any thing more from she brother , by the entrance of . after a few moment ' chat , , recollect that be yet uninformed of she sister 's be there , quit the room in quest of she ; and be leave to improve she acquaintance with , who , by the gay unconcern , the happy self - complacency of he manner while enjoy so unfair a division of he mother 's love and liberality , to the prejudice of he banish brother , earn only by he own dissipate course of life , and that brother 's integrity , be confirm she most unfavourable opinion of he head and heart . they have scarcely be two minute by themselves , before he begin to speak of ; for he , too , have hear of the living , and be very inquisitive on the subject . repeat the particular of it , as she have give they to ; and they effect on , though very different , be not less strike than it have be on he . he laugh most immoderately . the idea of 's be a clergyman , and live in a small parsonage - house , divert he beyond measure ; -- and when to that be add the fanciful imagery of Edward read prayer in a white surplice , and publish the banns of marriage between and , he could conceive nothing more ridiculous . , while she wait in silence and immovable gravity , the conclusion of such folly , could not restrain she eye from be fix on he with a look that speak all the contempt it excit . it be a look , however , very well bestow , for it relieve she own feeling , and give no intelligence to he . he be recall from wit to wisdom , not by any reproof of she 's , but by he own sensibility . " we may treat it as a joke , " say he , at last , recover from the affect laugh which have considerably lengthen out the genuine gaiety of the moment -- " but , upon my soul , it be a most serious business . poor ! he be ruin for ever . I be extremely sorry for it -- for I know he
he to be a very good - hear creature ; as well - mean a fellow perhaps , as any in the world . you must not judge of he , , from you slight acquaintance .-- poor ! -- he manners be certainly not the happiest in nature . -- but we be not all bear , you know , with the same power , -- the same address .-- poor fellow ! -- to see he in a circle of strangers ! -- to be sure it be pitiable enough !-- but upon my soul , I believe he have as good a heart as any in the kingdom ; and I declare and protest to you I never be so shocked in my life , as when it all burst forth . I could not believe it .-- my mother be the first person who tell I of it ; and I , feel myself call on to act with resolution , immediately say to she , ' my dear madam , I do not know what you may intend to do on the occasion , but as for myself , I must say , that if do marry this young woman , I never will see he again . ' that be what I say immediately .-- I be most uncommonly shocked , indeed !-- poor !-- he have do for himself completely -- shut himself out for ever from all decent society !-- but , as I directly say to my mother , I be not in the least surprised at it ; from he style of education , it be always to be expect . my poor mother be half frantic . " " have you ever see the lady ? " " yes ; once , while she be stay in this house , I happen to drop in for ten minute ; and I see quite enough of she . the merest awkward country girl , without style , or elegance , and almost without beauty .-- I remember she perfectly . just the kind of girl I should suppose likely to captivate poor . I offer immediately , as soon as my mother relate the affair to I , to talk to he myself , and dissuade he from the match ; but it be too late then , I find , to do any thing , for unluckily , I be not in the way at first , and know nothing of it till after the breach have take place , when it be not for I , you know , to interfere . but have I be inform of it a few hour earlier -- I think it be most probable -- that something might have be hit on . I certainly should have represent it to in a very strong light . ' my dear fellow ,' I should have say , ' consider what you be do . you be make a most disgraceful connection , and such a one as you family be unanimous in disapproving . ' I can not help think , in short , that mean might have be find . but now it be all too late . he must be starve , you know ; -- that be certain ; absolutely starve . " he have just settle this point with great composure , when the entrance of put a end to the subject . but though she never speak of it out of she own family , could see its influence on she mind , in the something like confusion of countenance with which she enter , and a attempt at cordiality in she behaviour to herself . she even proceed so far as to be concerned to find that and she sister be so soon to leave town , as she have hope to see more of they ; -- a exertion in which she husband , who attend she into the room , and hang enamoure over she accent , seem to distinguish every thing that be most affectionate and graceful . chapter 42 one other short call in , in which receive she brother 's congratulation on they travelling so far towards without any expense , and on 's be to follow they to Cleveland in a day or two , complete the intercourse of the brother and sister in town ; -- and a faint invitation from , to come to whenever it should happen to be in they way , which of all thing be the most unlikely to occur , with a more warm , though less public , assurance , from to , of the promptitude with which he should come to see she at , be all that foretold any meeting in the country . it amuse she to observe that all she friend seem determined to send she to ; -- a place , in which , of all other , she would now least chuse to visit , or wish to reside ; for not only be it consider as she future home by she brother and , but even Lucy , when they part , give she a pressing invitation to visit she there . very early in , and tolerably early in the day , the two party from and set out from they respective home , to meet , by appointment , on the road . for the convenience of and she child , they be to be more than two day on they journey , and , travel more expeditiously with , be to join they at soon after they arrival . , few as have be she hour of comfort in , and eager as she have long be to quit it , could not , when it come to the point , bid adieu to the house in which she have for the last time
time enjoy those hope , and that confidence , in , which be now extinguish for ever , without great pain . could she leave the place in which remain , busy in new engagement , and new scheme , in which she could have no share , without shed many tear . 's satisfaction , at the moment of removal , be more positive . she have no such object for she lingering thought to fix on , she leave no creature behind , from whom it would give she a moment 's regret to be divide for ever , she be pleased to be free herself from the persecution of 's friendship , she be grateful for bring she sister away unseen by since he marriage , and she look forward with hope to what a few month of tranquility at might do towards restore 's peace of mind , and confirm she own . they journey be safely perform . the second day bring they into the cherished , or the prohibit , county of , for as such be it dwelt on by turn in 's imagination ; and in the forenoon of the third they drive up to . be a spacious , modern - build house , situate on a sloping lawn . it have no park , but the pleasure - grounds be tolerably extensive ; and like every other place of the same degree of importance , it have its open shrubbery , and closer wood walk , a road of smooth gravel win round a plantation , lead to the front , the lawn be dot over with timber , the house itself be under the guardianship of the fir , the mountain - ash , and the acacia , and a thick screen of they altogether , intersperse with tall Lombardy poplar , shut out the office . enter the house with a heart swell with emotion from the consciousness of be only eighty mile from , and not thirty from ; and before she have be five minute within its wall , while the other be busily help to show she child to the housekeeper , she quit it again , steal away through the winding shrubbery , now just begin to be in beauty , to gain a distant eminence ; where , from its Grecian temple , she eye , wander over a wide tract of country to the south - east , could fondly rest on the farthest ridge of hill in the horizon , and fancy that from they summit might be see . in such moments of precious , invaluable misery , she rejoice in tear of agony to be at ; and as she return by a different circuit to the house , feel all the happy privilege of country liberty , of wander from place to place in free and luxurious solitude , she resolve to spend almost every hour of every day while she remain with the , in the indulgence of such solitary ramble . she return just in time to join the other as they quit the house , on a excursion through its more immediate premise ; and the rest of the morning be easily whil away , in lounge round the kitchen garden , examine the bloom upon its wall , and listen to the gardener 's lamentation upon blight , in dawdl through the green - house , where the loss of she favourite plant , unwarily expose , and nip by the lingering frost , raise the laughter of , -- and in visit she poultry - yard , where , in the disappointed hope of she dairy - maid , by hen forsak they nests , or be steal by a fox , or in the rapid decrease of a promising young brood , she find fresh source of merriment . the morning be fine and dry , and , in she plan of employment abroad , have not calculate for any change of weather during they stay at . with great surprise therefore , do she find herself prevent by a settled rain from go out again after dinner . she have depend on a twilight walk to the temple , and perhaps all over the grounds , and a evening merely cold or damp would not have deter she from it ; but a heavy and settle rain even she could not fancy dry or pleasant weather for walking . they party be small , and the hour pass quietly away . have she child , and Jenning she carpet - work ; they talk of the friend they have leave behind , arrange 's engagement , and wonder whether and would get farther than read that night . , however little concerned in it , join in they discourse ; and , who have the knack of find she way in every house to the library , however it might be avoid by the family in general , soon procure herself a book . nothing be want on 's side that constant and friendly good humwe could do , to make they feel themselves welcome . the openness and heartiness of she manner more than aton for that want of recollection and elegance which make she often deficient in the form of politeness ; she kindness , recommend by so pretty a face , be engage ; she folly , though evident be not disgust , because it be not conceit ; and could have forgive every thing but she laugh . the two gentleman arrive the next day to a very late dinner , afforde a pleasant enlargement of the party , and a very welcome variety to they conversation , which a long morning of the same continue rain have reduce very low . have see so little of , and in that little have see so much variety in
in he address to she sister and herself , that she know not what to expect to find he in he own family . she find he , however , perfectly the gentleman in he behaviour to all he visitor , and only occasionally rude to he wife and she mother ; she find he very capable of be a pleasant companion , and only prevent from be so always , by too great a aptitude to fancy himself as much superior to people in general , as he must feel himself to be to and . for the rest of he character and habit , they be mark , as far as could perceive , with no trait at all unusual in he sex and time of life . he be nice in he eating , uncertain in he hour ; fond of he child , though affecte to slight it ; and id away the morning at billiards , which ought to have be devote to business . she like he , however , upon the whole , much better than she have expect , and in she heart be not sorry that she could like he no more ; -- not sorry to be drive by the observation of he Epicurism , he selfishness , and he conceit , to rest with complacency on the remembrance of 's generous temper , simple taste , and diffident feeling . of , or at least of some of he concern , she now receive intelligence from , who have be into lately ; and who , treat she at once as the disinterested friend of , and the kind of confident of himself , talk to she a great deal of the parsonage at , describe its deficiency , and tell she what he mean to do himself towards remove they . -- he behaviour to she in this , as well as in every other particular , he open pleasure in meet she after a absence of only ten day , he readiness to converse with she , and he deference for she opinion , might very well justify 's persuasion of he attachment , and would have be enough , perhaps , have not Elinor still , as from the first , believe he real favourite , to make she suspect it herself . but as it be , such a notion have scarcely ever enter she head , except by 's suggestion ; and she could not help believe herself the nicest observer of the two ; -- she watch he eye , while think only of he behaviour ; -- and while he look of anxious solicitude on 's feeling , in she head and throat , the beginning of a heavy cold , because unexpressed by word , entirely escape the latter lady 's observation ;-- she could discover in they the quick feeling , and needless alarm of a lover . two delightful twilight walk on the third and fourth evening of she be there , not merely on the dry gravel of the shrubbery , but all over the grounds , and especially in the most distant part of they , where there be something more of wildness than in the rest , where the tree be the oldest , and the grass be the longest and wettest , have -- assist by the still greater imprudence of sitting in she wet shoe and stocking -- give a cold so violent as , though for a day or two trifle with or deny , would force itself by increase ailment on the concern of every body , and the notice of herself . Prescription pour in from all quarter , and as usual , be all decline . though heavy and feverish , with a pain in she limb , and a cough , and a sore throat , a good night 's rest be to cure she entirely ; and it be with difficulty that prevail on she , when she go to bed , to try one or two of the simplest of the remedy . chapter 43 get up the next morning at she usual time ; to every inquiry replie that she be better , and try to prove herself so , by engage in she accustomary employment . but a day spend in sitting shivering over the fire with a book in she hand , which she be unable to read , or in lie , weary and languid , on a sofa , do not speak much in favour of she amendment ; and when , at last , she go early to bed , more and more indisposed , be only astonished at she sister 's composure , who , though attend and nurse she the whole day , against 's inclination , and force proper medicines on she at night , trust , like , to the certainty and efficacy of sleep , and feel no real alarm . a very restless and feverish night , however , disappoint the expectation of both ; and when , after persist in rising , confess herself unable to sit up , and return voluntarily to she bed , be very ready to adopt 's advice , of send for the 's apothecary . he come , examine he patient , and though encourage to expect that a very few day would restore she sister to health , yet , by pronounce she disorder to have a putrid tendency , and allow the word " infection " to pass he lip , give instant alarm to , on she baby 's account . , who have be inclin from the first to think 's complaint more serious than , now look very grave on 's report , and confirm 's fear and caution , urge the necessity of she immediate removal with she infant ; and , though
though treat they apprehension as idle , find the anxiety and importunity of he wife too great to be withstand . she departure , therefore , be fix on ; and within a hour after 's arrival , she set off , with she little boy and he nurse , for the house of a near relation of 's , who liv a few mile on the other side of ; whither she husband promise , at she earnest entreaty , to join she in a day or two ; and whither she be almost equally urgent with she mother to accompany she . , however , with a kindness of heart which make really love she , declare she resolution of not stirr from as long as remain ill , and of endeavouring , by she own attentive care , to supply to she the place of the mother she have take she from ; and find she on every occasion a most willing and active helpmate , desirous to share in all she fatigue , and often by she better experience in nursing , of material use . poor , languid and low from the nature of she malady , and feel herself universally ill , could no longer hope that tomorrow would find she recover ; and the idea of what tomorrow would have produce , but for this unlucky illness , make every ailment severe ; for on that day they be to have begin they journey home ; and , attend the whole way by a servant of , be to have take they mother by surprise on the follow forenoon . the little she say be all in lamentation of this inevitable delay ; though try to raise she spirits , and make she believe , as she then really believe herself , that it would be a very short one . the next day produce little or no alteration in the state of the patient ; she certainly be not better , and , except that there be no amendment , do not appear worse . they party be now farther reduce ; for , though very unwilling to go as well from real humanity and good - nature , as from a dislike of appear to be frightene away by he wife , be persuade at last by to perform he promise of follow she ; and while he be prepare to go , himself , with a much greater exertion , begin to talk of go likewise .-- here , however , the kindness of interpose most acceptably ; for to send the away while he love be in so much uneasiness on she sister 's account , would be to deprive they both , she think , of every comfort ; and therefore tell he at once that he stay at be necessary to herself , that she should want he to play at piquet of a evening , while be above with she sister , &c. she urge he so strongly to remain , that he , who be gratify the first wish of he own heart by a compliance , could not long even affect to demur ; especially as 's entreaty be warmly seconde by , who seem to feel a relief to himself , in leave behind he a person so well able to assist or advise in any emergence . be , of course , keep in ignorance of all these arrangement . she know not that she have be the means of send the owners of away , in about seven day from the time of they arrival . it give she no surprise that she see nothing of ; and as it give she likewise no concern , she never mention she name . two day pass away from the time of 's departure , and she situation continue , with little variation , the same . , who attend she every day , still talk boldly of a speedy recovery , and be equally sanguine ; but the expectation of the other be by no means so cheerful . have determine very early in the seizure that would never get over it , and , who be chiefly of use in listen to 's foreboding , be not in a state of mind to resist they influence . he try to reason himself out of fear , which the different judgment of the apothecary seem to render absurd ; but the many hour of each day in which he be leave entirely alone , be but too favourable for the admission of every melancholy idea , and he could not expel from he mind the persuasion that he should see no more . on the morning of the third day however , the gloomy anticipation of both be almost do away ; for when arrive , he declare he patient materially better . she pulse be much stronger , and every symptom more favourable than on the preceding visit . , confirm in every pleasant hope , be all cheerfulness ; rejoice that in she letter to she mother , she have pursue she own judgment rather than she friend 's , in make very light of the indisposition which delay they at ; and almost fix on the time when would be able to travel . but the day do not close so auspiciously as it begin .-- towards the evening become ill again , grow more heavy , restless , and uncomfortable than before . she sister , however , still sanguine , be willing to attribute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of have sit up to have she bed make ; and carefully administer the cordial prescribe , see she , with satisfaction , sink at last into a slumber , from which she expect the most beneficial effect . she sleep , though not so quiet
quiet as wish to see it , last a considerable time ; and anxious to observe the result of it herself , she resolve to sit with she during the whole of it . , know nothing of any change in the patient , go unusually early to bed ; she maid , who be one of the principal nurse , be recreate herself in the housekeeper 's room , and remain alone with . the repose of the latter become more and more disturbed ; and she sister , who watch , with unremitting attention she continual change of posture , and hear the frequent but inarticulate sound of complaint which pass she lip , be almost wish to rouse she from so painful a slumber , when , suddenly awaken by some accidental noise in the house , start hastily up , and , with feverish wildness , cry out ,-- " be mama come ?--" " not yet , " cry the other , conceal she terror , and assist to lie down again , " but she will be here , I hope , before it be long . it be a great way , you know , from hence to . " " but she must not go round by , " cry , in the same hurried manner . " I shall never see she , if she go by . " perceive with alarm that she be not quite herself , and , while attempt to soothe she , eagerly feel she pulse . it be lower and quicker than ever ! and , still talk wildly of mama , she alarm increase so rapidly , as to determine she on send instantly for , and despatch a messenger to for she mother . to consult with on the best means of effect the latter , be a thought which immediately follow the resolution of its performance ; and as soon she have ring up the maid to take she place by she sister , she hasten down to the drawing - room , where she know he be generally to be find at a much later hour than the present . it be no time for hesitation . she fear and she difficulty be immediately before he . she fear , he have no courage , no confidence to attempt the removal of :-- he listen to they in silent despondence ; -- but she difficulty be instantly obviate , for with a readiness that seem to speak the occasion , and the service pre-arrange in he mind , he offer himself as the messenger who should fetch . make no resistance that be not easily overcome . she thank he with brief , though fervent gratitude , and while he go to hurry off he servant with a message to , and a order for post-horse directly , she write a few line to she mother . the comfort of such a friend at that moment as -- or such a companion for she mother , -- how gratefully be it feel !-- a companion whose judgment would guide , whose attendance must relieve , and whose friendship might soothe she !-- as far as the shock of such a summon could be lessen to she , he presence , he manners , he assistance , would lessen it . he , meanwhile , whatever he might feel , act with all the firmness of a collect mind , make every necessary arrangement with the utmost despatch , and calculate with exactness the time in which she might look for he return . not a moment be lose in delay of any kind . the horse arrive , even before they be expect , and only press she hand with a look of solemnity , and a few word speak too low to reach she ear , hurrie into the carriage . it be then about twelve o'clock , and she return to she sister 's apartment to wait for the arrival of the apothecary , and to watch by she the rest of the night . it be a night of almost equal suffering to both . hour after hwe pass away in sleepless pain and delirium on 's side , and in the most cruel anxiety on 's , before appear . she apprehension once raise , pay by they excess for all she former security ; and the servant who sit up with she , for she would not allow to be call , only torture she more , by hint of what she mistress have always think . 's idea be still , at interval , fix incoherently on she mother , and whenever she mention she name , it give a pang to the heart of poor , who , reproach herself for have trifle with so many day of illness , and wretch for some immediate relief , fancie that all relief might soon be in vain , that every thing have be delay too long , and picture to herself she suffer mother arrive too late to see this darling child , or to see she rational . she be on the point of send again for , or if he could not come , for some other advice , when the former -- but not till after five o'clock -- arrive . he opinion , however , make some little amend for he delay , for though acknowledge a very unexpected and unpleasant alteration in he patient , he would not allow the danger to be material , and talk of the relief which a fresh mode of treatment must procure , with a confidence which , in a lesser degree , be communicate to . he promise to call again in the course of three or four hour , and leave both the patient and she anxious attendent more compose than he have
have find they . with strong concern , and with many reproach for not be call to they aid , do hear in the morning of what have pass . she former apprehension , now with greater reason restore , leave she no doubt of the event ; and though try to speak comfort to , she conviction of she sister 's danger would not allow she to offer the comfort of hope . she heart be really grieve . the rapid decay , the early death of a girl so young , so lovly as , must have struck a less interested person with concern . on 's compassion she have other claim . she have be for three month she companion , be still under she care , and she be know to have be greatly injured , and long unhappy . the distress of she sister too , particularly a favourite , be before she ; -- and as for they mother , when consider that might probably be to what be to herself , she sympathy in she suffering be very sincere . be punctual in he second visit ; -- but he come to be disappoint in he hope of what the last would produce . he medicine have fail ; -- the fever be unabated ; and only more quiet -- not more herself -- remain in a heavy stupor . , catche all , and more than all , he fear in a moment , propose to call in further advice . but he judge it unnecessary : he have still something more to try , some more fresh application , of whose success he be as confident as the last , and he visit conclude with encouraging assurances which reach the ear , but could not enter the heart of . she be calm , except when she think of she mother ; but she be almost hopeless ; and in this state she continue till noon , scarcely stirr from she sister 's bed , she thought wander from one image of grief , one suffer friend to another , and she spirit oppress to the utmost by the conversation of , who scruple not to attribute the severity and danger of this attack to the many week of previous indisposition which 's disappointment have bring on . feel all the reasonableness of the idea , and it give fresh misery to she reflection . about noon , however , she begin -- but with a caution -- a dread of disappointment which for some time keep she silent , even to she friend -- to fancy , to hope she could perceive a slight amendment in she sister 's pulse ; -- she wait , watch , and examine it again and again ; -- and at last , with a agitation more difficult to bury under exterior calmness , than all she forego distress , venture to communicate she hope . , though force , on examination , to acknowledge a temporary revival , try to keep she young friend from indulge a thought of its continuance ;-- and , con over every injunction of distrust , tell herself likewise not to hope . but it be too late . hope have already enter ; and feel all its anxious flutter , she bend over she sister to watch -- she hardly know for what . half a hour pass away , and the favourable symptom yet blesse she . other even arise to confirm it . she breath , she skin , she lip , all flatter with sign of amendment ; and fix she eye on she with a rational , though languid , gaze . Anxiety and hope now oppress she in equal degree , and leave she no moment of tranquillity till the arrival of at four o'clock ; -- when he assurance , he felicitation on a recovery in she sister even surpass he expectation , give she confidence , comfort , and tear of joy . be in every respect materially better , and he declare she entirely out of danger . , perhaps satisfied with the partial justification of she foreboding which have be find in they late alarm , allow herself to trust in he judgment , and admit , with unfeigned joy , and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness , the probability of a entire recovery . could not be cheerful . she joy be of a different kind , and lead to any thing rather than to gaiety . restore to life , health , friend , and to she do mother , be a idea to fill she heart with sensation of exquisite comfort , and expand it in fervent gratitude ; -- but it lead to no outward demonstration of joy , no word , no smile . all within 's breast be satisfaction , silent and strong . she continue by the side of she sister , with little intermission the whole afternoon , calm every fear , satisfy every inquiry of she enfeeble spirit , supply every succour , and watch almost every look and every breath . the possibility of a relapse would of course , in some moment , occur to remind she of what anxiety be -- but when she see , on she frequent and minute examination , that every symptom of recovery continue , and see at six o'clock sink into a quiet , steady , and to all appearance comfortable , sleep , she silence every doubt . the time be now draw on , when might be expect back . at ten o'clock , she trust , or at least not much later she mother would be relieve from the dreadful suspense in which she must now be travel towards they . the Colonel , too !--perhaps scarcely less a object of pity !--Oh !--how slow be the progress of
of time which yet keep they in ignorance ! at seven o'clock , leave still sweetly asleep , she join Jennings in the drawing - room to tea . of breakfast she have be keep by she fear , and of dinner by they sudden reverse , from eat much ; -- and the present refreshment , therefore , with such feeling of content as she bring to it , be particularly welcome . would have persuade she , at its conclusion , to take some rest before she mother 's arrival , and allow she to take she place by ; but have no sense of fatigue , no capability of sleep at that moment about she , and she be not to be keep away from she sister a unnecessary instant . Jennings therefore attend she up stair into the sick chamber , to satisfy herself that all continue right , leave she there again to she charge and she thought , and retire to she own room to write letter and sleep . the night be cold and stormy . the wind roar round the house , and the rain beat against the window ; but , all happiness within , regard it not . sleep through every blast ; and the traveller -- they have a rich reward in store , for every present inconvenience . the clock struck eight . have it be ten , would have be convince that at that moment she hear a carriage drive up to the house ; and so strong be the persuasion that she , in spite of the almost impossibility of they be already come , that she move into the adjoining dressing - closet and open a window shutter , to be satisfied of the truth . she instantly see that she ear have not deceive she . the flaring lamp of a carriage be immediately in view . by they uncertain light she think she could discern it to be draw by four horse ; and this , while it tell the excess of she poor mother 's alarm , give some explanation to such unexpected rapidity . never in she life have find it so difficult to be calm , as at that moment . the knowledge of what she mother must be feel as the carriage stopt at the door -- of she doubt -- she dread -- perhaps she despair !-- and of what she have to tell !-- with such knowledge it be impossible to be calm . all that remain to be do be to be speedy ; and , therefore stay only till she could leave 's maid with she sister , she hurrie down stair . the bustle in the vestibule , as she pass along a inner lobby , assure she that they be already in the house . she rush to the drawing - room , -- she enter it , -- and see only . chapter 44 , start back with a look of horror at the sight of he , obey the first impulse of she heart in turn instantly to quit the room , and she hand be already on the lock , when its action be suspend by he hastily advancing , and say , in a voice rather of command than supplication , " , for half a hour -- for ten minute -- I entreat you to stay . " " no , sir , " she reply with firmness , " I shall not stay . you business can not be with ME . the servant , I suppose , forget to tell you that be not in the house . " " have they tell I , " he cry with vehemence , " that and all he relation be at the , it would not have turn I from the door . my business be with you , and only you . " " with I ! " -- in the utmost amazement -- " well , sir , -- be quick -- and if you can -- less violent . " " sit down , and I will be both . " she hesitate ; she know not what to do . the possibility of 's arrive and finde she there , come across she . but she have promise to hear he , and she curiosity no less than she honor be engage . after a moment 's recollection , therefore , conclude that prudence require dispatch , and that she acquiescence would best promote it , she walk silently towards the table , and sit down . he take the opposite chair , and for half a minute not a word be say by either . " pray be quick , sir , " -- say , impatiently ;--" I have no time to spare . " he be sit in a attitude of deep meditation , and see not to hear she . " you sister , " say he , with abruptness , a moment afterwards -- " be out of danger . I hear it from the servant . be praise ! -- but be it true ? be it really true ? " would not speak . he repeat the inquiry with yet greater eagerness . " for 's sake tell I , be she out of danger , or be she not ? " " we hope she be . " he rise up , and walk across the room . " have I know as much half a hour ago -- but since I be here , " -- speak with a force vivacity as he return to he seat --" what do it signify ? -- for once , -- it will be the last time , perhaps -- let we be cheerful together .-- I be in a fine mood for gaiety .-- tell I honestly "
" -- a deeper glow overspread he cheek --" do you think I most a knave or a fool ? " look at he with greater astonishment than ever . she begin to think that he must be in liquor ; -- the strangeness of such a visit , and of such manners , see no otherwise intelligible ; and with this impression she immediately rise , say , " , I advise you at present to return to -- I be not at leisure to remain with you longer .-- whatever you business may be with I , will it be better recollect and explain to - morrow . " " I understand you , " he reply , with a expressive smile , and a voice perfectly calm ; " yes , I be very drunk .-- a pint of porter with my cold beef at be enough to over -set I . " " at ! " --cry , more and more at a loss to understand what he would be at . " yes , -- I leave this morning at eight o'clock , and the only ten minute I have spend out of my chaise since that time procure I a nuncheon at . " the steadiness of he manner , and the intelligence of he eye as he speak , convince , that whatever other unpardonable folly might bring he to , he be not bring there by intoxication , she say , after a moment 's recollection , " , you ink to feel , and I certainly do -- that after what have pass -- you come here in this manner , and force yourself upon my notice , require a very particular excuse .-- what be it , that you mean by it ? " -- " I mean , " -- say he , with serious energy --" if I can , to make you hate I one degree less than you do now . I mean to offer some kind of explanation , some kind of apology , for the past ; to open my whole heart to you , and by convince you , that though I have be always a blockhead , I have not be always a rascal , to obtain something like forgiveness from ma -- from you sister . " " be this the real reason of you come ? " " upon my soul it be , " -- be he answer , with a warmth which bring all the former to she remembrance , and in spite of herself make she think he sincere . " if that be all , you may be satisfied already , -- for -- she have long forgiven you . " " have she ? " -- he cry , in the same eager tone .-- " then she have forgive I before she ought to have do it . but she shall forgive I again , and on more reasonable grounds .-- now will you listen to I ? " bow she assent . " I do not know , " say he , after a pause of expectation on she side , and thoughtfulness on he own , --" how you may have account for my behaviour to you sister , or what diabolical motive you may have impute to I .-- perhaps you will hardly think the better of I , -- it be worth the trial however , and you shall hear every thing . when I first become intimate in you family , I have no other intention , no other view in the acquaintance than to pass my time pleasantly while I be obliged to remain in , more pleasantly than I have ever do before . you sister 's lovely person and interesting manners could not but please I ; and she behaviour to I almost from the first , be of a kind -- it be astonish , when I reflect on what it be , and what she be , that my heart should have be so insensible ! but at first I must confess , my vanity only be elevate by it . careless of she happiness , think only of my own amusement , give way to feeling which I have always be too much in the habit of indulging , I endeavoure , by every means in my power , to make myself pleasing to she , without any design of return she affection . " , at this point , turn she eye on he with the most angry contempt , stop he , by say , " it be hardly worth while , , for you to relate , or for I to listen any longer . such a begin as this can not be follow by any thing .-- do not let I be pain by hear any thing more on the subject . " " I insist on you hear the whole of it , " he reply , " my fortune be never large , and I have always be expensive , always in the habit of associating with people of better income than myself . every year since my come of age , or even before , I believe , have add to my debt ; and though the death of my old cousin , , be to set I free ; yet that event be uncertain , and possibly far distant , it have be for some time my intention to re-establish my circumstance by marry a woman of fortune . to attach myself to you sister , therefore , be not a thing to be think of ; -- and with a meanness , selfishness , cruelty -- which no indignant , no contemptuous look , even of yours , , can ever reprobate too much -- I be act in this manner , try to engage
engage she regard , without a thought of return it . -- but one thing may be say for I : even in that horrid state of selfish vanity , I do not know the extent of the injury I meditate , because I do not then know what it be to love . but have I ever know it ?-- well may it be doubt ; for , have I really love , could I have sacrifice my feeling to vanity , to avarice ?-- or , what be more , could I have sacrificed hers ?-- but I have do it . to avoid a comparative poverty , which she affection and she society would have deprive of all its horror , I have , by raise myself to affluence , lose every thing that could make it a blessing . " " you do then , " say , a little softened , " believe yourself at one time attach to she ? " " to have resist such attraction , to have withstood such tenderness !-- be there a man on earth who could have do it ? -- yes , I find myself , by insensible degree , sincerely fond of she ; and the happiest hour of my life be what I spend with she when I feel my intentions be strictly honourable , and my feeling blameless . even then , however , when fully determine on pay my address to she , I allow myself most improperly to put off , from day to day , the moment of do it , from a unwillingness to enter into a engagement while my circumstance be so greatly embarrassed . I will not reason here -- nor will I stop for you to expatiate on the absurdity , and the worse than absurdity , of scrupling to engage my faith where my honour be already bound . the event have prove , that I be a cunning fool , provide with great circumspection for a possible opportunity of make myself contemptible and wretch for ever . at last , however , my resolution be take , and I have determine , as soon as I could engage she alone , to justify the attention I have so invariably pay she , and openly assure she of a affection which I have already take such pain to display . but in the interim -- in the interim of the very few hour that be to pass , before I could have a opportunity of speak with she in private -- a circumstance occur -- a unlucky circumstance , to ruin all my resolution , and with it all my comfort . a discovery take place , " -- here he hesitate and look down .--" have somehow or other be inform , I imagine by some distant relation , whose interest it be to deprive I of she favour , of a affair , a connection -- but I need not explain myself farther , " he add , look at she with a heighten colour and a enquiring eye -- " you particular intimacy -- you have probably hear the whole story long ago . " " I have , " return , colour likewise , and harden she heart anew against any compassion for he , " I have hear it all . and how you will explain away any part of you guilt in that dreadful business , I confess be beyond my comprehension . " " remember , " cry , " from whom you receive the account . could it be a impartial one ? I acknowledge that she situation and she character ink to have be respect by I . I do not mean to justify myself , but at the same time can not leave you to suppose that I have nothing to urge -- that because she be injure she be irreproachable , and because I be a libertine , she must be a saint . if the violence of she passion , the weakness of she understanding -- I do not mean , however , to defend myself . she affection for I deserve better treatment , and I often , with great self - reproach , recall the tenderness which , for a very short time , have the power of create any return . I wish -- I heartily wish it have never be . but I have injur more than herself ; and I have injure one , whose affection for I --( may I say it ? ) be scarcely less warm than hers ; and whose mind -- oh ! how infinitely superior ! " -- " you indifference , however , towards that unfortunate girl -- I must say it , unpleasant to I as the discussion of such a subject may well be -- you indifference be no apology for you cruel neglect of she . do not think yourself excuse by any weakness , any natural defect of understanding on she side , in the wanton cruelty so evident on yours . you must have know , that while you be enjoy yourself in pursue fresh scheme , always gay , always happy , she be reduce to the extremest indigence . " " but , upon my soul , I do not know it , " he warmly reply ; " I do not recollect that I have omit to give she my direction ; and common sense might have tell she how to find it out . " " well , sir , and what say ? " " she tax I with the offence at once , and my confusion may be guesse . the purity of she life , the formality of she notions , she ignorance of the world -- every thing be against I . the matter itself I could not deny ,
, and vain be every endeavour to soften it . she be previously dispose , I believe , to doubt the morality of my conduct in general , and be moreover discontent with the very little attention , the very little portion of my time that I have bestow on she , in my present visit . in short , it end in a total breach . by one measure I might have save myself . in the height of she morality , good woman ! she offer to forgive the past , if I would marry . that could not be -- and I be formally dismiss from she favour and she house . the night follow this affair -- I be to go the next morning -- be spend by I in deliberating on what my future conduct should be . the struggle be great -- but it end too soon . my affection for , my thorough conviction of she attachment to I -- it be all insufficient to outweigh that dread of poverty , or get the better of those false idea of the necessity of riche , which I be naturally inclin to feel , and expensive society have increase . I have reason to believe myself secure of my present wife , if I choose to address she , and I persuade myself to think that nothing else in common prudence remain for I to do . a heavy scene however await I , before I could leave ;-- I be engage to dine with you on that very day ; some apology be therefore necessary for my break this engagement . but whether I should write this apology , or deliver it in person , be a point of long debate . to see , I feel , would be dreadful , and I even doubt whether I could see she again , and keep to my resolution . in that point , however , I undervalue my own magnanimity , as the event declare ; for I go , I see she , and see she miserable , and leave she miserable -- and leave she hope never to see she again . " " why do you call , ? " say , reproachfully ; " a note would have answer every purpose .-- why be it necessary to call ? " " it be necessary to my own pride . I could not bear to leave the country in a manner that might lead you , or the rest of the neighbourhood , to suspect any part of what have really pass between and myself -- and I resolve therefore on call at the cottage , in my way to . the sight of you dear sister , however , be really dreadful ; and , to heighten the matter , I find she alone . you be all gone I do not know where . I have leave she only the evening before , so fully , so firmly resolve within my self on do right ! a few hour be to have engage she to I for ever ; and I remember how happy , how gay be my spirit , as I walk from the cottage to , satisfied with myself , delighte with every body ! but in this , we last interview of friendship , I approach she with a sense of guilt that almost take from I the power of dissembling . she sorrow , she disappointment , she deep regret , when I tell she that I be oblige to leave so immediately -- I never shall forget it -- too with such reliance , such confidence in I !-- oh , !-- what a hard - hear rascal I be ! " they be both silent for a few moment . first spoke . " do you tell she that you should soon return ? " " I do not know what i tell she , " he reply , impatiently ; " less than be due to the past , beyond a doubt , and in all likelihood much more than be justifi by the future . I can not think of it .-- it will not do .-- then come you dear mother to torture I farther , with all she kindness and confidence . thank ! it do torture I . I be miserable . , you can not have a idea of the comfort it give I to look back on my own misery . I owe such a grudge to myself for the stupid , rascally folly of my own heart , that all my past suffering under it be only triumph and exultation to I now . well , I go , leave all that I love , and go to those to whom , at best , I be only indifferent . my journey to town -- travel with my own horse , and therefore so tediously -- no creature to speak to -- my own reflection so cheerful -- when I look forward every thing so invite !-- when I look back at , the picture so soothing !-- oh , it be a blessed journey ! " he stop . " well , sir , " say , who , though pity he , grow impatient for he departure , " and this be all ? " " ah !-- no , -- have you forget what pass in town ?-- that infamous letter -- do she show it you ? " " yes , I see every note that pass . " " when the first of hers reach I ( as it immediately do , for I be in town the whole time , ) what I feel be -- in the common phrase , not to be express ; in a more simple one -- perhaps too simple to raise any
any emotion -- my feeling be very , very painful .-- every line , every word be -- in the hackneyed metaphor which they dear writer , be she here , would forbid -- a dagger to my heart . to know that be in town be -- in the same language -- a thunderbolt .-- Thunderbolt and dagger !-- what a reproof would she have give I !-- she taste , she opinion -- I believe they be better know to I than my own , -- and I be sure they be dearer . " 's heart , which have undergone many change in the course of this extraordinary conversation , be now soften again ; -- yet she feel it she duty to check such idea in she companion as the last . " this be not right , .-- remember that you be marry . relate only what in you conscience you think necessary for I to hear . " " 's note , by assure I that I be still as dear to she as in former day , that in spite of the many , many week we have be separate , she be as constant in she own feeling , and as full of faith in the constancy of mine as ever , awaken all my remorse . I say awaken , because time and , business and dissipation , have in some measure quiet it , and I have be grow a fine hardened villain , fancie myself indifferent to she , and chuse to fancy that she too must have become indifferent to I ; talk to myself of we past attachment as a mere idle , trifl business , shrugge up my shoulders in proof of its be so , and silence every reproach , overcome every scruple , by secretly say now and then , 'I shall be heartily glad to hear she be well married . '-- but this note make I know myself better . I feel that she be infinitely dearer to I than any other woman in the world , and that I be use she infamously . but every thing be then just settle between and I . to retreat be impossible . all that I have to do , be to avoid you both . I send no answer to , intend by that to preserve myself from she farther notice ; and for some time I be even determine not to call in ; -- but at last , judge it wiser to affect the air of a cool , common acquaintance than anything else , I watch you all safely out of the house one morning , and leave my name . " " watch we out of the house ! " " even so . you would be surprised to hear how often I watch you , how often I be on the point of falling in with you . I have enter many a shop to avoid you sight , as the carriage drive by . lod as I do in , there be hardly a day in which I do not catch a glimpse of one or other of you ; and nothing but the most constant watchfulness on my side , a most invariably prevail desire to keep out of you sight , could have separate we so long . I avoid the as much as possible , as well as everybody else who be likely to prove a acquaintance in common . not aware of they be in town , however , I blundere on , I believe , the first day of he come , and the day after I have call at 's . he ask I to a party , a dance at he house in the evening . -- have he not tell I as a inducement that you and you sister be to be there , I should have feel it too certain a thing , to trust myself near he . the next morning bring another short note from -- still affectionate , open , artless , confid -- everything that could make my conduct most hateful . I could not answer it . I try -- but could not frame a sentence . but I think of she , I believe , every moment of the day . if you can pity I , , pity my situation as it be then . with my head and heart full of you sister , I be force to play the happy lover to another woman !-- those three or four week be worse than all . well , at last , as I need not tell you , you be force on I ; and what a sweet figure I cut !-- what a evening of agony it be !-- , beautiful as a angel on one side , call I in such a tone !-- oh , !-- hold out she hand to I , ask I for a explanation , with those bewitch eye fix in such speak solicitude on my face !-- and , jealous as the on the other hand , look all that be -- well , it do not signify ; it be over now .-- such a evening !-- I run away from you all as soon as I could ; but not before I have see 's sweet face as white as death .-- that be the last , last look I ever have of she ; -- the last manner in which she appear to I . it be a horrid sight ! -- yet when I think of she to - day as really die , it be a kind of comfort to I to imagine that I know exactly how she would appear to those , who see she last in this world . she be before I , constantly
constantly before I , as I travel , in the same look and hue . " a short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeed . Willoughby first rouse himself , break it thus : " well , let I make haste and be gone . you sister be certainly better , certainly out of danger ? " " we be assure of it . " " you poor mother , too !--doting on . " " but the letter , , you own letter ; have you any thing to say about that ? " " yes , yes , that in particular . you sister write to I again , you know , the very next morning . you see what she say . I be breakfaste at the , -- and she letter , with some other , be bring to I there from my lodging . it happen to catch 's eye before it catch mine -- and its size , the elegance of the paper , the hand -writ altogether , immediately give she a suspicion . some vague report have reach she before of my attachment to some young lady in , and what have pass within she observation the preceding evening have mark who the young lady be , and make she more jealous than ever . affec that air of playfulness , therefore , which be delightful in a woman one love , she open the letter directly , and read its contents . she be well pay for she impudence . she read what make she wretch . she wretchedness I could have borne , but she passion -- she malice -- at all event it must be appease . and , in short -- what do you think of my wife 's style of letter-writing ?--delicate --tender--truly feminine -- be it not ? " " you wife !-- the letter be in you own hand - write . " " yes , but I have only the credit of servilely copy such sentence as I be asham to put my name to . the original be all she own -- she own happy thought and gentle diction . but what could I do !-- we be engage , every thing in preparation , the day almost fix -- but I be talk like a fool . preparation !--day !-- in honest word , she money be necessary to I , and in a situation like mine , any thing be to be do to prevent a rupture . and after all , what do it signify to my character in the opinion of and she friend , in what language my answer be couched ?-- it must have be only to one end . my business be to declare myself a scoundrel , and whether I do it with a bow or a bluster be of little importance .-- 'I be ruin for ever in they opinion -- ' say I to myself -- 'I be shut out for ever from they society , they already think I a unprincipled fellow , this letter will only make they think I a blackguard one . ' such be my reasoning , as , in a sort of desperate carelessness , I copy my wife 's word , and part with the last relic of . she three note -- unluckily they be all in my pocketbook , or I should have deny they existence , and hoard they for ever -- I be force to put they up , and could not even kiss they . and the lock of hair -- that too I have always carry about I in the same pocket - book , which be now search by Madam with the most ingratiating virulence , -- the dear lock -- all , every memento be tear from I . " " you be very wrong , , very blamable , " say , while she voice , in spite of herself , betraye she compassionate emotion ; " you ought not to speak in this way , either of . or my sister . you have make you own choice . it be not force on you . you wife have a claim to you politeness , to you respect , at least . she must be attach to you , or she would not have marry you . to treat she with unkindness , to speak of she slightingly be no atonement to -- nor can I suppose it a relief to you own conscience . " " do not talk to I of my wife , " say he with a heavy sigh .-- " she do not deserve you compassion .-- she know I have no regard for she when we marry .-- well , marry we be , and come down to to be happy , and afterwards return to town to be gay .-- and now do you pity I , ? -- or have I say all this to no purpose ?-- be I -- be it only one degree -- be I less guilty in you opinion than I be before ?-- my intentions be not always wrong . have I explain away any part of my guilt ? " " yes , you have certainly remove something -- a little .-- you have prove yourself , on the whole , less faulty than I have believe you . you have prove you heart less wicked , much less wicked . but I hardly know -- the misery that you have inflict -- I hardly know what could have make it worse . " " will you repeat to you sister when she be recover , what I have be tell you ?-- let I be a little lighten too in she opinion as well as in yours . you tell I that she have forgive I already . let I be able
able to fancy that a better knowledge of my heart , and of my present feeling , will draw from she a more spontaneous , more natural , more gentle , less dignified , forgiveness . tell she of my misery and my penitence -- tell she that my heart be never inconstant to she , and if you will , that at this moment she be dearer to I than ever . " " I will tell she all that be necessary to what may comparatively be call , you justification . but you have not explain to I the particular reason of you come now , nor how you hear of she illness . " " last night , in lobby , I run against , and when he see who I be -- for the first time these two month -- he speak to I .-- that he have cut I ever since my marriage , I have see without surprise or resentment . now , however , he good - natured , honest , stupid soul , full of indignation against I , and concern for you sister , could not resist the temptation of tell I what he know ink to -- though probably he do not think it would -- vex I horridly . as bluntly as he could speak it , therefore , he tell I that be die of a putrid fever at -- a letter that morne receive from declare she danger most imminent -- the Palmer be all go off in a fright , &c .-- I be too much shock to be able to pass myself off as insensible even to the undiscerning . he heart be soften in see mine suffer ; and so much of he ill - will be do away , that when we part , he almost shook I by the hand while he remind I of a old promise about a pointer puppy . what I feel on hear that you sister be die -- and die too , believe I the greatest villain upon earth , scorn , hate I in she latest moment -- for how could I tell what horrid project might not have be impute ? one person I be sure would represent I as capable of any thing -- what I feel be dreadful !-- my resolution be soon make , and at eight o'clock this morning I be in my carriage . now you know all . " make no answer . she thought be silently fix on the irreparable injury which too early a independence and its consequent habits of idleness , dissipation , and luxury , have make in the mind , the character , the happiness , of a man who , to every advantage of person and talents , a disposition naturally open and honest , and a feeling , affectionate temper . the world have make he extravagant and vain -- Extravagance and vanity have make he cold - hearted and selfish . Vanity , while seek its own guilty triumph at the expense of another , have involve he in a real attachment , which extravagance , or at least its offspring , necessity , have require to be sacrifice . each faulty propensity in lead he to evil , have lead he likewise to punishment . the attachment , from which against honour , against feeling , against every better interest he have outwardly torn himself , now , when no longer allowable , govern every thought ; and the connection , for the sake of which he have , with little scruple , leave she sister to misery , be likely to prove a source of unhappiness to himself of a far more incurable nature . from a reverie of this kind she be recall at the end of some minute by , who , rouse himself from a reverie at least equally painful , start up in preparation for go , and say -- " there be no use in stay here ; I must be off . " " be you go back to town ? " " no -- to . I have business there ; from thence to town in a day or two . good bye . " he hold out he hand . she could not refuse to give he hers 's ; -- he press it with affection . " and you do think something better of I than you do ? " --said he , let it fall , and lean against the mantel - piece as if forget he be to go . assure he that she do ; -- that she forgave , pitie , wish he well -- be even interested in he happiness -- and add some gentle counsel as to the behaviour most likely to promote it . he answer be not very encourage . " as to that , " say he , " I must rub through the world as well as I can . domestic happiness be out of the question . if , however , I be allow to think that you and yours feel a interest in my fate and action , it may be the means -- it may put I on my guard -- at least , it may be something to live for . to be sure be lose to I for ever . be I even by any bless chance at liberty again -- " stop he with a reproof . " well , " -- he reply -- " once more good bye . I shall now go away and live in dread of one event . " " what do you mean ? " " you sister 's marriage . " " you be very wrong . she can never be more lost to you than she be now . " " but she will be
be gain by some one else . and if that some one should be the very he whom , of all other , I could least bear -- but I will not stay to rob myself of all you compassionate goodwill , by shewing that where I have most injured I can least forgive . good bye ,-- bless you ! " and with these word , he almost run out of the room . chapter 45 , for some time after he leave she , for some time even after the sound of he carriage have die away , remain too much oppress by a crowd of idea , widely differ in themselves , but of which sadness be the general result , to think even of she sister . , he , whom only half a hour ago she have abhor as the most worthless of man , , in spite of all he fault , excite a degree of commiseration for the suffering produce by they , which make she think of he as now separate for ever from she family , with a tenderness , a regret , rather in proportion , as she soon acknowledge within herself -- to he wish than to he merit . she feel that he influence over she mind be heighten by circumstance which ought not in reason to have weight ; by that person of uncommon attraction , that open , affectionate , and lively manner which it be no merit to possess ; and by that still ardent love for , which it be not even innocent to indulge . but she feel that it be so , long , long before she could feel he influence less . when at last she return to the unconscious , she find she just awak , refresh by so long and sweet a sleep to the extent of she hope . 's heart be full . the past , the present , the future , 's visit , 's safety , and she mother 's expect arrival , throw she altogether into a agitation of spirit which keep off every indication of fatigue , and make she only fearful of betraie herself to she sister . short be the time , however , in which that fear could affect she , for within half a hour after 's leave the house , she be again call down stair by the sound of another carriage .-- eager to save she mother from every unnecessary moment 's horrible suspense , she run immediately into the hall , and reach the outward door just in time to receive and support she as she enter it . , whose terror as they draw near the house have produce almost the conviction of 's be no more , have no voice to inquire after she , no voice even for ; but she , wait neither for salutation nor inquiry , instantly give the joyful relief ; -- and she mother , catch it with all she usual warmth , be in a moment as much overcome by she happiness , as she have be before by she fear . she be support into the drawing - room between she daughter and she friend ; -- and there , shed tear of joy , though still unable to speak , embrace again and again , turn from she at interval to press 's hand , with a look which speak at once she gratitude , and she conviction of he sharing with herself in the bliss of the moment . he share it , however , in a silence even greater than she own . as soon as have recovere herself , to see be she first desire ; and in two minute she be with she beloved child , render dearer to she than ever by absence , unhappiness , and danger . 's delight , as she see what each felt in the meeting , be only check by a apprehension of its rob of farther sleep ; -- but could be calm , could be even prudent , when the life of a child be at stake , and , satisfied in know she mother be near she , and conscious of be too weak for conversation , submit readily to the silence and quiet prescribe by every nurse around she . would sit up with she all night ; and , in compliance with she mother 's entreaty , go to bed . but the rest , which one night entirely sleepless , and many hour of the most wearing anxiety seem to make requisite , be keep off by irritation of spirit . , " poor , " as she now allow herself to call he , be constantly in she thought ; she would not but have hear he vindication for the world , and now blame , now acquit herself for have judge he so harshly before . but she promise of relate it to she sister be invariably painful . she dread the performance of it , dread what its effect on might be ; doubt whether after such a explanation she could ever be happy with another ; and for a moment wish Willoughby a widower . then , remembere , reprove herself , feel that to this suffering and he constancy far more than to he rival 's , the reward of she sister be due , and wish any thing rather than 's death . the shock of 's errand at have be much soften to by she own previous alarm ; for so great be she uneasiness about , that she have already determined to set out for on that very day , without wait for any further intelligence , and have so far settle she journey before he arrival , that the be then expect every moment to fetch away , as she
she mother be unwilling to take she where there might be infection . continue to mmend every day , and the brilliant cheerfulness of 's look and spirit prove she to be , as she repeatedly declare herself , one of the happiest woman in the world . could not hear the declaration , nor witness its proof without sometimes wonder whether she mother ever recollect . but , trust to the temperate account of she own disappointment which have send she , be lead away by the exuberance of she joy to think only of what would increase it . be restore to she from a danger in which , as she now begin to feel , she own mistaken judgment in encourage the unfortunate attachment to , have contribute to place she ;-- and in she recovery she have yet another source of joy unthotch of by . it be thus impart to she , as soon as any opportunity of private conference between they occur . " at last we be alone . my Elinor , you do not yet know all my happiness . love . he have tell I so himself . " she daughter , feel by turn both pleased and pained , surprised and not surprise , be all silent attention . " you be never like I , dear , or I should wonder at you composure now . have I sit down to wish for any possible good to my family , I should have fix on 's marry one of you as the object most desirable . and I believe will be the most happy with he of the two . " be half inclin to ask she reason for think so , because satisfy that none founde on a impartial consideration of they age , character , or feeling , could be give ; -- but she mother must always be carry away by she imagination on any interesting subject , and therefore instead of a inquiry , she pass it off with a smile . " he open he whole heart to I yesterday as we travel . it come out quite unaware , quite undesignedly . I , you may well believe , could talk of nothing but my child ; -- he could not conceal he distress ; I see that it equall my own , and he perhaps , think that mere friendship , as the world now go , would not justify so warm a sympathy -- or rather , not think at all , I suppose -- give way to irresistible feeling , make I acquaint with he earnest , tender , constant , affection for . he have love she , my , ever since the first moment of see she . " here , however , perceive , -- not the language , not the profession of , but the natural embellishment of she mother 's active fancy , which fashio every thing delightful to she as it choose . " he regard for she , infinitely surpass anything that ever feel or feign , as much more warm , as more sincere or constant -- which ever we be to call it -- have subsist through all the knowledge of dear 's unhappy prepossession for that worthless young man !-- and without selfishness --without encourage a hope !--could he have see she happy with another -- such a noble mind !--such openness , such sincerity !-- no one can be deceive in . " " 's character , " say , " as a excellent man , be well establish . " " I know it be " -- reply she mother seriously , " or after such a warning , I should be the last to encourage such affection , or even to be pleas by it . but he come for I as he do , with such active , such ready friendship , be enough to prove he one of the worthiest of man . " " he character , however , " answer , " do not rest on one act of kindness , to which he affection for , be humanity out of the case , would have prompt he . to , to the , he have be long and intimately know ; they equally love and respect he ; and even my own knowledge of he , though lately acquire , be very considerable ; and so highly do I value and esteem he , that if can be happy with he , I shall be as ready as yourself to think we connection the greatest bless to we in the world . what answer do you give he ? --do you allow he to hope ? " " oh ! my love , I could not then talk of hope to he or to myself . might at that moment be die . but he do not ask for hope or encouragement . he be a involuntary confidence , a irrepressible effusion to a soothing friend -- not a application to a parent . yet after a time I do say , for at first I be quite overcome -- that if she liv , as I trust she might , my greatest happiness would lie in promote they marriage ; and since we arrival , since we delightful security , I have repeat it to he more fully , have give he every encouragement in my power . , a very little time , I tell he , will do everything ;-- 's heart be not to be waste for ever on such a man as .-- he own merits must soon secure it . " " to judge from the 's spirit , however , you have not yet make he equally sanguine . " " no .-- he think 's affection too deeply root for any change in it under
under a great length of time , and even suppose she heart again free , be too diffident of himself to believe , that with such a difference of age and disposition he could ever attach she . there , however , he be quite mistaken . he age be only so much beyond hers as to be a advantage , as to make he character and principle fix ; -- and he disposition , I be well convinced , be exactly the very one to make you sister happy . and he person , he manners too , be all in he favour . my partiality do not blind I ; he certainly be not so handsome as -- but at the same time , there be something much more pleasing in he countenance .-- there be always a something , -- if you remember , -- in 's eye at time , which I do not like . " could not remember it ; -- but she mother , without wait for she assent , continue , " and he manners , the 's manners be not only more pleasing to I than 's ever be , but they be of a kind I well know to be more solidly attach to . they gentleness , they genuine attention to other people , and they manly unstudied simplicity be much more accordant with she real disposition , than the liveliness -- often artificial , and often ill - time of the other . I be very sure myself , that have turn out as really amiable , as he have prove himself the contrary , would yet never have be so happy with he , as she will be with . " she pause . -- she daughter could not quite agree with she , but she dissent be not hear , and therefore give no offence . " at , she will be within a easy distance of I , " add , " even if I remain at ; and in all probability , -- for I hear it be a large village , -- indeed there certainly must be some small house or cottage close by , that would suit we quite as well as we present situation . " poor !-- here be a new scheme for get she to ! -- but she spirit be stubborn . " he fortune too !-- for at my time of life you know , everybody care about that ; -- and though I neither know nor desire to know , what it really be , I be sure it must be a good one . " here they be interrupt by the entrance of a third person , and withdraw to think it all over in private , to wish success to she friend , and yet in wish it , to feel a pang for . chapter 46 's illness , though weaken in its kind , have not be long enough to make she recovery slow ; and with youth , natural strength , and she mother 's presence in aid , it proceed so smoothly as to enable she to remove , within four day after the arrival of the latter , into 's dressing - room . when there , at she own particular request , for she be impatient to pour forth she thanks to he for fetch she mother , be invite to visit she . he emotion on enter the room , in see she altered look , and in receive the pale hand which she immediately hold out to he , be such , as , in 's conjecture , must arise from something more than he affection for , or the consciousness of its be know to other ; and she soon discover in he melancholy eye and varie complexion as he look at she sister , the probable recurrence of many past scene of misery to he mind , bring back by that resemblance between and already acknowledge , and now strengthen by the hollow eye , the sickly skin , the posture of recline weakness , and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation . , not less watchful of what pass than she daughter , but with a mind very differently influence , and therefore watch to very different effect , see nothing in the 's behaviour but what arise from the most simple and self - evident sensation , while in the action and word of she persuade herself to think that something more than gratitude already dawn . at the end of another day or two , grow visibly stronger every twelve hour , , urge equally by she own and she daughter 's wish , begin to talk of remove to . on she measure depend those of she two friend ; could not quit during the Dashwood 's stay ; and be soon bring , by they united request , to consider he own abode there as equally determinate , if not equally indispensable . at he and 's united request in return , be prevail on to accept the use of he carriage on she journey back , for the better accommodation of she sick child ; and the Colonel , at the joint invitation of and , whose active good - nature make she friendly and hospitable for other people as well as herself , engage with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage , in the course of a few week . the day of separation and departure arrive ; and , after take so particular and lengthen a leave of , one so earnestly grateful , so full of respect and kind wish as see due to she own heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention , and bid farewell with a cordiality of a friend , be carefully assist by he into the
the carriage , of which he seem anxious that she should engross at least half . and then follow , and the other be leave by themselves , to talk of the traveller , and feel they own dullness , till be summon to she chaise to take comfort in the gossip of she may for the loss of she two young companion ; and immediately afterwards take he solitary way to . the Dashwood be two day on the road , and bear she journey on both , without essential fatigue . every thing that the most zealous affection , the most solicitous care could do to render she comfortable , be the office of each watchful companion , and each find they reward in she bodily ease , and she calmness of spirit . to , the observation of the latter be particularly grateful . she , who have see she week after week so constantly suffer , oppress by anguish of heart which she have neither courage to speak of , nor fortitude to conceal , now see with a joy , which no other could equally share , a apparent composure of mind , which , in be the result as she trust of serious reflection , must eventually lead she to contentment and cheerfulness . as they approach , indeed , and enter on scene of which every field and every tree bring some peculiar , some painful recollection , she grow silent and thoughtful , and turn away she face from they notice , sit earnestly gaze through the window . but here , could neither wonder nor blame ; and when she see , as she assist from the carriage , that she have be cry , she see only a emotion too natural in itself to raise any thing less tender than pity , and in its unobtrusiveness entitle to praise . in the whole of she subsequent manner , she trace the direction of a mind awaken to reasonable exertion ; for no sooner have they enter they common sitting - room , than turn she eye around it with a look of resolute firmness , as if determine at once to accustom herself to the sight of every object with which the remembrance of could be connect .-- she say little , but every sentence aim at cheerfulness , and though a sigh sometimes escape she , it never pass away without the atonement of a smile . after dinner she would try she piano- forte . she go to it ; but the music on which she eye first rest be a opera , procure for she by , contain some of they favourite duet , and bear on its outward leaf she own name in he hand - write . -- that would not do .-- she shook she head , put the music aside , and after run over the key for a minute , complain of feebleness in she finger , and close the instrument again ; declare however with firmness as she do so , that she should in future practice much . the next morning produce no abatement in these happy symptom . on the contrary , with a mind and body alike strengthe by rest , she look and speak with more genuine spirit , anticipat the pleasure of 's return , and talk of the dear family party which would then be restore , of they mutual pursuit and cheerful society , as the only happiness worth a wish . " when the weather be settled , and I have recover my strength , " say she , " we will take long walk together every day . we will walk to the farm at the edge of the down , and see how the child go on ; we will walk to 's new plantation at , and the Abbeyland ; and we will often go the old ruin of the Priory , and try to trace its foundation as far as we be tell they once reach . I know we shall be happy . I know the summer will pass happily away . I mean never to be later in rise than six , and from that time till dinner I shall divide every moment between music and reading . I have form my plan , and be determined to enter on a course of serious study . we own library be too well know to I , to be resorte to for any thing beyond mere amusement . but there be many work well worth reading at the ; and there be other of more modern production which I know I can borrow of . by read only six hour a - day , I shall gain in the course of a twelve - month a great deal of instruction which I now feel myself to want . " honoure she for a plan which originate so nobly as this ; though smile to see the same eager fancy which have be lead she to the extreme of languid indolence and selfish repin , now at work in introduce excess into a scheme of such rational employment and virtuous self - control . she smile however change to a sigh when she remember that promise to be yet unfulfilled , and fear she have that to communicate which might again unsetle the mind of , and ruin at least for a time this fair prospect of busy tranquillity . wille therefore to delay the evil hour , she resolve to wait till she sister 's health be more secure , before she appoint it . but the resolution be make only to be break . have be two or three day at home , before the weather be fine enough for a invalid like herself to venture out . but at last a soft , genial morning appear ;
; such as might tempt the daughter 's wish and the mother 's confidence ; and , lean on 's arm , be authorise to walk as long as she could without fatigue , in the lane before the house . the sister set out at a pace , slow as the feebleness of in a exercise hitherto untried since she illness require ; -- and they have advance only so far beyond the house as to admit a full view of the hill , the important hill behind , when pause with she eye turn towards it , calmly say , " there , exactly there , " -- point with one hand , " on that project mound ,-- there I fall ; and there I first see . " she voice sunk with the word , but presently revive she add , " I be thankful to find that I can look with so little pain on the spot !-- shall we ever talk on that subject , ? " --hesitatingly it be say .--" or will it be wrong ?-- I can talk of it now , I hope , as I ought to do . " -- tenderly invite she to be open . " as for regret , " say , " I have do with that , as far as he be concerned . I do not mean to talk to you of what my feeling have be for he , but what they be now .-- at present , if I could be satisfied on one point , if I could be allow to think that he be not always act a part , not always deceive I ; -- but above all , if I could be assure that he never be so very wicked as my fear have sometimes fancie he , since the story of that unfortunate girl " -- she stopt . joyfully treasure she word as she answer , " if you could be assure of that , you think you should be easy . " " yes . my peace of mind be doubly involved in it ; -- for not only be it horrible to suspect a person , who have be what he have be to ME , of such design , -- but what must it make I appear to myself ?-- what in a situation like mine , but a most shamefully unguarded affection could expose I to " -- " how then , " ask she sister , " would you account for he behaviour ? " " I would suppose he ,-- oh , how gladly would I suppose he , only fickle , very , very fickle . " say no more . she be debat within herself on the eligibility of begin she story directly , or postpone it till be in stronger health ; -- and they crept on for a few minute in silence . " I be not wish he too much good , " say at last with a sigh , " when I wish he secret reflection may be no more unpleasant than my own . he will suffer enough in they . " " do you compare you conduct with he ? " " no . I compare it with what it ought to have been ; I compare it with yours . " " we situation have borne little resemblance . " " they have borne more than we conduct .-- do not , my dearest , let you kindness defend what I know you judgment must censure . my illness have make I think -- it have give I leisure and calmness for serious recollection . long before I be enough recover to talk , I be perfectly able to reflect . I consider the past : I see in my own behaviour , since the beginning of we acquaintance with he last autumn , nothing but a series of imprudence towards myself , and want of kindness to other . I see that my own feeling have prepare my suffering , and that my want of fortitude under they have almost lead I to the grave . my illness , I well know , have be entirely bring on by myself by such negligence of my own health , as I have feel even at the time to be wrong . have I die , -- it would have be self - destruction . I do not know my danger till the danger be remove ; but with such feeling as these reflection give I , I wonder at my recovery , -- wonder that the very eagerness of my desire to live , to have time for atonement to my , and to you all , do not kill I at once . have I die , -- in what peculiar misery should I have leave you , my nurse , my friend , my sister ! -- you , who have see all the fretful selfishness of my latter day ; who have know all the murmuring of my heart !-- how should I have live in you remembrance !-- my mother too ! how could you have console she !-- I can not express my own abhorrence of myself . whenever I look towards the past , I see some duty neglect , or some failing indulge . every body seem injure by I . the kindness , the unceasing kindness of , I have repay with ungrateful contempt . to the , to the , the , to every common acquaintance even , I have be insolent and unjust ; with a heart harden against they merit , and a temper irritate by they very attention .-- to , to , -- yes , even to they , little as they deserve , I have give less than they due . but you , -- you
you above all , above my mother , have be wrong by I . I , and only I , know you heart and its sorrow ; yet to what do it influence I ?-- not to any compassion that could benefit you or myself . -- you example be before I ; but to what avail ?-- be I more considerate of you and you comfort ? do I imitate you forbearance , or lessen you restraint , by take any part in those office of general complaisance or particular gratitude which you have hitherto be leave to discharge alone ?-- no ;-- not less when I know you to be unhappy , than when I have believe you at ease , do I turn away from every exertion of duty or friendship ; scarcely allow sorrow to exist but with I , regret only that heart which have desert and wronge I , and leave you , for or I profess a unbounded affection , to be miserable for my sake . " here cease the rapid flow of she self - reprove spirit ; and , impatient to soothey , though too honest to flatter , give she instantly that praise and support which she frankness and she contrition so well deserve . press she hand and reply , " you be very good .-- the future must be my proof . I have lay down my plan , and if I be capable of adhere to it -- my feeling shall be governed and my temper improve . they shall no longer worry other , nor torture myself . I shall now live solely for my family . you , my mother , and , must henceforth be all the world to I ; you will share my affections entirely between you . from you , from my home , I shall never again have the smallest incitement to move ; and if I do mix in other society , it will be only to show that my spirit be humble , my heart amend , and that I can practise the civility , the lesser duty of life , with gentleness and forbearance . as for -- to say that I shall soon or that I shall ever forget he , would be idle . he remembrance can be overcome by no change of circumstance or opinion . but it shall be regulate , it shall be check by religion , by reason , by constant employment . " she pause -- and add in a low voice , " if I could but know this heart , everything would become easy . " , who have now be for some time reflect on the propriety or impropriety of speedily hazard she narration , without feel at all nearer decision than at first , hear this ; and perceive that as reflection do nothing , resolution must do all , soon find herself lead to the fact . she manage the recital , as she hope , with address ; prepare she anxious listener with caution ; relate simply and honestly the chief point on which grounde he apology ; do justice to he repentance , and soften only he protestation of present regard . say not a word .-- she tremble , she eye be fix on the ground , and she lip become whiter than even sickness have leave they . a thousand inquiry spring up from she heart , but she da not urge one . she catch every syllable with pante eagerness ; she hand , unknowingly to herself , closely press she sister 's , and tear cover she cheek . , dread she be tired , lead she towards home ; and till they reach the door of the cottage , easily conjectur what she curiosity must be though no question be suffer to speak it , talk of nothing but , and they conversation together ; and be carefully minute in every particular of speech and look , where minuteness could be safely indulge . as soon as they enter the house , with a kiss of gratitude and these two word just articulate through she tear , " mama , " withdraw from she sister and walk slowly up stair . would not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable as what she now seek ; and with a mind anxiously pre-arrange its result , and a resolution of revive the subject again , should fail to do it , she turn into the parlour to fulfill she part injunction . chapter 47 Mrs . Dashwood do not hear unmove the vindication of she former favourite . she rejoice in he be clear from some part of he imputed guilt ;-- she be sorry for he ; -- she wish he happy . but the feeling of the past could not be recall .-- nothing could restore he with a faith unbroken -- a character unblemished , to . nothing could do away the knowledge of what the latter have suffer through he means , nor remove the guilt of he conduct towards . nothing could replace he , therefore , in she former esteem , nor injure the interest of . have , like she daughter , hear 's story from himself -- have she witness he distress , and be under the influence of he countenance and he manner , it be probable that she compassion would have be greater . but it be neither in 's power , nor in she wish , to rouse such feeling in another , by she retail explanation , as have at first be call forth in herself . reflection have give calmness to she judgment , and sober she own opinion of 's desert ; -- she wish , therefore , to declare only the simple truth , and lay open such fact as be really due to
to he character , without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy astray . in the evening , when they be all three together , begin voluntarily to speak of he again ; -- but that it be not without a effort , the restless , unquiet thoughtfulness in which she have be for some time previously sit -- she rise colour , as she speak , -- and she unsteady voice , plainly shew . " I wish to assure you both , " say she , " that I see every thing -- as you can desire I to do . " would have interrupt she instantly with soothing tenderness , have not , who really wish to hear she sister 's unbiased opinion , by a eager sign , engage she silence . slowly continue -- " it be a great relief to I -- what tell I this morning -- I have now hear exactly what I wish to hear . " -- for some moment she voice be lose ; but recover herself , she add , and with greater calmness than before -- " I be now perfectly satisfied , I wish for no change . I never could have be happy with he , after know , as sooner or later I must have know , all this .-- I should have have no confidence , no esteem . nothing could have do it away to my feeling . " " I know it -- I know it , " cry she mother . " happy with a man of libertine practice ! -- with one who so injur the peace of the dearest of we friend , and the best of man !-- no --my have not a heart to be make happy with such a man ! -- she conscience , she sensitive conscience , would have feel all that the conscience of she husband ought to have felt . " sigh , and repeat , " I wish for no change . " " you consider the matter , " say , " exactly as a good mind and a sound understanding must consider it ; and I dare say you perceive , as well as myself , not only in this , but in many other circumstance , reason enough to be convince that you marriage must have involve you in many certain trouble and disappointment , in which you would have be poorly support by a affection , on he side , much less certain . have you marry , you must have be always poor . he expensiveness be acknowledge even by himself , and he whole conduct declare that self - denial be a word hardly understand by he . he demand and you inexperience together , on a small , very small income , must have bring on distress which would not be the grievous to you , from have be entirely unknown and unthotch of before . you sense of honour and honesty would have lead you , I know , when aware of you situation , to attempt all the economy that would appear to you possible : and , perhaps , as long as you frugality retrench only on you own comfort , you might have be suffer to practice it , but beyond that -- and how little could the utmost of you single management do to stop the ruin which have begin before you marriage ?-- that , have you endeavoure , however reasonably , to abridge this enjoyment , be it not to be fear , that instead of prevailing on feeling so selfish to consent to it , you would have lessen you own influence on he heart , and make he regret the connection which have involve he in such difficulty ? " 's lip quiver , and she repeat the word " Selfish ? " in a tone that imply --" do you really think he selfish ? " " the whole of he behaviour , " reply , " from the beginning to the end of the affair , have be grounde on selfishness . it be selfishness which first make he sport with you affections ; which afterwards , when he own be engage , make he delay the confession of it , and which finally carry he from . he own enjoyment , or he own ease , be , in every particular , he rule principle . " " it be very true . my happiness never be he object . " " at present , " continue , " he regret what he have do . and why do he regret it ?-- because he find it have not answer towards himself . it have not make he happy . he circumstance be now unembarrassed -- he suffer from no evil of that kind ; and he think only that he have marry a woman of a less amiable temper than yourself . but do it follow that have he marry you , he would have be happy ?-- the inconvenience would have be different . he would then have suffer under the pecuniary distress which , because they be remove , he now reckon as nothing . he would have have a wife of whose temper he could make no complaint , but he would have be always necessitous -- always poor ; and probably would soon have learn to rank the innumerable comfort of a clear estate and good income as of far more importance , even to domestic happiness , than the mere temper of a wife . " " I have not a doubt of it , " say ; " and I have nothing to regret -- nothing but my own folly . " " Rather say you mother 's imprudence , my child , " say ; " she must be answerable . " Marianne
Marianne would not let she proceed ;-- and , satisfi that each feel they own error , wish to avoid any survey of the past that might weaken she sister 's spirit ; she , therefore , pursue the first subject , immediately continue , " one observation may , I think , be fairly draw from the whole of the story -- that all 's difficulty have arisen from the first offence against virtue , in he behaviour to . that crime have be the origin of every lesser one , and of all he present discontent . " assent most feelingly to the remark ; and she mother be lead by it to a enumeration of 's injury and merit , warm as friendship and design could unitedly dictate . she daughter do not look , however , as if much of it be hear by she . , accord to she expectation , see on the two or three follow day , that do not continue to gain strength as she have do ; but while she resolution be unsubdued , and she still try to appear cheerful and easy , she sister could safely trust to the effect of time upon she health . return , and the family be again all restore to each other , again quietly settle at the cottage ; and if not pursue they usual study with quite so much vigour as when they first come to , at least plan a vigorous prosecution of they in future . grow impatient for some tiding of . she have hear nothing of he since she leave , nothing new of he plan , nothing certain even of he present abode . some letter have pass between she and she brother , in consequence of 's illness ; and in the first of 's , there have be this sentence :-- " we know nothing of we unfortunate , and can make no enquiry on so prohibit a subject , but conclude he to be still at ; " which be all the intelligence of afforde she by the correspondence , for he name be not even mention in any of the succeeding letter . she be not doom , however , to be long in ignorance of he measure . they man - servant have be send one morning to on business ; and when , as he wait at table , he have satisfy the inquirie of he mistress as to the event of he errand , this be he voluntary communication -- " I suppose you know , ma 'am , that be marry . " give a violent start , fix she eye upon , see she turn pale , and fall back in she chair in hysteric . , whose eye , as she answer the servant 's inquiry , have intuitively take the same direction , be shocked to perceive by 's countenance how much she really suffer , and a moment afterwards , alike distress by 's situation , kknow not on which child to bestow she principal attention . the servant , who see only that be take ill , have sense enough to call one of the maid , who , with 's assistance , support she into the other room . by that time , be rather better , and she mother leave she to the care of and the maid , return to , who , though still much disorder , have so far recover the use of she reason and voice as to be just begin a inquiry of , as to the source of he intelligence . immediately take all that trouble on herself ; and have the benefit of the information without the exertion of seek it . " who tell you that be marry , ? " " I see myself , ma 'am , this morning in , and he lady too , as be . they be stop in a chaise at the door of the , as I go there with a message from at the to she brother , who be one of the post - boy . I happen to look up as I go by the chaise , and so I see directly it be the youngest ; so I take off my hat , and she know I and call to I , and inquire after you , ma 'am , and the young lady , especially , and bid I I should give she compliment and 's , they best compliment and service , and how sorry they be they have not time to come on and see you , but they be in a great hurry to go forwards , for they be go further down for a little while , but howsever , when they come back , they would make sure to come and see you . " " but do she tell you she be marry , ? " " yes , ma 'am . she smile , and say how she have change she name since she be in these part . she be always a very affable and free - spoken young lady , and very civil behaved . so , I make free to wish she joy . " " be in the carriage with she ? " " yes , ma 'am , I just see he lean back in it , but he do not look up ; -- he never be a gentleman much for talk . " 's heart could easily account for he not put himself forward ; and probably find the same explanation . " be there no one else in the carriage ? " " no , ma 'am , only they two . " " do you know where they come from ? " " they come straight from town , as -- tell I .
. " " and be they go farther westward ? " " yes , ma 'am -- but not to bide long . they will soon be back again , and then they would be sure and call here . " now look at she daughter ; but know better than to expect they . she recognise the whole of in the message , and be very confident that would never come near they . she observ in a low voice , to she mother , that they be probably go down to 's , near . 's intelligence seem over . look as if she wish to hear more . " do you see they off , before you come away ? " " no , ma 'am -- the horse be just come out , but I could not bide any longer ; I be afraid of be late . " " do look well ? " " yes , ma 'am , she say how she be very well ; and to my mind she be always a very handsome young lady -- and she seem vastly contente . " could think of no other question , and and the tablecloth , now alike needless , be soon afterwards dismisse . have already send to say , that she should eat nothing more . 's and 's appetite be equally lose , and might think herself very well off , that with so much uneasiness as both she sister have lately experienced , so much reason as they have often have to be careless of they meal , she have never be obliged to go without she dinner before . when the dessert and the wine be arrange , and and be leave by themselves , they remain long together in a similarity of thoughtfulness and silence . fear to hazard any remark , and venture not to offer consolation . she now find that she have er in relying on 's representation of herself ; and justly conclude that every thing have be expressly soften at the time , to spare she from a increase of unhappiness , suffer as she then have suffer for . she find that she have be misl by the careful , the considerate attention of she daughter , to think the attachment , which once she have so well understood , much slighter in reality , than she have be will nt to believe , or than it be now prove to be . she fear that under this persuasion she have be unjust , inattentive , nay , almost unkind , to she ; -- that 's affliction , because more acknowledge , more immediately before she , have too much engross she tenderness , and lead she away to forget that in she might have a daughter suffer almost as much , certainly with less self - provocation , and greater fortitude . chapter 48 now find the difference between the expectation of a unpleasant event , however certain the mind may be tell to consider it , and certainty itself . she now find , that in spite of herself , she have always admit a hope , while remain single , that something would occur to prevent he marry Lucy ; that some resolution of he own , some mediation of friend , or some more eligible opportunity of establishment for the lady , would arise to assist the happiness of all . but he be now marry ; and she condemn she heart for the lurking flattery , which so much heighten the pain of the intelligence . that he should be marry soon , before ( as she imagine ) he could be in order , and consequently before he could be in possession of the living , surprise she a little at first . but she soon see how likely it be that Lucy , in she self - provident care , in she haste to secure he , should overlook every thing but the risk of delay . they be marry , marry in town , and now hasten down to she uncle 's . what have feel on be within four mile from , on see she mother 's servant , on hear 's message ! they would soon , she suppose , be settle at .-- , -- that place in which so much conspire to give she a interest ; which she wish to be acquaint with , and yet desire to avoid . she see they in a instant in they parsonage - house ; see in , the active , contrive manager , uniting at once a desire of smart appearance with the utmost frugality , and asham to be suspect of half she economical practices ;--pursue she own interest in every thought , court the favour of , of , and of every wealthy friend . in -- she know not what she see , nor what she wish to see ; -- happy or unhappy , -- nothing please she ; she turn away she head from every sketch of he . flatter herself that some one of they connection in would write to they to announce the event , and give farther particular , -- but day after day pass off , and bring no letter , no tiding . though uncertain that any one be to blame , she find fault with every absent friend . they be all thoughtless or indolent . " when do you write to , ma 'am ? " be a inquiry which spring from the impatience of she mind to have something go on . " I write to he , my love , last week , and rather expect to see , than to hear from he again . I earnestly press he come to we , and should not be surprised to see he walk in
in today or tomorrow , or any day . " this be gain something , something to look forward to . must have some information to give . Scarcely have she so determine it , when the figure of a man on horseback draw she eye to the window . he stopt at they gate . it be a gentleman , it be himself . now she could hear more ; and she tremble in expectation of it . but -- it be not -- neither he air -- nor he height . be it possible , she must say it must be . she look again . he have just dismount ; -- she could not be mistaken , -- it be . she move away and sit down . " he come from 's purposely to see we . I will be calm ; I will be mistress of myself . " in a moment she perceive that the other be likewise aware of the mistake . she see she mother and change colour ; see they look at herself , and whisper a few sentence to each other . she would have give the world to be able to speak -- and to make they understand that she hope no coolness , no slight , would appear in they behaviour to he ; -- but she have no utterance , and be obliged to leave all to they own discretion . not a syllable pass aloud . they all wait in silence for the appearance of they visitor . he footstep be hear along the gravel path ; in a moment he be in the passage , and in another he be before they . he countenance , as he enter the room , be not too happy , even for . he complexion be white with agitation , and he look as if fearful of he reception , and conscious that he merit no kind one . , however , conform , as she trust , to the wish of that daughter , by whom she then mean in the warmth of she heart to be guide in every thing , meet with a look of force complacency , give he she hand , and wish he joy . he colou , and stammer out a unintelligible reply . 's lip have move with she mother 's , and , when the moment of action be over , she wish that she have shaken hand with he too . but it be then too late , and with a countenance mean to be open , she sit down again and talk of the weather . have retreate as much as possible out of sight , to conceal she distress ; and , understand some part , but not the whole of the case , think it incumbend on she to be dignify , and therefore take a seat as far from he as she could , and maintain a strict silence . when have cease to rejoice in the dryness of the season , a very awful pause take place . it be put a end to by , who feel obliged to hope that he have leave very well . in a hurried manner , he reply in the affirmative . another pause . Elinor resolve to exert herself , though fear the sound of she own voice , now say , " be at ? " " at ! " he reply , with a air of surprise .-- " no , my mother be in town . " " I mean , " say , take up some work from the table , " to inquire for . " she da not look up ; -- but she mother and both turn they eye on he . he colou , seem perplex , look doubtingly , and , after some hesitation , say ,-- " perhaps you mean -- my brother -- you mean Mrs.-- . " " . ! " --be repeat by and she mother in a accent of the utmost amazement ; -- and though could not speak , even she eye be fix on he with the same impatient wonder . he rise from he seat , and walk to the window , apparently from not know what to do ; take up a pair of scissors that lay there , and while spoil both they and they sheath by cut the latter to piece as he speak , say , in a hurried voice , " perhaps you do not know -- you may not have hear that my brother be lately marry to -- to the youngest -- to . " he word be echo with unspeakable astonishment by all but , who sit with she head lean over she work , in a state of such agitation as make she hardly know where she be . " yes , " say he , " they be marry last week , and be now at . " could sit it no longer . she almost run out of the room , and as soon as the door be close , burst into tear of joy , which at first she think would never cease . , who have then look any where , rather than at she , see she hurry away , and perhaps see -- or even hear , she emotion ; for immediately afterwards he fall into a reverie , which no remark , no inquiry , no affectionate address of could penetrate , and at last , without say a word , quit the room , and walk out towards the village -- leave the other in the greatest astonishment and perplexity on a change in he situation , so wonderful and so sudden ;-- a perplexity which they have no means of lessening but by they own conjecture . chapter 49 Unaccountable ,
, however , as the circumstance of he release might appear to the whole family , it be certain that be free ; and to what purpose that freedom would be employ be easily pre-determined by all ; -- for after experience the blessing of one imprudent engagement , contract without he mother 's consent , as he have already do for more than four year , nothing less could be expect of he in the failure of that , than the immediate contraction of another . he errand at , in fact , be a simple one . it be only to ask to marry he ; -- and consider that he be not altogether inexperienc in such a question , it might be strange that he should feel so uncomfortable in the present case as he really do , so much in need of encouragement and fresh air . how soon he have walk himself into the proper resolution , however , how soon a opportunity of exercise it occur , in what manner he express himself , and how he be receive , need not be particularly tell . this only need be say ; -- that when they all sit down to table at four o'clock , about three hour after he arrival , he have secure he lady , engage she mother 's consent , and be not only in the rapturous profession of the lover , but , in the reality of reason and truth , one of the happiest of man . he situation indeed be more than commonly joyful . he have more than the ordinary triumph of accept love to swell he heart , and raise he spirits . he be release without any reproach to himself , from a entanglement which have long for he misery , from a woman whom he have long cease to love ; -- and elevate at once to that security with another , which he must have think of almost with despair , as soon as he have learn to consider it with desire . he be bring , not from doubt or suspense , but from misery to happiness ; -- and the change be openly speak in such a genuine , flow , grateful cheerfulness , as he friend have never witness in he before . he heart be now open to , all its weakness , all its error confess , and he first boyish attachment to treat with all the philosophic dignity of twenty - four . " it be a foolish , idle inclination on my side , " say he , " the consequence of ignorance of the world -- and want of employment . have my brother give I some active profession when I be remove at eighteen from the care of , I think -- nay , I be sure , it would never have happen ; for though i leave with what I think , at the time , a most unconquerable preference for he niece , yet have I then have any pursuit , any object to engage my time and keep I at a distance from she for a few month , I should very soon have outgrow the fancied attachment , especially by mix more with the world , as in such case I must have do . but instead of have any thing to do , instead of have any profession choose for I , or be allow to chuse any myself , I return home to be completely idle ; and for the first twelvemonth afterwards I have not even the nominal employment , which belong to the university would have give I ; for I be not enter at till I be nineteen . I have therefore nothing in the world to do , but to fancy myself in love ; and as my mother do not make my home in every respect comfortable , as I have no friend , no companion in my brother , and dislike new acquaintance , it be not unnatural for I to be very often at , where I always feel myself at home , and be always sure of a welcome ; and accordingly I spend the greatest part of my time there from eighteen to nineteen : appear everything that be amiable and obliging . she be pretty too -- at least I think so then ; and I have see so little of other woman , that I could make no comparison , and see no defect . consider everything , therefore , I hope , foolish as we engagement be , foolish as it have since in every way be prove , it be not at the time a unnatural or a inexcusable piece of folly . " the change which a few hour have wrotch in the mind and the happiness of the Dashwood , be such -- so great -- as promise they all , the satisfaction of a sleepless night . , too happy to be comfortable , know not how to love , nor praise enough , how to be enough thankful for he release without wounde he delicacy , nor how at once to give they leisure for unrestrained conversation together , and yet enjoy , as she wish , the sight and society of both . Marianne could speak she happiness only by tear . comparison would occur -- regret would arise ; -- and she joy , though sincere as she love for she sister , be of a kind to give she neither spirit nor language . but -- how be she feeling to be describe ? -- from the moment of learn that be marry to another , that be free , to the moment of he justify the hope which have so instantly follow , she be every thing by turn but tranquil . but when the second moment
moment have pass , when she find every doubt , every solicitude remove , compare she situation with what so lately it have be , -- see he honourably release from he former engagement , see he instantly profit by the release , to address herself and declare a affection as tender , as constant as she have ever suppose it to be , -- she be oppress , she be overcome by she own felicity ; -- and happily dispose as be the human mind to be easily familiarize with any change for the better , it require several hour to give sedateness to she spirit , or any degree of tranquillity to she heart . be now fix at the cottage at least for a week ; -- for whatever other claim might be make on he , it be impossible that less than a week should be give up to the enjoyment of 's company , or suffice to say half that be to be say of the past , the present , and the future ; -- for though a very few hour spend in the hard labor of incessant talking will despatch more subject than can really be in common between any two rational creature , yet with lover it be different . they no subject be finish , no communication be even make , till it have be make at least twenty time over . 's marriage , the unceasing and reasonable wonder among they all , form of course one of the earliest discussion of the lover ; -- and 's particular knowledge of each party make it appear to she in every view , as one of the most extraordinary and unaccountable circumstance she have ever hear . how they could be throw together , and by what attraction could be draw on to marry a girl , of whose beauty she have herself hear he speak without any admiration ,-- a girl too already engage to he brother , and on whose account that brother have be throw off by he family -- it be beyond she comprehension to make out . to she own heart it be a delightful affair , to she imagination it be even a ridiculous one , but to she reason , she judgament , it be completely a puzzle . could only attempt a explanation by supposing , that , perhaps , at first accidentally meet , the vanity of the one have be so work on by the flattery of the other , as to lead by degree to all the rest . remembe what have tell she in , of he opinion of what he own mediation in he brother 's affair might have do , if apply to in time . she repeat it to . " that be exactly like , " -- be he immediate observation .-- " and that , " he presently add , " might perhaps be in this head when the acquaintance between they first begin . and perhaps at first might think only of procure he good office in my favour . other designs might afterward arise . " how long it have be carry on between they , however , he be equally at a loss with herself to make out ; for at , where he have remain for choice ever since he quit , he have have no means of hearing of she but from herself , and she letter to the very last be neither less frequent , nor less affectionate than usual . not the smallest suspicion , therefore , have ever occur to prepare he for what follow ; -- and when at last it burst on he in a letter from herself , he have be for some time , he believe , half stupify between the wonder , the horror , and the joy of such a deliverance . he put the letter into 's hand . " , " be very sure I have long lose you affections , I have think myself at liberty to bestow my own on another , and have no doubt of be as happy with he as I once use to think I might be with you ; but I scorn to accept a hand while the heart be another ' . sincerely wish you happy in you choice , and it shall not be my fault if we be not always good friend , as we near relationship now make proper . I can safely say I owe you no ill - will , and be sure you will be too generous to do we any ill office . you brother have gain my affections entirely , and as we could not live without one another , we be just return from the altar , and be now on we way to Dawlish for a few week , which place you dear brother have great curiosity to see , but think I would first trouble you with these few line , and shall always remain , " you sincere well - wisher , friend , and sister , " . " I have burn all you letter , and will return you picture the first opportunity . please to destroy my scrawl -- but the ring with my hair you be very welcome to keep . " read and return it without any comment . " I will not ask you opinion of it as a composition , " say .--" for worlds would not I have have a letter of hers see by you in former day .-- in a sister it be bad enough , but in a wife ! -- how I have blush over the page of she write !-- and I believe I may say that since the first half year of we foolish -- business -- this be the only letter I ever receive
receive from she , of which the substance make I any amend for the defect of the style . " " however it may have come about , " say , after a pause , -- " they be certainly marry . and you mother have brotch on herself a most appropriate punishment . the independence she settle on , through resentment against you , have put it in he power to make he own choice ; and she have actually be brib one son with a thousand a - year , to do the very deed which she disinherit the other for intend to do . she will hardly be less hurt , I suppose , by 's marry Lucy , than she would have be by you marry she . " " she will be more hurt by it , for always be she favourite .-- she will be more hurt by it , and on the same principle will forgive he much sooner . " in what state the affair stand at present between they , know not , for no communication with any of he family have yet be attempt by he . he have quit within four and twenty hour after 's letter arrive , and with only one object before he , the nearest road to , have have no leisure to form any scheme of conduct , with which that road do not hold the most intimate connection . he could do nothing till he be assure of he fate with ; and by he rapidity in seek that fate , it be to be suppose , in spite of the jealousy with which he have once thought of , in spite of the modesty with which he rate he own desert , and the politeness with which he talk of he doubt , he do not , upon the whole , expect a very cruel reception . it be he business , however , to say that he do , and he say it very prettily . what he might say on the subject a twelvemonth after , must be refer to the imagination of husband and wife . that Lucy have certainly mean to deceive , to go off with a flourish of malice against he in she message by , be perfectly clear to ; and himself , now thoroughly enlighten on she character , have no scruple in believe she capable of the utmost meanness of wanton ill - nature . though he eye have be long open , even before he acquaintance with , to she ignorance and a want of liberality in some of she opinion -- they have be equally imputed , by he , to she want of education ; and till she last letter reach he , he have always believe she to be a well - dispose , good - hear girl , and thoroughly attach to himself . nothing but such a persuasion could have prevent he put a end to a engagement , which , long before the discovery of it lay he open to he mother 's anger , have be a continual source of disquiet and regret to he . " I think it my duty , " say he , " independent of my feeling , to give she the option of continue the engagement or not , when I be renounce by my mother , and stand to all appearance without a friend in the world to assist I . in such a situation as that , where there seem nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any liive creature , how could I suppose , when she so earnestly , so warmly insist on share my fate , whatever it might be , that any thing but the most disinterested affection be she inducement ? and even now , I can not comprehend on what motive she act , or what fancie advantage it could be to she , to be fetter to a man for whom she have not the smallest regard , and who have only two thousand pound in the world . she could not foresee that would give I a living . " " no ; but she might suppose that something would occur in you favour ; that you own family might in time relent . and at any rate , she lose nothing by continue the engagement , for she have prove that it fetter neither she inclination nor she action . the connection be certainly a respectable one , and probably gain she consideration among she friend ; and , if nothing more advantageous occur , it would be better for she to marry you than be single . " be , of course , immediately convince that nothing could have be more natural than 's conduct , nor more self - evident than the motive of it . scolde he , harshly as lady always scold the imprudence which compliment themselves , for have spend so much time with they at , when he must have feel he own inconstancy . " you behaviour be certainly very wrong , " say she ; " because -- to say nothing of my own conviction , we relation be all lead away by it to fancy and expect what , as you be then situate , could never be . " he could only plead a ignorance of he own heart , and a mistaken confidence in the force of he engagement . " I be simple enough to think , that because my faith be plight to another , there could be no danger in my be with you ; and that the consciousness of my engagement be to keep my heart as safe and sacred as my honour . I feel that I admire you , but I tell myself it be only friendship ; and till
till I begin to make comparison between yourself and , I do not know how far I be get . after that , I suppose , I be wrong in remain so much in , and the argument with which I reconcile myself to the expediency of it , be no better than these :-- the danger be my own ; I be do no injury to anybody but myself . " smile , and shake she head . hear with pleasure of 's be expect at the Cottage , as he really wish not only to be better acquaint with he , but to have a opportunity of convince he that he no longer resent he give he the living of -- " which , at present , " say he , " after thanks so ungraciously deliver as mine be on the occasion , he must think I have never forgive he for offering . " now he feel astonished himself that he have never yet be to the place . but so little interest have be take in the matter , that he owe all he knowledge of the house , garden , and glebe , extent of the parish , condition of the land , and rate of the tithes , to herself , who have hear so much of it from , and hear it with so much attention , as to be entirely mistress of the subject . one question after this only remain undecided , between they , one difficulty only be to be overcome . they be bring together by mutual affection , with the warmest approbation of they real friend ; they intimate knowledge of each other seem to make they happiness certain -- and they only want something to live upon . have two thousand pound , and one , which , with living , be all that they could call they own ; for it be impossible that Dashwood should advance anything ; and they be neither of they quite enough in love to think that three hundred and fifty pound a - year would supply they with the comfort of life . be not entirely without hope of some favourable change in he mother towards he ; and on that he rest for the residue of they income . but have no such dependence ; for since would still be unable to marry , and he chusing herself have be speak of in 's flattering language as only a lesser evil than he chusing , she fear that 's offence would serve no other purpose than to enrich . about four day after 's arrival appear , to complete 's satisfaction , and to give she the dignity of have , for the first time since she live at , more company with she than she house would hold . be allow to retain the privilege of first comer , and therefore walk every night to he old quarter at the ; from whence he usually return in the morning , early enough to interrupt the lover 's first tete - a - tete before breakfast . a three week ' residence at , where , in he evening hour at least , he have little to do but to calculate the disproportion between thirty - six and seventeen , bring he to in a temper of mind which need all the improvement in 's look , all the kindness of she welcome , and all the encouragement of she mother 's language , to make it cheerful . among such friend , however , and such flattery , he do revive . no rumour of 's marriage have yet reach he :-- he know nothing of what have pass ; and the first hour of he visit be consequently spend in hearing and in wondering . every thing be explain to he by , and he find fresh reason to rejoice in what he have do for , since eventually it promote the interest of . it would be needless to say , that the gentleman advanc in the good opinion of each other , as they advanc in each other 's acquaintance , for it could not be otherwise . they resemblance in good principles and good sense , in disposition and manner of thinking , would probably have be sufficient to unite they in friendship , without any other attraction ; but they be in love with two sister , and two sister fond of each other , make that mutual regard inevitable and immediate , which might otherwise have wait the effect of time and judgment . the letter from town , which a few day before would have make every nerve in 's body thrill with transport , now arrive to be read with less emotion than mirth . write to tell the wonderful tale , to vent she honest indignation against the jilting girl , and pour forth she compassion towards poor , who , she be sure , have quite do upon the worthless hussy , and be now , by all account , almost broken - hear , at .-- " I do think , " she continue , " nothing be ever carry on so sly ; for it be but two day before call and sit a couple of hour with I . not a soul suspect anything of the matter , not even , who , poor soul ! come cry to I the day after , in a great fright for fear of Ferrars , as well as not know how to get to ; for it seem borrowed all she money before she go off to be marry , on purpose we suppose to make a show with , and poor have not seven shilling in the world ; -- so I be very glad to give she five guinea to take she down to ,
, where she think of stay three or four week with , in hope , as I tell she , to fall in with the Doctor again . and I must say that 's crossness not to take they along with they in the chaise be worse than all . poor ! I can not get he out of my head , but you must send for he to , and must try to comfort he . " 's strain be more solemn . be the most unfortunate of woman -- poor have suffer agony of sensibility -- and he consider the existence of each , under such a blow , with grateful wonder . 's offence be unpardonable , but be infinitely worse . neither of they be ever again to be mention to ; and even , if she might hereafter be induce to forgive she son , he wife should never be acknowledge as she daughter , nor be permit to appear in she presence . the secrecy with which everything have be carry on between they , be rationally treat as enormously heighten the crime , because , have any suspicion of it occur to the other , proper measure would have be take to prevent the marriage ; and he call on to join with he in regret that 's engagement with have not rather be fulfil , than that she should thus be the means of spreading misery farther in the family .-- he thus continue : " . have never yet mention 's name , which do not surprise we ; but , to we great astonishment , not a line have be receive from he on the occasion . perhaps , however , he be keep silent by he fear of offending , and I shall , therefore , give he a hint , by a line to , that he sister and I both think a letter of proper submission from he , address perhaps to , and by she shewn to she mother , might not be take amiss ; for we all know the tenderness of 's heart , and that she wish for nothing so much as to be on good term with she child . " this paragraph be of some importance to the prospect and conduct of . it determine he to attempt a reconciliation , though not exactly in the manner point out by they brother and sister . " a letter of proper submission ! " repeat he ; " would they have I beg my mother 's pardon for 's ingratitude to she , and breach of honour to I ?-- I can make no submission -- I be grow neither humble nor penitent by what have pass .-- I be grow very happy ; but that would not interest .-- I know of no submission that be proper for I to make . " " you may certainly ask to be forgive , " say , " because you have offend ; -- and I should think you might Now venture so far as to profess some concern for have ever form the engagement which draw on you you mother 's anger . " he agree that he might . " and when she have forgive you , perhaps a little humility may be convenient while acknowledge a second engagement , almost as imprudent in she eye as the first . " he have nothing to urge against it , but still resist the idea of a letter of proper submission ; and therefore , to make it easier to he , as he declare a much greater willingness to make mean concession by word of mouth than on paper , it be resolve that , instead of writing to , he should go to , and personally intreat she good office in he favour .-- " and if they really do interest themselves , " say , in she new character of candour , " in bring about a reconciliation , I shall think that even and be not entirely without merit . " after a visit on 's side of only three or four day , the two gentleman quit together .-- they be to go immediately to , that might have some personal knowledge of he future home , and assist he patron and friend in decide on what improvement be need to it ; and from thence , after stay there a couple of night , he be to proceed on he journey to town . chapter 50 after a proper resistance on the part of , just so violent and so steady as to preserve she from that reproach which she always seem fearful of incurring , the reproach of be too amiable , be admit to she presence , and pronounce to be again she son . she family have of late be exceedingly fluctuat . for many year of she life she have have two son ; but the crime and annihilation of a few week ago , have rob she of one ; the similar annihilation of have leave she for a fortnight without any ; and now , by the resuscitation of , she have one again . in spite of he be allow once more to live , however , he do not feel the continuance of he existence secure , till he have reveal he present engagement ; for the publication of that circumstance , he fear , might give a sudden turn to he constitution , and carry he off as rapidly as before . with apprehensive caution therefore it be reveal , and he be listen to with unexpected calmness . at first reasonably endeavoure to dissuade he from marry , by every argument in she power ; -- tell he , that in he would have a woman of higher rank and larger fortune ; -- and enforce the
the assertion , by observe that be the daughter of a nobleman with thirty thousand pound , while be only the daughter of a private gentleman with no more than ; but when she find that , though perfectly admit the truth of she representation , he be by no means inclin to be guide by it , she judge it wisest , from the experience of the past , to submit -- and therefore , after such a ungracious delay as she owe to she own dignity , and as serve to prevent every suspicion of good - will , she issue she decree of consent to the marriage of and . what she would engage to do towards augment they income be next to be consider ; and here it plainly appear , that though be now she only son , he be by no means she eldest ; for while be inevitably endow with a thousand pound a - year , not the smallest objection be make against 's take order for the sake of two hundred and fifty at the utmost ; nor be anything promise either for the present or in future , beyond the ten thousand pound , which have be give with Fanny . it be as much , however , as be desire , and more than be expect , by and ; and herself , by she shuffling excuse , see the only person surprise at she not give more . with a income quite sufficient to they want thus secure to they , they have nothing to wait for after be in possession of the living , but the readiness of the house , to which , with a eager desire for the accommodation of , be make considerable improvement ; and after wait some time for they completion , after experiencing , as usual , a thousand disappointment and delay from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workman , , as usual , break through the first positive resolution of not marry till every thing be ready , and the ceremony take place in church early in the autumn . the first month after they marriage be spend with they friend at the Mansion - house ; from whence they could superintend the progress of the Parsonage , and direct every thing as they like on the spot ;-- could chuse papers , project shrubbery , and invent a sweep . 's prophecy , though rather jumble together , be chiefly fulfil ; for she be able to visit and he wife in they Parsonage by , and she find in and she husband , as she really believe , one of the happiest couple in the world . they have in fact nothing to wish for , but the marriage of and , and rather better pasturage for they cow . they be visit on they first settle by almost all they relation and friend . come to inspect the happiness which she be almost asham of have authorise ; and even the be at the expense of a journey from to do they honour . " I will not say that I be disappoint , my dear sister , " say , as they be walk together one morning before the gate of , " that would be say too much , for certainly you have be one of the most fortunate young woman in the world , as it be . but , I confess , it would give I great pleasure to call brother . he property here , he place , he house , every thing be in such respectable and excellent condition ! -- and he woods !-- I have not see such timber any where in , as there be now stand in ! -- and though , perhaps , may not seem exactly the person to attract he -- yet I think it would altogether be advisable for you to have they now frequently stay with you , for as seem a great deal at home , nobody can tell what may happen -- for , when people be much throw together , and see little of anybody else -- and it will always be in you power to set she off to advantage , and so forth ; -- in short , you may as well give she a chance -- you understand I ." -- but though do come to see they , and always treat they with the make - believe of decent affection , they be never insult by she real favour and preference . that be due to the folly of , and the cunning of he wife ; and it be earn by they before many month have pass away . the selfish sagacity of the latter , which have at first draw into the scrape , be the principal instrument of he deliverance from it ; for she respectful humility , assiduous attention , and endless flattery , as soon as the smallest opening be give for they exercise , reconcile to he choice , and re-establish he completely in she favour . the whole of 's behaviour in the affair , and the prosperity which crown it , therefore , may be hold forth as a most encouraging instance of what a earnest , a unceasing attention to self - interest , however its progress may be apparently obstruct , will do in secure every advantage of fortune , with no other sacrifice than that of time and conscience . when first seek she acquaintance , and privately visit she in 's , it be only with the view impute to he by he brother . he merely mean to persuade she to give up the engagement ; and as there could be nothing to overcome but the affection of both , he naturally expect that one or two interview would settle the matter .
. in that point , however , and that only , he er ; -- for though soon give he hope that he eloquence would convince she in time , another visit , another conversation , be always want to produce this conviction . some doubts always linger in she mind when they part , which could only be remove by another half hour 's discourse with himself . he attendance be by this means secure , and the rest follow in course . instead of talking of , they come gradually to talk only of , -- a subject on which he have always more to say than on any other , and in which she soon betraye a interest even equal to he own ; and in short , it become speedily evident to both , that he have entirely supplant he brother . he be proud of he conquest , proud of tricking , and very proud of marry privately without he mother 's consent . what immediately follow be know . they pass some month in great happiness at ; for she have many relation and old acquaintance to cut -- and he draw several plan for magnificent cottage ; -- and from thence return to town , procure the forgiveness of , by the simple expedient of ask it , which , at 's instigation , be adopt . the forgiveness , at first , indeed , as be reasonable , comprehend only ; and , who have owed he mother no duty and therefore could have transgress none , still remain some week longer unpardoned . but perseverance in humility of conduct and message , in self - condemnation for 's offence , and gratitude for the unkindness she be treat with , procure she in time the haughty notice which overcome she by its graciousness , and lead soon afterwards , by rapid degree , to the highest state of affection and influence . become as necessary to , as either or ; and while be never cordially forgive for have once intend to marry she , and , though superior to she in fortune and birth , be speak of as a intruder , she be in every thing consider , and always openly acknowledge , to be a favourite child . they settle in town , receive very liberal assistance from , be on the best term imaginable with the Dashwood ; and set aside the jealousy and ill - will continually subsist between and , in which they husband of course take a part , as well as the frequent domestic disagreement between and themselves , nothing could exceed the harmony in which they all liv together . what have do to forfeit the right of eldest son , might have puzzl many people to find out ; and what have do to succeed to it , might have puzzl they still more . it be a arrangement , however , justifi in its effect , if not in its cause ; for nothing ever appear in 's style of living or of talk to give a suspicion of he regret the extent of he income , as either leave he brother too little , or bring himself too much ; -- and if might be judge from the ready discharge of he duty in every particular , from a increase attachment to he wife and he home , and from the regular cheerfulness of he spirit , he might be suppose no less contented with he lot , no less free from every wish of a exchange . 's marriage divide she as little from she family as could well be contrive , without render the cottage at entirely useless , for she mother and sister spend much more than half they time with she . be act on motives of policy as well as pleasure in the frequency of she visit at ; for she wish of bring and together be hardly less earnest , though rather more liberal than what have express . it be now she darl object . precious as be the company of she daughter to she , she desire nothing so much as to give up its constant enjoyment to she value friend ; and to see settle at the mansion - house be equally the wish of and . they each feel he sorrow , and they own obligation , and , by general consent , be to be the reward of all . with such a confederacy against she -- with a knowledge so intimate of he goodness -- with a conviction of he fond attachment to herself , which at last , though long after it be observable to everybody else -- burst on she -- what could she do ? be bear to a extraordinary fate . she be bear to discover the falsehood of she own opinion , and to counteract , by she conduct , she most favourite maxim . she be bear to overcome a affection for so late in life as at seventeen , and with no sentiment superior to strong esteem and lively friendship , voluntarily to give she hand to another !-- and that other , a man who have suffer no less than herself under the event of a former attachment , whom , two year before , she have consider too old to be marry , -- and who still seek the constitutional safeguard of a flannel waistcoat ! but so it be . instead of fall a sacrifice to a irresistible passion , as once she have fondly flatter herself with expecting ,-- instead of remain even for ever with she mother , and find she only pleasur in retirement and study , as afterwards in she more calm and sober judgment she have determine on , -- she find herself at nineteen , submit to new attachment , enter on
