by I I , handsome , clever , and rich , with a comfortable home and happy disposition , seem to unite some of the best blessing of existence ; and have liv nearly twenty - one year in the world with very little to distress or vex she . she be the youngest of the two daughter of a most affectionate , indulgent father ; and have , in consequence of she sister 's marriage , be mistress of he house from a very early period . she mother have die too long ago for she to have more than a indistinct remembrance of she caress ; and she place have be supply by a excellent woman as governess , who have fall little short of a mother in affection . sixteen year have be in 's family , less as a governess than a friend , very fond of both daughter , but particularly of . between _them it be more the intimacy of sister . even before have cease to hold the nominal office of governess , the mildness of she temper have hardly allow she to impose any restraint ; and the shadow of authority be now long pass away , they have be live together as friend and friend very mutually attach , and do just what she like ; highly esteem 's judgment , but direct chiefly by she own . the real evil , indeed , of 's situation be the power of have rather too much she own way , and a disposition to think a little too well of herself ; these be the disadvantage which threaten alloy to she many enjoyment . the danger , however , be at present so unperceived , that they do not by any mean rank as misfortunes with she . come -- a gentle sorrow -- but not at all in the shape of any disagreeable consciousness .-- marry . it be 's loss which first bring grief . it be on the wedding - day of this beloved friend that first sit in mournful thought of any continuance . the wedding over , and the bride - people go , she father and herself be leave to dine together , with no prospect of a third to cheer a long evening . she father compose himself to sleep after dinner , as usual , and she have then only to sit and think of what she have lose . the event have every promise of happiness for she friend . be a man of unexceptionable character , easy fortune , suitable age , and pleasant manners ; and there be some satisfaction in consider with what self - deny , generous friendship she have always wish and promote the match ; but it be a black morning 's work for she . the want of would be feel every hour of every day . she recall she past kindness -- the kindness , the affection of sixteen year -- how she have teach and how she have play with she from five year old -- how she have devote all she power to attach and amuse she in health -- and how nurse she through the various illness of childhood . a large debt of gratitude be owe here ; but the intercourse of the last seven year , the equal footing and perfect unreserve which have soon follow 's marriage , on they be leave to each other , be yet a dearer , tenderer recollection . she have be a friend and companion such as few possess : intelligent , well - inform , useful , gentle , knowe all the way of the family , interested in all its concern , and peculiarly interested in herself , in every pleasure , every scheme of hers -- one to whom she could speak every thought as it arise , and who have such a affection for she as could never find fault . how be she to bear the change ?--It be true that she friend be go only half a mile from they ; but be aware that great must be the difference between a , only half a mile from they , and a in the house ; and with all she advantage , natural and domestic , she be now in great danger of suffering from intellectual solitude . she dearly love she father , but he be no companion for she . he could not meet she in conversation , rational or playful . the evil of the actual disparity in they ag ( and have not marry early ) be much increase by he constitution and habit ; for have be a valetudinarian all he life , without activity of mind or body , he be a much older man in way than in year ; and though everywhere belove for the friendliness of he heart and he amiable temper , he talents could not have recommend he at any time . she sister , though comparatively but little remove by matrimony , be settle in , only sixteen mile off , be much beyond she daily reach ; and many a long and evening must be struggle through at , before bring the next visit from and she husband , and they little child , to fill the house , and give she pleasant society again . Highbury , the large and populious village , almost amount to a town , to which , in spite of its separate lawn , and shrubbery , and name , do really belong , afforde she no equal . the Woodhouse be first in consequence there . all look up to they . she have many acquaintance in the place , for she father be universally civil , but not one among they who could be accept in lieu of for even half a day . it be a
a melancholy change ; and could not but sigh over it , and wish for impossible thing , till she father awoke , and make it necessary to be cheerful . he spirit require support . he be a nervous man , easily depressed ; fond of every body that he be use to , and hate to part with they ; hate change of every kind . , as the origin of change , be always disagreeable ; and he be by no mean yet reconcile to he own daughter 's marrying , nor could ever speak of she but with compassion , though it have be entirely a match of affection , when he be now oblige to part with too ; and from he habits of gentle selfishness , and of be never able to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself , he be very much disposed to think have do as sad a thing for herself as for they , and would have be a great deal happier if she have spend all the rest of she life at . smile and chat as cheerfully as she could , to keep he from such thought ; but when tea come , it be impossible for he not to say exactly as he have say at dinner , " poor !-- I wish she be here again . what a pity it be that ever think of she ! " " I can not agree with you , papa ; you know I cannot . be such a good - humoured , pleasant , excellent man , that he thoroughly deserve a good wife ; -- and you would not have have live with we for ever , and bear all my odd humours , when she might have a house of she own ? " " a house of she own ! -- but where be the advantage of a house of she own ? this be three time as large .-- and you have never any odd humours , my dear . " " how often we shall be go to see they , and they come to see we !-- we shall be always meet ! we must begin ; we must go and pay wedding visit very soon . " " my dear , how be I to get so far ? Randall be such a distance . I could not walk half so far . " " no , papa , nobody think of you walking . we must go in the carriage , to be sure . " " the carriage ! but will not like to put the horse to for such a little way ; -- and where be the poor horse to be while we be pay we visit ? " " they be to be put into 's stable , papa . you know we have settle all that already . we talk it all over with last night . and as for , you may be very sure he will always like go to , because of he daughter 's be housemay there . I only doubt whether he will ever take we anywhere else . that be you do , papa . you get that good place . nobody thought of till you mention she -- be so obliged to you ! " " I be very glad I do think of she . it be very lucky , for I would not have have poor think himself slighte upon any account ; and I be sure she will make a very good servant : she be a civil , pretty - speak girl ; I have a great opinion of she . whenever I see she , she always curtsey and ask I how I do , in a very pretty manner ; and when you have have she here to do needlework , I observe she always turn the lock of the door the right way and never bang it . I be sure she will be a excellent servant ; and it will be a great comfort to poor to have somebody about she that she be used to see . go over to see he daughter , you know , she will be hear of we . he will be able to tell she how we all be . " spa no exertion to maintain this happier flow of idea , and hope , by the help of backgammon , to get she father tolerably through the evening , and be attack by no regret but she own . the backgammon - table be place ; but a visitor immediately afterwards walk in and make it unnecessary . , a sensible man about seven or eight - and - thirty , be not only a very old and intimate friend of the family , but particularly connect with it , as the elder brother of 's husband . he live about a mile from , be a frequent visitor , and always welcome , and at this time more welcome than usual , as come directly from they mutual connexion in . he have return to a late dinner , after some day ' absence , and now walk up to to say that all be well in . it be a happy circumstance , and animate for some time . have a cheerful manner , which always do he good ; and he many inquirie after " poor Isabella " and she child be answer most satisfactorily . when this be over , gratefully observ , " it be very kind of you , , to come out at this late hour to call upon we . I be afraid you must have have a shocking walk . " " not at all , sir . it be a beautiful moonlight night ; and so mild that I
I must draw back from you great fire . " " but you must have find it very damp and dirty . I wish you may not catch cold . " " dirty , sir ! look at my shoe . not a speck on they . " " well ! that be quite surprising , for we have have a vast deal of rain here . it raine dreadfully hard for half a hour while we be at breakfast . I want they to put off the wedding . " " by the bye -- I have not wish you joy . be pretty well aware of what sort of joy you must both be feel , I have be in no hurry with my congratulation ; but I hope it all go off tolerably well . how do you all behave ? who cry most ? " " ah ! poor ! ' tTis a sad business . " " and , if you please ; but I can not possibly say ' poor . ' I have a great regard for you and ; but when it come to the question of dependence or independence !-- at any rate , it must be better to have only one to please than two . " " especially when _one_ of those two be such a fanciful , troublesome creature ! " say playfully . " that be what you have in you head , I know -- and what you would certainly say if my father be not by . " " I believe it be very true , my dear , indeed , " say , with a sigh . " I be afraid I be sometimes very fanciful and troublesome . " " my dearest papa ! you do not think I could mean _you _, or suppose to mean _you _. what a horrible idea ! oh no ! I mean only myself . love to find fault with I , you know -- in a joke -- it be all a joke . we always say what we like to one another . " , in fact , be one of the few people who could see fault in , and the only one who ever tell she of they : and though this be not particularly agreeable to herself , she know it would be so much less so to she father , that she would not have he really suspect such a circumstance as she not be think perfect by every body . " know I never flatter she , " say , " but I mean no reflection on any body . have be use to have two person to please ; she will now have but one . the chance be that she must be a gainer . " " well , " say , willing to let it pass --" you want to hear about the wedding ; and I shall be happy to tell you , for we all behave charmingly . every body be punctual , every body in they best look : not a tear , and hardly a long face to be see . oh no ; we all feel that we be go to be only half a mile apart , and be sure of meet every day . " " dear bear every thing so well , " say she father . " but , , she be really very sorry to lose poor , and I be sure she _will miss she more than she think for . " turn away she head , divide between tear and smile . " it be impossible that should not miss such a companion , " say . " we should not like she so well as we do , sir , if we could suppose it ; but she know how much the marriage be to 's advantage ; she know how very acceptable it must be , at 's time of life , to be settle in a home of she own , and how important to she to be secure of a comfortable provision , and therefore can not allow herself to feel so much pain as pleasure . every friend of must be glad to have she so happily married . " " and you have forget one matter of joy to I , " say , " and a very considerable one -- that i make the match myself . I make the match , you know , four year ago ; and to have it take place , and be prove in the right , when so many people say would never marry again , may comfort I for any thing . " shook he head at she . she father fondly reply , " ah ! my dear , I wish you would not make match and foretell thing , for whatever you say always come to pass . pray do not make any more match . " " I promise you to make none for myself , papa ; but I must , indeed , for other people . it be the greatest amusement in the world ! and after such success , you know ! -- every body say that would never marry again . oh dear , no ! , who have be a widower so long , and who seem so perfectly comfortable without a wife , so constantly occupy either in he business in town or among he friend here , always acceptable wherever he go , always cheerful -- need not spend a single evening in the year alone if he do not like it . oh no ! certainly would never marry again . some people even talk of a promise to he wife on she death , and other of the son and the uncle not let he . all manner
manner of solemn nonsense be talk on the subject , but I believe none of it . " ever since the day -- about four year ago -- that and I meet with he in , when , because it begin to drizzle , he dart away with so much gallantry , and borrowed two umbrella for we from 's , I make up my mind on the subject . I plan the match from that hour ; and when such success have bless I in this instance , dear papa , you can not think that I shall leave off match - make . " " I do not understand what you mean by ' success , ' " say . " success suppose endeavour . you time have be properly and delicately spend , if you have be endeavour for the last four year to bring about this marriage . a worthy employment for a young lady 's mind ! but if , which I rather imagine , you make the match , as you call it , mean only you plan it , you say to yourself one idle day , ' I think it would be a very good thing for if be to marry she , ' and say it again to yourself every now and then afterwards , why do you talk of success ? where be you merit ? what be you proud of ? you make a lucky guess ; and that be all that can be say . " " and have you never know the pleasure and triumph of a lucky guess ?-- I pity you .-- I think you cleverer -- for , depend upon it a lucky guess be never merely luck . there be always some talent in it . and as to my poor word ' success , ' which you quarrel with , I do not know that I be so entirely without any claim to it . you have draw two pretty picture ; but I think there may be a third -- a something between the do - nothing and the do - all . if I have not promote 's visit here , and give many little encouragement , and smooth many little matter , it might not have come to any thing after all . I think you must know enough to comprehend that . " " a straightforward , open - hear man like , and a rational , unaffected woman like , may be safely leave to manage they own concern . you be more likely to have do harm to yourself , than good to they , by interference . " " never think of herself , if she can do good to other , " rejoin , understand but in part . " but , my dear , pray do not make any more match ; they be silly thing , and break up one 's family circle grievously . " " only one more , papa ; only for . poor ! you like , papa ,-- I must look about for a wife for he . there be nobody in who deserve he -- and he have be here a whole year , and have fitte up he house so comfortably , that it would be a shame to have he single any longer -- and I think when he be join they hand to - day , he look so very much as if he would like to have the same kind office do for he ! I think very well of , and this be the only way I have of do he a service . " " be a very pretty young man , to be sure , and a very good young man , and I have a great regard for he . but if you want to show he any attention , my dear , ask he to come and dine with we some day . that will be a much better thing . I dare say will be so kind as to meet he . " " with a great deal of pleasure , sir , at any time , " say , laugh , " and I agree with you entirely , that it will be a much better thing . invite he to dinner , , and help he to the best of the fish and the chicken , but leave he to chuse he own wife . Depend upon it , a man of six or seven - and - twenty can take care of himself . " chapter ii be a native of , and bear of a respectable family , which for the last two or three generation have be rise into gentility and property . he have receive a good education , but , on succeed early in life to a small independence , have become indisposed for any of the more homely pursuit in which he brother be engage , and have satisfy a active , cheerful mind and social temper by enter into the militia of he county , then embody . be a general favourite ; and when the chance of he military life have introduce he to , of a great family , and fell in love with he , nobody be surprize , except she brother and he wife , who have never see he , and who be full of pride and importance , which the connexion would offend . , however , be of age , and with the full command of she fortune -- though she fortune bear no proportion to the family - estate -- be not to be dissuad from the marriage , and it take place , to the infinite mortification of and , who throw she off with due decorum . it be a unsuitable connexion , and do not produce much
much happiness . ought to have find more in it , for she have a husband whose warm heart and sweet temper make he think every thing due to she in return for the great goodness of be in love with he ; but though she have one sort of spirit , she have not the best . she have resolution enough to pursue she own will in spite of she brother , but not enough to refrain from unreasonable regret at that brother 's unreasonable anger , nor from miss the luxuries of she former home . they live beyond they income , but still it be nothing in comparison of : she do not cease to love she husband , but she want at once to be the wife of , and of . , who have be consider , especially by the Churchill , as make such a amazing match , be prove to have much the worst of the bargain ; for when he wife di , after a three year ' marriage , he be rather a poorer man than at first , and with a child to maintain . from the expense of the child , however , he be soon relieved . the boy have , with the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of he mother 's , be the means of a sort of reconciliation ; and and , have no child of they own , nor any other young creature of equal kindred to care for , offer to take the whole charge of the little soon after she decease . some scruple and some reluctance the widower - father may be suppose to have felt ; but as they be overcome by other consideration , the child be give up to the care and the wealth of the Churchill , and he have only he own comfort to seek , and he own situation to improve as he could . a complete change of life become desirable . he quit the militia and engage in trade , have brothers already establish in a good way in , which afforde he a favourable opening . it be a concern which bring just employment enough . he have still a small house in , where most of he leisure day be spend ; and between useful occupation and the pleasure of society , the next eighteen or twenty year of he life pass cheerfully away . he have , by that time , realise a easy competence -- enough to secure the purchase of a little estate adjoin , which he have always longed for -- enough to marry a woman as portionless even as , and to live accord to the wish of he own friendly and social disposition . it be now some time since have begin to influence he scheme ; but as it be not the tyrannic influence of youth on , it have not shake he determination of never settle till he could purchase Randalls , and the sale of Randalls be long look forward to ; but he have go steadily on , with these object in view , till they be accomplish . he have make he fortune , buy he house , and obtain he wife ; and be begin a new period of existence , with every probability of greater happiness than in any yet pass through . he have never be a unhappy man ; he own temper have secure he from that , even in he first marriage ; but he second must show he how delightful a well - judge and truly amiable woman could be , and must give he the pleasantest proof of its be a great deal better to choose than to be choose , to excite gratitude than to feel it . he have only himself to please in he choice : he fortune be he own ; for as to , it be more than be tacitly bring up as he uncle 's heir , it have become so avow a adoption as to have he assume the name of on come of age . it be most unlikely , therefore , that he should ever want he father 's assistance . he father have no apprehension of it . the aunt be a capricious woman , and govern she husband entirely ; but it be not in 's nature to imagine that any caprice could be strong enough to affect one so dear , and , as he believe , so deservedly dear . he see he son every year in , and be proud of he ; and he fond report of he as a very fine young man have make feel a sort of pride in he too . he be look on as sufficiently belong to the place to make he merit and prospect a kind of common concern . be one of the boast of , and a lively curiosity to see he prevail , though the compliment be so little return that he have never be there in he life . he come to visit he father have be often talk of but never achieve . now , upon he father 's marriage , it be very generally propose , as a most proper attention , that the visit should take place . there be not a dissentient voice on the subject , either when drank tea with and , or when and return the visit . now be the time for to come among they ; and the hope strengthen when it be understand that he have write to he new mother on the occasion . for a few day , every morning visit in include some mention of the handsome letter have receive . " I suppose you have hear of the handsome letter have write to ? I understand it be a very handsome letter
letter , indeed . tell I of it . see the letter , and he say he never see such a handsome letter in he life . " it be , indeed , a highly prized letter . have , of course , form a very favourable idea of the young man ; and such a pleasing attention be a irresistible proof of he great good sense , and a most welcome addition to every source and every expression of congratulation which she marriage have already secure . she feel herself a most fortunate woman ; and she have liv long enough to know how fortunate she might well be think , where the only regret be for a partial separation from friend whose friendship for she have never cool , and who could ill bear to part with she . she know that at time she must be miss ; and could not think , without pain , of 's lose a single pleasure , or suffer a hour 's ennui , from the want of she companionableness : but dear be of no feeble character ; she be more equal to she situation than most girl would have be , and have sense , and energy , and spirit that might be hope would bear she well and happily through it be little difficulty and privation . and then there be such comfort in the very easy distance of Randalls from , so convenient for even solitary female walking , and in 's disposition and circumstance , which would make the approaching season no hindrance to they spending half the evening in the week together . she situation be altogether the subject of hour of gratitude to , and of moment only of regret ; and she satisfaction -- she more than satisfaction -- she cheerful enjoyment , be so just and so apparent , that , well as she know she father , be sometimes take by surprize at he be still able to pity 's poor , ' when they leave she at Randall in the centre of every domestic comfort , or see she go away in the evening attend by she pleasant husband to a carriage of she own . but never do she go without 's give a gentle sigh , and say , " ah , poor ! she would be very glad to stay . " there be no recovering -- nor much likelihood of ceasing to pity she ; but a few week bring some alleviation to . the compliment of he neighbour be over ; he be no longer tease by be wish joy of so sorrowful a event ; and the wedding - cake , which have be a great distress to he , be all eat up . he own stomach could bear nothing rich , and he could never believe other people to be different from himself . what be unwholesome to he he regard as unfit for any body ; and he have , therefore , earnestly try to dissuade they from have any wedding - cake at all , and when that prove avain , as earnestly try to prevent any body 's eat it . he have be at the pain of consulting , the apothecary , on the subject . be a intelligent , gentlemanlike man , whose frequent visit be one of the comfort of 's life ; and upon be apply to , he could not but acknowledge ( though it see rather against the bia of inclination ) that wedding - cake might certainly disagree with many -- perhaps with most people , unless take moderately . with such a opinion , in confirmation of he own , hope to influence every visitor of the newly marry pair ; but still the cake be eat ; and there be no rest for he benevolent nerve till it be all gone . there be a strange rumour in of all the little Perry be see with a slice of 's wedding - cake in they hand : but would never believe it . chapter III Woodhouse be fond of society in he own way . he like very much to have he friend come and see he ; and from various united cause , from he long residence at , and he good nature , from he fortune , he house , and he daughter , he could command the visit of he own little circle , in a great measure , as he like . he have not much intercourse with any family beyond that circle ; he horror of late hour , and large dinner - party , make he unfin for any acquaintance but such as would visit he on he own term . fortunately for he , Highbury , include Randall in the same parish , and in the parish adjoin , the seat of , comprehend many such . not unfrequently , through 's persuasion , he have some of the chosen and the best to dine with he : but evening party be what he prefer ; and , unless he fancie himself at any time unequal to company , there be scarcely a evening in the week in which could not make up a card - table for he . , long - stand regard bring the and ; and by , a young man live alone without like it , the privilege of exchange any vacant evening of he own blank solitude for the elegancy and society of 's drawing - room , and the smile of he lovely daughter , be in no danger of be throw away . after these come a second set ; among the most come - at - able of whom be and , and , three lady almost always at the service of a invitation from , and who be fetch and carry home so often
often , that think it no hardship for either or the horse . have it take place only once a year , it would have be a grievance . , the widow of a former vicar of , be a very old lady , almost past every thing but tea and quadrille . she live with she single daughter in a very small way , and be consider with all the regard and respect which a harmless old lady , under such untoward circumstance , can excite . she daughter enjoy a most uncommon degree of popularity for a woman neither young , handsome , rich , nor marry . stand in the very worst predicament in the world for have much of the public favour ; and she have no intellectual superiority to make atonement to herself , or frighten those who might hate she into outward respect . she have never boast either beauty or cleverness . she youth have pass without distinction , and she middle of life be devote to the care of a failing mother , and the endeavour to make a small income go as far as possible . and yet she be a happy woman , and a woman whom no one name without good - will . it be she own universal good - will and contente temper which work such wonder . she love every body , be interested in every body 's happiness , quicksight to every body 's merit ; think herself a most fortunate creature , and surround with blessing in such a excellent mother , and so many good neighbour and friend , and a home that want for nothing . the simplicity and cheerfulness of she nature , she contente and grateful spirit , be a recommendation to every body , and a mine of felicity to herself . she be a great talker upon little matter , which exactly suite , full of trivial communication and harmless gossip . be the mistress of a -- not of a seminary , or a establishment , or any thing which profess , in long sentence of refin nonsense , to combine liberal acquirement with elegant morality , upon new principle and new system -- and where young lady for enormous pay might be screw out of health and into vanity -- but a real , honest , old - fashioned boarding - school , where a reasonable quantity of accomplishment be sell at a reasonable price , and where girl might be send to be out of the way , and scramble themselves into a little education , without any danger of come back prodigy . 's school be in high repute -- and very deservedly ; for be reckon a particularly healthy spot : she have a ample house and garden , give the child plenty of wholesome food , let they run about a great deal in the summer , and in winter dress they chilblain with she own hand . it be no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now walk after she to church . she be a plain , motherly kind of woman , who have work hard in she youth , and now think herself entitle to the occasional holiday of a tea-visit ; and have formerly owed much to 's kindness , feel he particular claim on she to leave she neat parlour , hang round with fancy - work , whenever she could , and win or lose a few sixpence by he fireside . these be the lady whom find herself very frequently able to collect ; and happy be she , for she father 's sake , in the power ; though , as far as she be herself concerned , it be no remedy for the absence of . she be delighted to see she father look comfortable , and very much pleased with herself for contrive thing so well ; but the quiet prosing of three such woman make she feel that every evening so spend be indeed one of the long evening she have fearfully anticipat . as she sit one morning , look forward to exactly such a close of the present day , a note be bring from , request , in most respectful term , to be allow to bring with she ; a most welcome request : for be a girl of seventeen , whom know very well by sight , and have long feel a interest in , on account of she beauty . a very gracious invitation be return , and the evening no longer dread by the fair mistress of the mansion . be the natural daughter of somebody . somebody have place she , several year back , at 's school , and somebody have lately raise she from the condition of scholar to that of parlour - boarder . this be all that be generally know of she history . she have no visible friend but what have be acquire at , and be now just return from a long visit in the country to some young lady who have be at school there with she . she be a very pretty girl , and she beauty happen to be of a sort which particularly admire . she be short , plump , and fair , with a fine bloom , blue eye , light hair , regular feature , and a look of great sweetness , and , before the end of the evening , be as much pleased with she manners as she person , and quite determined to continue the acquaintance . she be not strike by any thing remarkably clever in 's conversation , but she find she altogether very engaging -- not inconveniently shy , not unwilling to talk -- and yet so far from pushing , shew so proper and become a deference , see so pleasantly grateful
grateful for be admit to , and so artlessly impress by the appearance of every thing in so superior a style to what she have be use to , that she must have good sense , and deserve encouragement . encouragement should be give . those soave blue eye , and all those natural graces , should not be waste on the inferior society of and its connexion . the acquaintance she have already form be unworthy of she . the friend from whom she have just part , though very good sort of people , must be do she harm . they be a family of the name of , whom well know by character , as rent a large farm of , and reside in the parish of -- very creditably , she believe -- she know think highly of they -- but they must be coarse and unpolished , and very unfit to be the intimate of a girl who want only a little more knowledge and elegance to be quite perfect . She_ would notice she ; she would improve she ; she would detach she from she bad acquaintance , and introduce she into good society ; she would form she opinion and she manners . it would be a interesting , and certainly a very kind undertaking ; highly become she own situation in life , she leisure , and power . she be so busy in admir those soft blue eye , in talk and listen , and form all these scheme in the in - between , that the evening fly away at a very unusual rate ; and the supper - table , which always close such party , and for which she have be use to sit and watch the due time , be all set out and ready , and move forwards to the fire , before she be aware . with a alacrity beyond the common impulse of a spirit which yet be never indifferent to the credit of do every thing well and attentively , with the real good - will of a mind delighte with its own idea , do she then do all the honour of the meal , and help and recommend the minced chicken and scallop oyster , with a urgency which she know would be acceptable to the early hour and civil scruple of they guest . upon such occasion poor feeling be in sad warfare . he love to have the cloth laid , because it have be the fashion of he youth , but he conviction of supper be very unwholesome make he rather sorry to see any thing put on it ; and while he hospitality would have welcome he visitor to every thing , he care for they health make he grieve that they would eat . such another small basin of thin gruel as he own be all that he could , with thorough self - approbation , recommend ; though he might constrain himself , while the lady be comfortably clear the nicer thing , to say : " . Bates , let I propose you venturing on one of these egg . a egg boil very soft be not unwholesome . understand boil a egg better than any body . I would not recommend a egg boil by any body else ; but you need not be afraid , they be very small , you see -- one of we small egg will not hurt you . , let help you to a _little bit of tart -- a _very little bit . ours be all apple - tart . you need not be afraid of unwholesome preserve here . I do not advise the custard . , what say you to _half a glass of wine ? a _small_ half - glass , put into a tumbler of water ? I do not think it could disagree with you . " allow she father to talk -- but supply she visitor in a much more satisfactory style , and on the present evening have particular pleasure in send they away happy . the happiness of be quite equal to she intentions . Woodhouse be so great a personage in , that the prospect of the introduction have give as much panic as pleasure ; but the humble , grateful little girl go off with highly gratified feeling , delighte with the affability with which have treat she all the evening , and actually shaken hand with she at last ! 's intimacy at be soon a settled thing . quick and decide in she way , lose no time in inviting , encourage , and tell she to come very often ; and as they acquaintance increase , so do they satisfaction in each other . as a walking companion , have very early foreseen how useful she might find she . in that respect 's loss have be important . she father never go beyond the shrubbery , where two division of the ground suffice he for he long walk , or he short , as the year vari ; and since 's marriage she exercise have be too much confin . she have venture once alone to , but it be not pleasant ; and a , therefore , one whom she could summon at any time to a walk , would be a valuable addition to she privileges . but in every respect , as she see more of she , she approve she , and be confirm in all she kind designs . certainly be not clever , but she have a sweet , docile , grateful disposition , be totally free from conceit , and only desire to be guide by any one she look up to . she early attachment to herself be very amiable ; and she inclination for good company , and power of appreciate what be
be elegant and clever , shew that there be no want of taste , though strength of understanding must not be expect . altogether she be quite convinced of 's be exactly the young friend she want -- exactly the something which she home require . such a friend as be out of the question . two such could never be grant . two such she do not want . it be quite a different sort of thing , a sentiment distinct and independent . be the object of a regard which have its basis in gratitude and esteem . would be love as one to whom she could be useful . for there be nothing to be do ; for every thing . she first attempt at usefulness be in a endeavour to find out who be the parent , but could not tell . she be ready to tell every thing in she power , but on this subject question be vain . be oblige to fancy what she like -- but she could never believe that in the same situation _she should not have discover the truth . have no penetration . she have be satisfied to hear and believe just what choose to tell she ; and look no farther . , and the teacher , and the girl and the affair of the school in general , form naturally a great part of the conversation -- and but for she acquaintance with the of - , it must have be the whole . but the occupy she thought a good deal ; she have spend two very happy month with they , and now love to talk of the pleasure of she visit , and describe the many comforts and wonder of the place . encourage she talkativeness -- amuse by such a picture of another set of being , and enjoy the youthful simplicity which could speak with so much exultation of 's have " _two_ parlour , two very good parlour , indeed ; one of they quite as large as 's drawing - room ; and of she have a upper maid who have liv five - and - twenty year with she ; and of they have eight cow , two of they Alderneys , and one a little cow , a very pretty little cow indeed ; and of 's say as she be so fond of it , it should be call _her_ cow ; and of they have a very handsome summer - house in they garden , where some day next year they be all to drink tea :-- a very handsome summer - house , large enough to hold a dozen people . " for some time she be amuse , without think beyond the immediate cause ; but as she come to understand the family better , other feeling arise . she have take up a wrong idea , fancie it be a mother and daughter , a son and son 's wife , who all liv together ; but when it appear that the , who bear a part in the narrative , and be always mention with approbation for he great good - nature in do something or other , be a single man ; that there be no young , no wife in the case ; she do suspect danger to she poor little friend from all this hospitality and kindness , and that , if she be not take care of , she might be require to sink herself forever . with this inspiriting notion , she question increase in number and mean ; and she particularly lead to talk more of , and there be evidently no dislike to it . be very ready to speak of the share he have have in they moonlight walk and merry evening game ; and dwelt a good deal upon he be so very good - humour and oblige . he have go three mile round one day in order to bring she some walnuts , because she have say how fond she be of they , and in every thing else he be so very obliging . he have he shepherd 's son into the parlour one night on purpose to s to she . she be very fond of singing . he could se a little himself . she believe he be very clever , and understand every thing . he have a very fine flock , and , while she be with they , he have be bid more for he wool than any body in the country . she believe every body speak well of he . he mother and sister be very fond of he . have tell she one day ( and there be a blush as she say it , ) that it be impossible for any body to be a better son , and therefore she be sure , whenever he marry , he would make a good husband . not that she _want he to marry . she be in no hurry at all . " well do , ! " think . " you know what you be about . " " and when she have come away , be so very kind as to send a beautiful goose -- the finest goose have ever see . have dress it on a , and ask all the three teacher , , and , and , to sup with she . " " , I suppose , be not a man of information beyond the line of he own business ? he do not read ? " " oh yes !-- that be , no --I do not know -- but I believe he have read a good deal -- but not what you would think any thing of . he read the Agricultural report , and some other book that lay in one of
of the window seat -- but he read all _them to himself . but sometimes of a evening , before we go to card , he would read something aloud out of the , very entertaining . and I know he have read the of . he never read the romance of the , nor the child of the . he have never hear of such book before I mention they , but he be determined to get they now as soon as ever he can . " the next question be -- " what sort of look man be ? " " oh ! not handsome -- not at all handsome . I think he very aplain at first , but I do not think he so aplain now . one do not , you know , after a time . but do you never see he ? he be in every now and then , and he be sure to ride through every week in he way to . he have pass you very often . " " that may be , and I may have see he fifty time , but without have any idea of he name . a young farmer , whether on horseback or on foot , be the very last sort of person to raise my curiosity . the yeomanry be precisely the order of people with whom I feel I can have nothing to do . a degree or two lower , and a creditable appearance might interest I ; I might hope to be useful to they family in some way or other . but a farmer can need none of my help , and be , therefore , in one sense , as much above my notice as in every other he be below it . " " to be sure . oh yes ! it be not likely you should ever have observe he ; but he know you very well indeed -- I mean by sight . " " I have no doubt of he be a very respectable young man . I know , indeed , that he be so , and , as such , wish he well . what do you imagine he age to be ? " " he be four - and - twenty the 8th of last , and my birthday be the 23rd just a fortnight and a day 's difference -- which be very odd . " " only four - and - twenty . that be too young to settle . he mother be perfectly right not to be in a hurry . they seem very comfortable as they be , and if she be to take any pain to marry he , she would probably repent it . six year hence , if he could meet with a good sort of young woman in the same rank as he own , with a little money , it might be very desirable . " " six year hence ! dear miss Woodhouse , he would be thirty year old ! " " well , and that be as early as most man can afford to marry , who be not bear to a independence . , I imagine , have he fortune entirely to make -- can not be at all beforehand with the world . whatever money he might come into when he father di , whatever he share of the family property , it be , I dare say , all afloat , all employ in he stock , and so forth ; and though , with diligence and good luck , he may be rich in time , it be next to impossible that he should have realise any thing yet . " " to be sure , so it be . but they live very comfortably . they have no indoor man , else they do not want for any thing ; and talk of take a boy another year . " " I wish you may not get into a scrape , , whenever he do marry ;-- I mean , as to be acquaint with he wife -- for though he sister , from a superior education , be not to be altogether object to , it do not follow that he might marry any body at all fit for you to notice . the misfortune of you birth ought to make you particularly careful as to you associate . there can be no doubt of you be a gentleman 's daughter , and you must support you claim to that station by every thing within you own power , or there will be plenty of people who would take pleasure in degrad you . " " yes , to be sure , I suppose there be . but while I visit at , and you be so kind to I , , I be not afraid of what any body can do . " " you understand the force of influence pretty well , ; but I would have you so firmly establish in good society , as to be independent even of and . I want to see you permanently well connect , and to that end it will be advisable to have as few odd acquaintance as may be ; and , therefore , I say that if you should still be in this country when marries , I wish you may not be draw in by you intimacy with the sister , to be acquaint with the wife , who will probably be some mere farmer 's daughter , without education . " " to be sure . yes . not that I think would ever marry any body but what have have some education -- and be very well bring up . however , I do not mean to set up my opinion against yours -- and I be
be sure I shall not wish for the acquaintance of he wife . I shall always have a great regard for the , especially , and should be very sorry to give they up , for they be quite as well educate as I . but if he marry a very ignorant , vulgar woman , certainly I have better not visit she , if I can help it . " watch she through the fluctuation of this speech , and see no alarming symptom of love . the young man have be the first admirer , but she trust there be no other hold , and that there would be no serious difficulty , on 's side , to oppose any friendly arrangement of she own . they meet the very next day , as they be walk on the Donwell road . he be on foot , and after look very respectfully at she , look with most unfeigned satisfaction at she companion . be not sorry to have such a opportunity of survey ; and walk a few yard forward , while they talk together , soon make she quick eye sufficiently acquaint with . he appearance be very neat , and he look like a sensible young man , but he person have no other advantage ; and when he come to be contrast with gentleman , she think he must lose all the ground he have gain in 's inclination . be not insensible of manner ; she have voluntarily notice she father 's gentleness with admiration as well as . look as if he do not know what manner be . they remain but a few minute together , as Woodhouse must not be keep wait ; and then come run to she with a smile face , and in a flutter of spirit , which hope very soon to compose . " only think of we happen to meet he !-- how very odd ! it be quite a chance , he say , that he have not go round by . he do not think we ever walk this road . he think we walk towards Randalls most day . he have not be able to get the romance of the yet . he be so busy the last time he be at that he quite forget it , but he go again to - morrow . so very odd we should happen to meet ! well , , be he like what you expect ? what do you think of he ? do you think he so very plain ? " " he be very plain , undoubtedly -- remarkably plain :-- but that be nothing compare with he entire want of gentility . I have no right to expect much , and I do not expect much ; but I have no idea that he could be so very clownish , so totally without air . I have imagine he , I confess , a degree or two nearer gentility . " " to be sure , " say , in a mortified voice , " he be not so genteel as real gentleman . " " I think , , since you acquaintance with we , you have be repeatedly in the company of some such very real gentleman , that you must yourself be strike with the difference in . at , you have have very good specimen of well educated , well breed man . I should be surprize if , after see they , you could be in company with again without perceive he to be a very inferior creature -- and rather wonder at yourself for have ever think he at all agreeable before . do not you begin to feel that now ? be not you struck ? I be sure you must have be strike by he awkward look and abrupt manner , and the uncouthness of a voice which I hear to be wholly unmodulated as I stand here . " " certainly , he be not like . he have not such a fine air and way of walk as . I see the difference plain enough . but be so very fine a man ! " " 's air be so remarkably good that it be not fair to compare Martin with _him_. you might not see one in a hundred with _gentleman_ so plainly write as in . but he be not the only gentleman you have be lately use to . what say you to and ? with either of _them _. compare they manner of carry themselves ; of walking ; of speak ; of be silent . you must see the difference . " " oh yes !-- there be a great difference . but be almost a old man . must be between forty and fifty . " " which make he good manners the more valuable . the older a person grow , , the more important it be that they manners should not be bad ; the more glaring and disgust any loudness , or coarseness , or awkwardness become . what be passable in youth be detestable in later age . be now awkward and abrupt ; what will he be at 's time of life ? " " there be no saying , indeed , " reply rather solemnly . " but there may be pretty good guessing . he will be a completely gross , vulgar farmer , totally inattentive to appearance , and think of nothing but profit and loss . " " will he , indeed ? that will be very bad . " " how much he business engross he already be very plain from the circumstance of he forgetting to inquire for the book you recommend . he be a great deal too full of the market to think of any thing else -- which be just
just as it should be , for a thrive man . what have he to do with book ? and I have no doubt that he _will_ thrive , and be a very rich man in time -- and he be illiterate and coarse need not disturb _us_. " " I wonder he do not remember the book " -- be all 's answer , and speak with a degree of grave displeasure which think might be safely leave to itself . she , therefore , say no more for some time . she next beginning be , " in one respect , perhaps , 's manners be superior to 's or 's . they have more gentleness . they might be more safely hold up as a pattern . there be a openness , a quickness , almost a bluntness in , which every body like in _him , because there be so much good - humour with it -- but that would not do to be copy . neither would 's downright , decide , command sort of manner , though it suit _him_ very well ; he figure , and look , and situation in life seem to allow it ; but if any young man be to set about copy he , he would not be sufferable . on the contrary , I think a young man might be very safely recommend to take as a model . be good - humoured , cheerful , oblige , and gentle . he seem to I to be grow particularly gentle of late . I do not know whether he have any design of ingratiat himself with either of we , , by additional softness , but it strike I that he manners be softer than they use to be . if he mean any thing , it must be to please you . do not I tell you what he say of you the other day ? " she then repeat some warm personal praise which she have draw from , and now do full justice to ; and blush and smile , and say she have always think very agreeable . be the very person fix on by for drive the young farmer out of 's head . she think it would be a excellent match ; and only too palpably desirable , natural , and probable , for she to have much merit in plan it . she fear it be what every body else must think of and predict . it be not likely , however , that any body should have equall she in the date of the plan , as it have enter she brain during the very first evening of 's come to . the longer she consider it , the greater be she sense of its expediency . 's situation be most suitable , quite the gentleman himself , and without low connexion ; at the same time , not of any family that could fairly object to the doubtful birth of . he have a comfortable home for she , and imagine a very sufficient income ; for though the vicarage of be not large , he be know to have some independent property ; and she think very highly of he as a good - humoure , well - mean , respectable young man , without any deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world . she have already satisfied herself that he think a beautiful girl , which she trust , with such frequent meeting at , be foundation enough on he side ; and on 's there could be little doubt that the idea of be preferre by he would have all the usual weight and efficacy . and he be really a very pleasing young man , a young man whom any woman not fastidious might like . he be reckon very handsome ; he person much admire in general , though not by she , there be a want of elegance of feature which she could not dispense with :-- but the girl who could be gratify by a 's riding about the country to get walnuts for she might very well be conquer by 's admiration . " I do not know what you opinion may be , , " say , " of this great intimacy between and , but I think it a bad thing . " " a bad thing ! do you really think it a bad thing ?--why so ? " " I think they will neither of they do the other any good . " " you surprize I ! must do good : and by supplye she with a new object of interest , may be say to do good . I have be see they intimacy with the greatest pleasure . how very differently we feel ! -- not think they will do each other any good ! this will certainly be the beginning of one of we quarrel about , . " " perhaps you think I be come on purpose to quarrel with you , know to be out , and that you must still fight you own battle . " " would undoubtedly support I , if he be here , for he think exactly as I do on the subject . we be speak of it only yesterday , and agree how fortunate it be for , that there should be such a girl in for she to associate with . , I shall not allow you to be a fair judge in this case . you be so much use to live alone , that you do not know the value of a companion ; and , perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comfort a woman feel in the society of one of she own sex , after be use to it all she life .
. I can imagine you objection to . she be not the superior young woman which 's friend ought to be . but on the other hand , as want to see she better inform , it will be a inducement to she to read more herself . they will read together . she mean it , I know . " " have be mean to read more ever since she be twelve year old . I have see a great many list of she draw - up at various time of book that she mean to read regularly through -- and very good list they be -- very well choose , and very neatly arrange -- sometimes alphabetically , and sometimes by some other rule . the list she draw up when only fourtee -- I remember think it do she judgment so much credit , that I preserve it some time ; and I dare say she may have make out a very good list now . but I have do with expect any course of steady reading from . she will never submit to any thing require industry and patience , and a subjection of the fancy to the understanding . where fail to stimulate , I may safely affirm that will do nothing . -- you never could persuade she to read half so much as you wish . -- you know you could not . " " I dare say , " reply , smile , " that I think so _than _;--but since we have part , I can never remember 's omitting to do any thing I wish . " " there be hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory as _that _, " -- say , feelingly ; and for a moment or two he have do . " but I , " he soon add , " who have have no such charm thrown over my sense , must still see , hear , and remember . be spoiled by be the cleverest of she family . at ten year old , she have the misfortune of be able to answer question which puzzl she sister at seventeen . she be always quick and assure : slow and diffident . and ever since she be twelve , have be mistress of the house and of you all . in she mother she lose the only person able to cope with she . she inherit she mother 's talents , and must have be under subjection to she . " " I should have be sorry , , to be dependent on _your_ recommendation , have I quit 's family and want another situation ; I do not think you would have speak a good word for I to any body . I be sure you always think I unfin for the office I hold . " " yes , " say he , smile . " you be better place _here_ ; very fin for a wife , but not at all for a governess . but you be prepare yourself to be a excellent wife all the time you be at . you might not give such a complete education as you power would seem to promise ; but you be receive a very good education from _her , on the very material matrimonial point of submit you own will , and do as you be bid ; and if have ask I to recommend he a wife , I should certainly have name . " " thank you . there will be very little merit in make a good wife to such a man as . " " why , to own the truth , I be afraid you be rather throw away , and that with every disposition to bear , there will be nothing to be borne . we will not despair , however . may grow cross from the wantonness of comfort , or he son may plague he . " " I hope not _that _.-- it be not likely . no , , do not foretell vexation from that quarter . " " not I , indeed . I only name possibility . I do not pretend to 's genius for foretell and guess . I hope , with all my heart , the young man may be a in merit , and a Churchill in fortune .-- but -- I have not half do about . I think she the very worst sort of companion that could possibly have . she know nothing herself , and look upon as know every thing . she be a flatterer in all she way ; and so much the worse , because undesign . she ignorance be hourly flattery . how can imagine she have any thing to learn herself , while be present such a delightful inferiority ? and as for , I will venture to say that _she can not gain by the acquaintance . Hartfield will only put she out of conceit with all the other place she belong to . she will grow just refin enough to be uncomfortable with those among whom birth and circumstance have place she home . I be much mistaken if 's doctrine give any strength of mind , or tend at all to make a girl adapt herself rationally to the variety of she situation in life .-- they only give a little polish . " " I either depend more upon 's good sense than you do , or be more anxious for she present comfort ; for I can not lament the acquaintance . how well she look last night ! " " oh ! you would rather talk of she person than she mind , would you ? very well ; I shall not attempt to deny 's be pretty . " " pretty ! say beautiful rather . can you imagine any
any thing nearer perfect beauty than altogether -- face and figure ? " " I do not know what i could imagine , but I confess that I have seldom see a face or figure more pleasing to I than hers . but I be a partial old friend . " " such a eye !-- the true hazle eye -- and so brilliant ! regular feature , open countenance , with a complexion ! oh ! what a bloom of full health , and such a pretty height and size ; such a firm and upright figure ! there be health , not merely in she bloom , but in she air , she head , she glance . one hear sometimes of a child be ' the picture of health ;' now , always give I the idea of be the complete picture of grow - up health . she be loveliness itself . , be not she ? " " I have not a fault to find with she person , " he reply . " I think she all you describe . I love to look at she ; and I will add this praise , that I do not think she personally vain . consider how very handsome she be , she appear to be little occupy with it ; she vanity lie another way . , I be not to be talk out of my dislike of , or my dread of its do they both harm . " " and I , , be equally stout in my confidence of it be not do they any harm . with all dear 's little fault , she be a excellent creature . where shall we see a better daughter , or a kinder sister , or a truer friend ? no , no ; she have qualitie which may be trust ; she will never lead any one really wrong ; she will make no last blunder ; where err once , she be in the right a hundred time . " " very well ; I will not plague you any more . shall be a angel , and I will keep my spleen to myself till bring and . love with a reasonable and therefore not a blind affection , and always think as he do ; except when he be not quite frightened enough about the child . I be sure of have they opinion with I . " " I know that you all love she really too well to be unjust or unkind ; but excuse I , , if I take the liberty ( I consider myself , you know , as have somewhat of the privilege of speech that 's mother might have have ) the liberty of hinting that I do not think any possible good can arise from 's intimacy be make a matter of much discussion among you . pray excuse I ; but suppose any little inconvenience may be apprehend from the intimacy , it can not be expect that , accountable to nobody but she father , who perfectly approve the acquaintance , should put a end to it , so long as it be a source of pleasure to herself . it have be so many year my province to give advice , that you can not be surprize , , at this little remains of office . " " not at all , " cry he ; " I be much oblige to you for it . it be very good advice , and it shall have a better fate than you advice have often find ; for it shall be attend to . " " . be easily alarmed , and might be make unhappy about she sister . " " be satisfied , " say he , " I will not raise any outcry . I will keep my ill - humour to myself . I have a very sincere interest in . do not seem more my sister ; have never accit a greater interest ; perhaps hardly so great . there be a anxiety , a curiosity in what one feel for . I wonder what will become of she ! " " so do I , " say gently , " very much . " " she always declare she will never marry , which , of course , mean just nothing at all . but I have no idea that she have yet ever see a man she care for . it would not be a bad thing for she to be very much in love with a proper object . I should like to see in love , and in some doubt of a return ; it would do she good . but there be nobody hereabout to attach she ; and she go so seldom from home . " " there do , indeed , seem as little to tempt she to break she resolution at present , " say , " as can well be ; and while she be so happy at , I can not wish she to be form any attachment which would be create such difficulty on poor 's account . I do not recommend matrimony at present to , though I mean no slight to the state , I assure you . " part of she meaning be to conceal some favourite thought of she own and 's on the subject , as much as possible . there be wish at Randalls respect 's destiny , but it be not desirable to have they suspect ; and the quiet transition which soon afterwards make to " what do think of the weather ; shall we have rain ? " convince she that he have nothing more to say or surmise about . could not feel a doubt of have give 's fancy a proper direction and raise
raise the gratitude of she young vanity to a very good purpose , for she find she decidedly more sensible than before of 's be a remarkably handsome man , with most agreeable manners ; and as she have no hesitation in follow up the assurance of he admiration by agreeable hint , she be soon pretty confident of create as much liking on 's side , as there could be any occasion for . she be quite convinced of 's be in the fairest way of fall in love , if not in love already . she have no scruple with regard to he . he talk of , and praise she so warmly , that she could not suppose any thing want which a little time would not add . he perception of the striking improveament of 's manner , since she introduction at , be not one of the least agreeable proof of he grow attachment . " you have give all that she require , " say he ; " you have make she graceful and easy . she be a beautiful creature when she come to you , but , in my opinion , the attraction you have add be infinitely superior to what she receive from nature . " " I be glad you think I have be useful to she ; but only want draw out , and receive a few , very few hint . she have all the natural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself . I have do very little . " " if it be admissible to contradict a lady , " say the -- " I have perhaps give she a little more decision of character , have teach she to think on point which have not fall in she way before . " " exactly so ; that be what principally strike I . so much superadded decision of character ! have be the hand ! " " have be the pleasure , I be sure . I never meet with a disposition more truly amiable . " " I have no doubt of it . " and it be speak with a sort of sighing animation , which have a vast deal of the lover . she be not less pleased another day with the manner in which he seconde a sudden wish of hers , to have 's picture . " do you ever have you likeness take , ? " say she : " do you ever sit for you picture ? " be on the point of leave the room , and only stopt to say , with a very interesting naivete , " oh ! dear , no , never . " no sooner be she out of sight , than exclaim , " what a exquisite possession a good picture of she would be ! I would give any money for it . I almost long to attempt she likeness myself . you do not know it I dare say , but two or three year ago I have a great passion for take likeness , and attempt several of my friend , and be think to have a tolerable eye in general . but from one cause or another , I give it up in disgust . but really , I could almost venture , if would sit to I . it would be such a delight to have she picture ! " " let I entreat you , " cry ; " it would indeed be a delight ! let I entreat you , , to exercise so charme a talent in favour of you friend . I know what you drawing be . how could you suppose I ignorant ? be not this room rich in specimen of you landscape and flower ; and have not some inimitable figure - piece in she drawing - room , at Randalls ? " yes , good man !-- think -- but what have all that to do with take likeness ? you know nothing of drawing . do not pretend to be in rapture about mine . keep you rapture for 's face . " well , if you give I such kind encouragement , , I believe I shall try what I can do . 's feature be very delicate , which make a likeness difficult ; and yet there be a peculiarity in the shape of the eye and the line about the mouth which one ought to catch . " " exactly so -- the shape of the eye and the line about the mouth -- I have not a doubt of you success . pray , pray attempt it . as you will do it , it will indeed , to use you own word , be a exquisite possession . " " but I be afraid , , will not like to sit . she think so little of she own beauty . do not you observe she manner of answer I ? how completely it mean , ' why should my picture be draw ? ' " " oh ! yes , I observ it , I assure you . it be not lose on I . but still I can not imagine she would not be persuade . " be soon back again , and the proposal almost immediately make ; and she have no scruple which could stand many minute against the earnest pressing of both the other . wish to go to work directly , and therefore produce the portfolio contain she various attempt at portrait , for not one of they have ever be finish , that they might decide together on the best size for . she many beginnings be display . Miniature , half - length , whole - length , pencil , crayon , and water - colours have be all try in turn .
. she have always want to do every thing , and have make more progress both in drawing and music than many might have do with so little labour as she would ever submit to . she play and sang ; -- and draw in almost every style ; but steadiness have always be want ; and in nothing have she approach the degree of excellence which she would have be glad to command , and ought not to have fail of . she be not much deceive as to she own skill either as a artist or a musician , but she be not unwilling to have other deceive , or sorry to know she reputation for accomplishment often higher than it deserv . there be merit in every draw -- in the least finish , perhaps the most ; she style be spirit ; but have there be much less , or have there be ten time more , the delight and admiration of she two companion would have be the same . they be both in ecstasy . a likeness please every body ; and 's performance must be capital . " no great variety of face for you , " say . " I have only my own family to study from . there be my father -- another of my father -- but the idea of sit for he picture make he so nervous , that I could only take he by stealth ; neither of they very like therefore . again , and again , and again , you see . dear ! always my kindest friend on every occasion . she would sit whenever I ask she . there be my sister ; and really quite she own little elegant figure !-- and the face not unlike . I should have make a good likeness of she , if she would have sit longer , but she be in such a hurry to have I draw she four child that she would not be quiet . then , here come all my attempt at three of those four child ; -- there they be , and and , from one end of the sheet to the other , and any one of they might do for any one of the rest . she be so eager to have they draw that I could not refuse ; but there be no make child of three or four year old stand still you know ; nor can it be very easy to take any likeness of they , beyond the air and complexion , unless they be coarser feature than any of mama 's child ever were . here be my sketch of the fourth , who be a baby . I take he as he be sleep on the sofa , and it be as strong a likeness of he cockade as you would wish to see . he have nestle down he head most conveniently . that be very like . I be rather proud of little . the corner of the sofa be very good . then here be my last , " -- unclose a pretty sketch of a gentleman in small size , whole - length --" my last and my best -- my brother , .-- this do not want much of be finish , when I put it away in a pet , and vow I would never take another likeness . I could not help be provoke ; for after all my pain , and when I have really make a very good likeness of it --( . and I be quite agree in think it _very like ) -- only too handsome -- too flatter -- but that be a fault on the right side -- after all this , come poor dear 's cold approbation of -- " yes , it be a little like -- but to be sure it do not do he justice . " we have have a great deal of trouble in persuade he to sit at all . it be make a great favour of ; and altogether it be more than I could bear ; and so I never would finish it , to have it apologise over as a unfavourable likeness , to every morning visitor in ; -- and , as I say , I do then forswear ever draw any body again . but for 's sake , or rather for my own , and as there be no husband and wife in the case _at_ _present_ , I will break my resolution now . " seem very properly struck and delighte by the idea , and be repeat , " no husband and wife in the case at present indeed , as you observe . exactly so . no husband and wife , " with so interesting a consciousness , that begin to consider whether she have not better leave they together at once . but as she want to be draw , the declaration must wait a little longer . she have soon fix on the size and sort of portrait . it be to be a whole - length in water - colour , like 's , and be destin , if she could please herself , to hold a very honourable station over the mantelpiece . the sitting begin ; and , smile and blush , and afraid of not keep she attitude and countenance , present a very sweet mixture of youthful expression to the steady eye of the artist . but there be no do any thing , with fidget behind she and watch every touch . she give he credit for stationing himself where he might gaze and gaze again without offence ; but be really oblige to put a end to it , and request he to place himself elsewhere . it then occur to she to employ
employ he in reading . " if he would be so good as to read to they , it would be a kindness indeed ! it would amuse away the difficulty of she part , and lessen the irksomeness of 's . " be only too happy . listen , and draw in peace . she must allow he to be still frequently come to look ; any thing less would certainly have be too little in a lover ; and he be ready at the smallest intermission of the pencil , to jump up and see the progress , and be char .-- there be no be displease with such a encourager , for he admiration make he discern a likeness almost before it be possible . she could not respect he eye , but he love and he complaisance be unexceptionable . the sitting be altogether very satisfactory ; she be quite enough pleased with the first day 's sketch to wish to go on . there be no want of likeness , she have be fortunate in the attitude , and as she mean to throw in a little improvement to the figure , to give a little more height , and considerably more elegance , she have great confidence of its be in every way a pretty draw at last , and of its filling its destin place with credit to they both -- a stand memorial of the beauty of one , the skill of the other , and the friendship of both ; with as many other agreeable associations as 's very promising attachment be likely to add . be to sit again the next day ; and , just as he ought , entreate for the permission of attending and read to they again . " by all means . we shall be most happy to consider you as one of the party . " the same civility and courtesy , the same success and satisfaction , take place on the morrow , and accompany the whole progress of the picture , which be rapid and happy . every body who see it be pleased , but be in continual rapture , and defend it through every criticism . " have give she friend the only beauty she want , " --observe to he -- not in the least suspect that she be address a lover .--" the expression of the eye be most correct , but have not those eyebrow and eyelash . it be the fault of she face that she have they not . " " do you think so ? " reply he . " I can not agree with you . it appear to I a most perfect resemblance in every feature . I never see such a likeness in my life . we must allow for the effect of shade , you know . " " you have make she too tall , , " say . know that she have , but would not own it ; and warmly add , " oh no ! certainly not too tall ; not in the least too tall . consider , she be sit down -- which naturally present a different -- which in short give exactly the idea -- and the proportion must be preserve , you know . Proportion , fore - shorten .-- oh no ! it give one exactly the idea of such a height as 's . exactly so indeed ! " " it be very pretty , " say . " so prettily done ! just as you drawing always be , my dear . I do not know any body who draw so well as you do . the only thing I do not thoroughly like be , that she seem to be sit out of door , with only a little shawl over she shoulders -- and it make one think she must catch cold . " " but , my dear papa , it be suppose to be summer ; a warm day in summer . look at the tree . " " but it be never safe to sit out of door , my dear . " " you , sir , may say any thing , " cry , " but I must confess that I regard it as a most happy thought , the placing of out of door ; and the tree be touch with such inimitable spirit ! any other situation would have be much less in character . the naivete of 's manners -- and altogether -- oh , it be most admirable ! I can not keep my eye from it . I never see such a likeness . " the next thing want be to get the picture fram ; and here be a few difficulty . it must be do directly ; it must be do in ; the order must go through the hand of some intelligent person whose taste could be depend on ; and , the usual doer of all commission , must not be apply to , because it be , and could not bear the idea of she stirr out of she house in the fog of . but no sooner be the distress know to , than it be remove . he gallantry be always on the alert . " might he be trust with the commission , what infinite pleasure should he have in execute it ! he could ride to at any time . it be impossible to say how much he should be gratify by be employ on such a errand . " " he be too good !-- she could not endure the thought !-- she would not give he such a troublesome office for the world , " -- bring on the desire repetition of entreaty and assurance , -- and a very few minute settle the business . be
be to take the drawing to , chuse the frame , and give the direction ; and think she could so pack it as to ensure its safety without much incommod he , while he see mostly fearful of not be incommod enough . " what a precious deposit ! " say he with a tender sigh , as he receive it . " this man be almost too gallant to be in love , " think . " I should say so , but that I suppose there may be a hundr different way of be in love . he be a excellent young man , and will suit exactly ; it will be a ' exactly so , ' as he say himself ; but he do sigh and languish , and study for compliment rather more than I could endure as a principal . I come in for a pretty good share as a second . but it be he gratitude on 's account . " the very day of have go to produce a fresh occasion for 's service towards she friend . have be at , as usual , soon after breakfast ; and , after a time , have go home to return again to dinner : she return , and sooner than have be talk of , and with a agitate , hurrie look , announce something extraordinary to have happen which she be long to tell . half a minute bring it all out . she have hear , as soon as she get back to 's , that have be there a hour before , and find she be not at home , nor particularly expect , have leave a little parcel for she from one of he sister , and go away ; and on open this parcel , she have actually find , besides the two song which she have lent to copy , a letter to herself ; and this letter be from he , from , and contain a direct proposal of marriage . " who could have think it ? she be so surprized she do not know what to do . yes , quite a proposal of marriage ; and a very good letter , at least she think so . and he write as if he really love she very much -- but she do not know -- and so , she be come as fast as she could to ask what she should do .-- " be half - asham of she friend for see so pleased and so doubtful . " upon my word , " she cry , " the young man be determine not to lose any thing for want of ask . he will connect himself well if he can . " " will you read the letter ? " cry . " pray do . I would rather you would . " be not sorry to be press . she read , and be surprize . the style of the letter be much above she expectation . there be not merely no grammatical error , but as a composition it would not have disgrace a gentleman ; the language , though plain , be strong and unaffected , and the sentiment it convey very much to the credit of the writer . it be short , but express good sense , warm attachment , liberality , propriety , even delicacy of feeling . she pause over it , while stand anxiously watch for she opinion , with a " well , well , " and be at last force to add , " be it a good letter ? or be it too short ? " " yes , indeed , a very good letter , " reply rather slowly --" so good a letter , , that every thing consider , I think one of he sister must have help he . I can hardly imagine the young man whom I see talk with you the other day could express himself so well , if leave quite to he own power , and yet it be not the style of a woman ; no , certainly , it be too strong and concise ; not diffuse enough for a woman . no doubt he be a sensible man , and I suppose may have a natural talent for -- think strongly and clearly -- and when he take a pen in hand , he thought naturally find proper word . it be so with some man . yes , I understand the sort of mind . , decide , with sentiment to a certain point , not coarse . a better write letter , ( return it , ) than I have expect . " " well , " say the still wait ; --" well -- and -- and what shall I do ? " " what shall you do ! in what respect ? do you mean with regard to this letter ? " " yes . " " but what be you in doubt of ? you must answer it of course -- and speedily . " " yes . but what shall I say ? dear , do advise I . " " oh no , no ! the letter have much better be all you own . you will express yourself very properly , I be sure . there be no danger of you not be intelligible , which be the first thing . you meaning must be unequivocal ; no doubt or demur : and such expressions of gratitude and concern for the pain you be inflict as propriety require , will present themselves unbidden to _your_ mind , I be persuade . you need not be prompt to write with the appearance of sorrow for he disappointment . " " you think I ought to refuse he then , " say
say , look down . " ink to refuse he ! my dear , what do you mean ? be you in any doubt as to that ? I think -- but I beg you pardon , perhaps I have be under a mistake . I certainly have be misunderstan you , if you feel in doubt as to the _purport_ of you answer . I have imagine you be consult I only as to the wording of it . " be silent . with a little reserve of manner , continue : " you mean to return a favourable answer , I collect . " " no , I do not ; that be , I do not mean -- what shall I do ? what would you advise I to do ? pray , dear Woodhouse , tell I what I ought to do . " " I shall not give you any advice , . I will have nothing to do with it . this be a point which you must settle with you feeling . " " I have no notion that he like I so very much , " say , contemplate the letter . for a little while persever in she silence ; but begin to apprehend the bewitch flattery of that letter might be too powerful , she think it best to say , " I lay it down as a general rule , , that if a woman _doubt as to whether she should accept a man or not , she certainly ought to refuse he . if she can hesitate as to ' yes , ' she ought to say ' no ' directly . it be not a state to be safely enter into with doubtful feeling , with half a heart . I think it my duty as a friend , and older than yourself , to say thus much to you . but do not imagine that I want to influence you . " " oh ! no , I be sure you be a great deal too kind to -- but if you would just advise I what I have best do -- no , no , I do not mean that -- as you say , one 's mind ought to be quite make up -- one should not be hesitat -- it be a very serious thing .-- it will be safer to say ' no , ' perhaps .-- do you think I have better say ' no ? ' " " not for the world , " say , smile graciously , " would I advise you either way . you must be the best judge of you own happiness . if you prefer to every other person ; if you think he the most agreeable man you have ever be in company with , why should you hesitate ? you blush , .-- do any body else occur to you at this moment under such a definition ? , , do not deceive yourself ; do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion . at this moment whom be you think of ? " the symptom be favourable .-- instead of answering , turn away confused , and stand thoughtfully by the fire ; and though the letter be still in she hand , it be now mechanically twist about without regard . wait the result with impatience , but not without strong hope . at last , with some hesitation , say -- " , as you will not give I you opinion , I must do as well as I can by myself ; and I have now quite determined , and really almost make up my mind -- to refuse . do you think I be right ? " " perfectly , perfectly right , my dearest Harriet ; you be do just what you ink . while you be at all in suspense I keep my feeling to myself , but now that you be so completely decide I have no hesitation in approving . dear Harriet , I give myself joy of this . it would have grieve I to lose you acquaintance , which must have be the consequence of you marrying . while you be in the smallest degree waver , I say nothing about it , because I would not influence ; but it would have be the loss of a friend to I . I could not have visit , of - . now I be secure of you for ever . " have not surmise she own danger , but the idea of it strike she forcibly . " you could not have visit I ! " she cry , look aghast . " no , to be sure you could not ; but I never think of that before . that would have be too dreadful ! -- what a escape !-- dear miss Woodhouse , I would not give up the pleasure and honour of be intimate with you for any thing in the world . " " indeed , , it would have be a severe pang to lose you ; but it must have be . you would have throw yourself out of all good society . I must have give you up . " " dear I !-- how should I ever have borne it ! it would have kill I never to come to Hartfield any more ! " " dear affectionate creature !--_You_ banish to - !--_ You_ confin to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all you life ! I wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it . he must have a pretty good opinion of himself . " " I do not think he be conceit either , in general , " say , she conscience oppose such censure ; " at least , he be
be very good natured , and I shall always feel much obliged to he , and have a great regard for -- but that be quite a different thing from -- and you know , though he may like I , it do not follow that I should -- and certainly I must confess that since my visit here I have see people -- and if one come to compare they , person and manners , there be no comparison at all , _one_ be so very handsome and agreeable . however , I do really think a very amiable young man , and have a great opinion of he ; and he be so much attach to I -- and he write such a letter -- but as to leave you , it be what I would not do upon any consideration . " " thank you , thank you , my own sweet little friend . we will not be part . a woman be not to marry a man merely because she be ask , or because he be attach to she , and can write a tolerable letter . " " oh no ;-- and it be but a short letter too . " feel the bad taste of she friend , but let it pass with a " very true ; and it would be a small consolation to she , for the clownish manner which might be offend she every hour of the day , to know that she husband could write a good letter . " " oh ! yes , very . nobody care for a letter ; the thing be , to be always happy with pleasant companion . I be quite determined to refuse he . but how shall I do ? what shall I say ? " assure she there would be no difficulty in the answer , and advise its be write directly , which be agree to , in the hope of she assistance ; and though continue to protest against any assistance be want , it be in fact give in the formation of every sentence . the look over he letter again , in reply to it , have such a softening tendency , that it be particularly necessary to brace she up with a few decisive expression ; and she be so very much concerned at the idea of make he unhappy , and think so much of what he mother and sister would think and say , and be so anxious that they should not fancy she ungrateful , that believe if the young man have come in she way at that moment , he would have be accept after all . this letter , however , be write , and seal , and send . the business be finish , and . she be rather low all the evening , but could allow for she amiable regret , and sometimes relieve they by speaking of she own affection , sometimes by bring forward the idea of . " I shall never be invite to - again , " be say in rather a sorrowful tone . " , if you be , could I ever bear to part with you , my Harriet . you be a great deal too necessary at to be spare to - . " " and I be sure I should never want to go there ; for I be never happy but at . " some time afterwards it be , " I think . would be very much surprize if she know what have happen . I be sure would -- for think she own sister very well marry , and it be only a linen - draper . " " one should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the teacher of a school , . I dare say would envy you such a opportunity as this of be marry . even this conquest would appear valuable in she eye . as to any thing superior for you , I suppose she be quite in the dark . the attention of a certain person can hardly be among the tittle - tattle of yet . I fancy you and I be the only people to whom he look and manners have explain themselves . " blush and smile , and say something about wonder that people should like she so much . the idea of be certainly cheer ; but still , after a time , she be tender - heart again towards the reject . " now he have get my letter , " say she softly . " I wonder what they be all do -- whether he sister know -- if he be unhappy , they will be unhappy too . I hope he will not mind it so very much . " " let we think of those among we absent friend who be more cheerfully employ , " cry . " at this moment , perhaps , be shew you picture to he mother and sister , tell how much more beautiful be the original , and after be ask for it five or six time , allow they to hear you name , you own dear name . " " my picture !-- but he have leave my picture in - . " " have he so !-- then I know nothing of . no , my dear little modest Harriet , depend upon it the picture will not be in bond - street till just before he mount he horse to - morrow . it be he companion all this evening , he solace , he delight . it open he design to he family , it introduce you among they , it diffuse through the party those pleasantest feeling of we nature , eager curiosity and warm prepossession . how cheerful , how animated ,
, how suspicious , how busy they imagination all be ! " smile again , and she smile grow stronger . sleep at that night . for some week past she have be spend more than half she time there , and gradually get to have a bed - room appropriate to herself ; and jud it best in every respect , safest and kindest , to keep she with they as much as possible just at present . she be oblige to go the next morning for a hour or two to 's , but it be then to be settle that she should return to , to make a regular visit of some day . while she be gone , call , and sit some time with and , till , who have previously make up he mind to walk out , be persuade by he daughter not to defer it , and be induce by the entreaty of both , though against the scruple of he own civility , to leave for that purpose . , who have nothing of ceremony about he , be offer by he short , decided answer , a amusing contrast to the protract apology and civil hesitation of the other . " well , I believe , if you will excuse I , , if you will not consider I as do a very rude thing , I shall take 's advice and go out for a quarter of a hour . as the sun be out , I believe I have better take my three turn while I can . I treat you without ceremony , . we invalid think we be privileged people . " " my dear sir , do not make a stranger of I . " " I leave a excellent substitute in my daughter . will be happy to entertain you . and therefore I think I will beg you excuse and take my three turn -- my winter walk . " " you can not do better , sir . " " I would ask for the pleasure of you company , , but I be a very slow walker , and my pace would be tedious to you ; and , besides , you have another long walk before you , to . " " thank you , sir , thank you ; I be go this moment myself ; and I think the sooner _you_ go the better . I will fetch you greatcoat and open the garden door for you . " Woodhouse at last be off ; but , instead of be immediately off likewise , sit down again , seemingly inclin for more chat . he begin speaking of , and speak of she with more voluntary praise than have ever hear before . " I can not rate she beauty as you do , " say he ; " but she be a pretty little creature , and I be inclin to think very well of she disposition . she character depend upon those she be with ; but in good hand she will turn out a valuable woman . " " I be glad you think so ; and the good hand , I hope , may not be want . " " come , " say he , " you be anxious for a compliment , so I will tell you that you have improve she . you have cure she of she school - girl 's giggle ; she really do you credit . " " thank you . I should be mortify indeed if I do not believe I have be of some use ; but it be not every body who will bestow praise where they may . you do not often overpower I with it . " " you be expect she again , you say , this morning ? " " almost every moment . she have be go longer already than she intend . " " something have happen to delay she ; some visitor perhaps . " " Highbury gossip !-- Tiresome wretch ! " " may not consider every body tiresome that you would . " know this be too true for contradiction , and therefore say nothing . he presently add , with a smile , " I do not pretend to fix on time or place , but I must tell you that I have good reason to believe you little friend will soon hear of something to she advantage . " " indeed ! how so ? of what sort ? " " a very serious sort , I assure you ; " still smile . " very serious ! I can think of but one thing -- who be in love with she ? who make you they confident ? " be more than half in hope of 's have dropt a hint . be a sort of general friend and adviser , and she know look up to he . " I have reason to think , " he reply , " that will soon have a offer of marriage , and from a most unexceptionable quarter :-- be the man . she visit to - , this summer , seem to have do he business . he be desperately in love and mean to marry she . " " he be very obliging , " say ; " but be he sure that mean to marry he ? " " well , well , mean to make she a offer then . will that do ? he come to the two evening ago , on purpose to consult I about it . he know I have a thorough regard for he and all he family , and , I believe , consider I as one of he best friend . he come to ask I whether I think it would be imprudent in
in he to settle so early ; whether I think she too young : in short , whether I approve he choice altogether ; have some apprehension perhaps of she be consider ( especially since _you make so much of she ) as in a line of society above he . I be very much pleased with all that he say . I never hear better sense from any one than . he always speak to the purpose ; open , straightforward , and very well judge . he tell I every thing ; he circumstance and plan , and what they all propose do in the event of he marriage . he be a excellent young man , both as son and brother . I have no hesitation in advise he to marry . he prove to I that he could afford it ; and that be the case , I be convince he could not do better . I praise the fair lady too , and altogether send he away very happy . if he have never esteem my opinion before , he would have think highly of I then ; and , I dare say , leave the house think I the best friend and counsellor man ever have . this happen the night before last . now , as we may fairly suppose , he would not allow much time to pass before he speak to the lady , and as he do not appear to have spoken yesterday , it be not unlikely that he should be at 's to - day ; and she may be detain by a visitor , without think he at all a tiresome wretch . " " pray , , " say , who have be smile to herself through a great part of this speech , " how do you know that do not speak yesterday ? " " certainly , " reply he , surprize , " I do not absolutely know it ; but it may be infer . be not she the whole day with you ? " " come , " say she , " I will tell you something , in return for what you have tell I . he do speak yesterday -- that be , he write , and be refuse . " this be oblige to be repeat before it could be believe ; and actually look red with surprize and displeasure , as he stand up , in tall indignation , and say , " then she be a greater simpleton than I ever believe she . what be the foolish girl about ? " " oh ! to be sure , " cry , " it be always incomprehensible to a man that a woman should ever refuse a offer of marriage . a man always imagine a woman to be ready for any body who ask she . " " Nonsense ! a man do not imagine any such thing . but what be the meaning of this ? refuse ? madness , if it be so ; but I hope you be mistaken . " " I see she answer !-- nothing could be clearer . " " you see she answer !-- you write she answer too . , this be you do . you persuade she to refuse he . " " and if I do , ( which , however , I be far from allowing ) I should not feel that I have do wrong . be a very respectable young man , but I can not admit he to be 's equal ; and be rather surprize indeed that he should have venture to address she . by you account , he do seem to have have some scruple . it be a pity that they be ever get over . " " 's equal ! " exclaim loudly and warmly ; and with calmer asperity , add , a few moment afterwards , " no , he be not she equal indeed , for he be as much she superior in sense as in situation . , you infatuation about that girl blind you . what be 's claim , either of birth , nature or education , to any connexion higher than ? she be the natural daughter of nobody know whom , with probably no settled provision at all , and certainly no respectable relation . she be know only as parlour - boarder at a common school . she be not a sensible girl , nor a girl of any information . she have be teach nothing useful , and be too young and too simple to have acquire any thing herself . at she age she can have no experience , and with she little wit , be not very likely ever to have any that can avail she . she be pretty , and she be good tempered , and that be all . my only scruple in advise the match be on he account , as be beneath he desert , and a bad connexion for he . I feel that , as to fortune , in all probability he might do much better ; and that as to a rational companion or useful helpmate , he could not do worse . but I could not reason so to a man in love , and be willing to trust to there be no harm in she , to she have that sort of disposition , which , in good hand , like he , might be easily lead aright and turn out very well . the advantage of the match I feel to be all on she side ; and have not the smallest doubt ( nor have I now ) that there would be a general cry -out upon she extreme good luck . even _your_ satisfaction I make sure of . it cross
cross my mind immediately that you would not regret you friend 's leave , for the sake of she be settle so well . I remember say to myself , ' even , with all she partiality for , will think this a good match . ' " " I can not help wonder at you know so little of as to say any such thing . what ! think a farmer , ( and with all he sense and all he merit be nothing more , ) a good match for my intimate friend ! not regret she leave for the sake of marry a man whom I could never admit as a acquaintance of my own ! I wonder you should think it possible for I to have such feeling . I assure you mine be very different . I must think you statement by no means fair . you be not just to 's claim . they would be estimate very differently by other as well as myself ; may be the richest of the two , but he be undoubtedly she inferior as to rank in society .-- the sphere in which she move be much above he .-- it would be a degradation . " " a degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance , to be marry to a respectable , intelligent gentleman - farmer ! " " as to the circumstance of she birth , though in a legal sense she may be call , it will not hold in common sense . she be not to pay for the offence of other , by be hold below the level of those with whom she be bring up .-- there can scarcely be a doubt that she father be a gentleman -- and a gentleman of fortune .-- she allowance be very liberal ; nothing have ever be grudge for she improvement or comfort .-- that she be a gentleman 's daughter , be indubitable to I ; that she associate with gentleman 's daughter , no one , I apprehend , will deny .-- she be superior to . " " whoever might be she parent , " say , " whoever may have have the charge of she , it do not appear to have be any part of they plan to introduce she into what you would call good society . after receive a very indifferent education she be leave in 's hand to shift as she can ; -- to move , in short , in 's line , to have 's acquaintance . she friend evidently think this good enough for she ; and it _be good enough . she desire nothing better herself . till you choose to turn she into a friend , she mind have no distaste for she own set , nor any ambition beyond it . she be as happy as possible with the in the summer . she have no sense of superiority then . if she have it now , you have give it . you have be no friend to , . would never have proceed so far , if he have not feel persuaded of she not be disinclin to he . I know he well . he have too much real feeling to address any woman on the haphazard of selfish passion . and as to conceit , he be the farthest from it of any man I know . Depend upon it he have encouragement . " it be most convenient to not to make a direct reply to this assertion ; she choose rather to take up she own line of the subject again . " you be a very warm friend to ; but , as I say before , be unjust to Harriet . 's claim to marry well be not so contemptible as you represent they . she be not a clever girl , but she have better sense than you be aware of , and do not deserve to have she understanding speak of so slightingly . Waive that point , however , and suppose she to be , as you describe she , only pretty and good - natured , let I tell you , that in the degree she possess they , they be not trivial recommendation to the world in general , for she be , in fact , a beautiful girl , and must be think so by ninety - nine people out of a hundr ; and till it appear that man be much more philosophic on the subject of beauty than they be generally suppose ; till they do fall in love with well - inform mind instead of handsome face , a girl , with such loveliness as , have a certainty of be admire and seek after , of have the power of chusing from among many , consequently a claim to be nice . she good - nature , too , be not so very slight a claim , comprehend , as it do , real , thorough sweetness of temper and manner , a very humble opinion of herself , and a great readiness to be pleased with other people . I be very much mistaken if you sex in general would not think such beauty , and such temper , the highest claim a woman could possess . " " upon my word , , to hear you abuse the reason you have , be almost enough to make I think so too . better be without sense , than misapply it as you do . " " to be sure ! " cry she playfully . " I know that be the feeling of you all . I know that such a girl as be exactly what every man delight in -- what at once bewitch he sense and satisfy he judgment . oh ! may pick and chuse . be you ,
, yourself , ever to marry , she be the very woman for you . and be she , at seventeen , just enter into life , just begin to be know , to be wonder at because she do not accept the first offer she receive ? no --pray let she have time to look about she . " " I have always think it a very foolish intimacy , " say presently , " though I have keep my thought to myself ; but I now perceive that it will be a very unfortunate one for . you will puff she up with such idea of she own beauty , and of what she have a claim to , that , in a little while , nobody within she reach will be good enough for she . Vanity work on a weak head , produce every sort of mischief . nothing so easy as for a young lady to raise she expectation too high . may not find offer of marriage flow in so fast , though she be a very pretty girl . man of sense , whatever you may chuse to say , do not want silly wife . man of family would not be very fond of connect themselves with a girl of such obscurity -- and most prudent man would be afraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they might be involved in , when the mystery of she parentage come to be reveal . let she marry , and she be safe , respectable , and happy for ever ; but if you encourage she to expect to marry greatly , and teach she to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of consequence and large fortune , she may be a parlour - boarder at 's all the rest of she life -- or , at least , ( for be a girl who will marry somebody or other , ) till she grow desperate , and be glad to catch at the old writing - master 's son . " " we think so very differently on this point , , that there can be no use in canvasse it . we shall only be make each other more angry . but as to my _letting she marry , it be impossible ; she have refuse he , and so decidedly , I think , as must prevent any second application . she must abide by the evil of have refuse he , whatever it may be ; and as to the refusal itself , I will not pretend to say that I might not influence she a little ; but I assure you there be very little for I or for any body to do . he appearance be so much against he , and he manner so bad , that if she ever be dispose to favour he , she be not now . I can imagine , that before she have see any body superior , she might tolerate he . he be the brother of she friend , and he take pain to please she ; and altogether , have see nobody better ( that must have be he great assistant ) she might not , while she be at - , find he disagreeable . but the case be alter now . she know now what gentleman be ; and nothing but a gentleman in education and manner have any chance with . " " Nonsense , errant nonsense , as ever be talk ! " cry .--" 's manners have sense , sincerity , and good - humour to recommend they ; and he mind have more true gentility than could understand . " make no answer , and try to look cheerfully unconcerned , but be really feel uncomfortable and want he very much to be go . she do not repent what she have do ; she still think herself a better judge of such a point of female right and refinement than he could be ; but yet she have a sort of habitual respect for he judgment in general , which make she dislike have it so loudly against she ; and to have he sit just opposite to she in angry state , be very disagreeable . some minute pass in this unpleasant silence , with only one attempt on 's side to talk of the weather , but he make no answer . he be think . the result of he thought appear at last in these word . " have no great loss -- if he can but think so ; and I hope it will not be long before he do . you views for be best know to yourself ; but as you make no secret of you love of match - make , it be fair to suppose that view , and plan , and project you have ; -- and as a friend I shall just hind to you that if be the man , I think it will be all labour in vain . " laugh and disclaim . he continue , " Depend upon it , will not do . be a very good sort of man , and a very respectable vicar of , but not at all likely to make a imprudent match . he know the value of a good income as well as any body . may talk sentimentally , but he will act rationally . he be as well acquaint with he own claim , as you can be with 's . he know that he be a very handsome young man , and a great favourite wherever he go ; and from he general way of talk in unreserved moment , when there be only man present , I be convinced that he do not mean to throw himself away . I have hear he speak with
with great animation of a large family of young lady that he sister be intimate with , who have all twenty thousand pound apiece . " " I be very much oblige to you , " say , laugh again . " if I have set my heart on 's marry , it would have be very kind to open my eye ; but at present I only want to keep to myself . I have do with match - make indeed . I could never hope to equal my own doings at Randalls . I shall leave off while I be well . " " good morning to you , " -- say he , rise and walk off abruptly . he be very much vex . he feel the disappointment of the young man , and be mortify to have be the means of promote it , by the sanction he have give ; and the part which he be persuade have take in the affair , be provoke he exceedingly . remain in a state of vexation too ; but there be more indistinctness in the cause of she 's , than in he . she do not always feel so absolutely satisfied with herself , so entirely convinced that she opinion be right and she adversary 's wrong , as . he walk off in more complete self - approbation than he leave for she . she be not so materially cast down , however , but that a little time and the return of be very adequate restorative . 's stay away so long be begin to make she uneasy . the possibility of the young man 's come to 's that morning , and meet with and plead he own cause , give alarming idea . the dread of such a failure after all become the prominent uneasiness ; and when appear , and in very good spirit , and without have any such reason to give for she long absence , she feel a satisfaction which settle she with she own mind , and convince she , that let think or say what he would , she have do nothing which woman 's friendship and woman 's feeling would not justify . he have frightene she a little about ; but when she consider that could not have observe he as she have do , neither with the interest , nor ( she must be allow to tell herself , in spite of 's pretension ) with the skill of such a observer on such a question as herself , that he have speak it hastily and in anger , she be able to believe , that he have rather say what he wish resentfully to be true , than what he know any thing about . he certainly might have hear speak with more unreserve than she have ever do , and might not be of a imprudent , inconsiderate disposition as to money matter ; he might naturally be rather attentive than otherwise to they ; but then , do not make due allowance for the influence of a strong passion at war with all interested motive . see no such passion , and of course think nothing of its effect ; but she see too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcome any hesitation that a reasonable prudence might originally suggest ; and more than a reasonable , become degree of prudence , she be very sure do not belong to . 's cheerful look and manner establish hers : she come back , not to think of , but to talk of . Nash have be tell she something , which she repeat immediately with great delight . have be to 's to attend a sick child , and have see he , and he have tell , that as he be come back yesterday from , he have meet , and find to he great surprize , that be actually on he road to , and not meane to return till the morrow , though it be the whist - club night , which he have be never know to miss before ; and have remonstrate with he about it , and tell he how shabby it be in he , they best player , to absent himself , and try very much to persuade he to put off he journey only one day ; but it would not do ; have be determined to go on , and have say in a _very _particular_ way indeed , that he be go on business which he would not put off for any inducement in the world ; and something about a very enviable commission , and be the bearer of something exceedingly precious . could not quite understand he , but he be very sure there must be a _lady in the case , and he tell he so ; and only look very conscious and smile , and ride off in great spirit . Nash have tell she all this , and have talk a great deal more about ; and say , look so very significantly at she , " that she do not pretend to understand what he business might be , but she only know that any woman whom could prefer , she should think the luckiest woman in the world ; for , beyond a doubt , have not he equal for beauty or agreeableness . " might quarrel with she , but could not quarrel with herself . he be so much displease , that it be longer than usual before he come to again ; and when they do meet , he grave look shew that she be not forgive . she be sorry , but could not repent . on the contrary , she plan and proceedings be more and more justified and endear to she by the
the general appearance of the next few day . the picture , elegantly fram , come safely to hand soon after 's return , and be hang over the mantelpiece of the common sitting - room , he get up to look at it , and sigh out he half sentence of admiration just as he ought ; and as for 's feeling , they be visibly form themselves into as strong and steady a attachment as she youth and sort of mind admit . be soon perfectly satisfied of 's be no otherwise remembe , than as he furnish a contrast with , of the utmost advantage to the latter . she views of improve she little friend 's mind , by a great deal of useful reading and conversation , have never yet lead to more than a few first chapter , and the intention of go on to -morrow . it be much easier to chat than to study ; much pleasanter to let she imagination range and work at 's fortune , than to be labour to enlarge she comprehension or exercise it on sober fact ; and the only literary pursuit which engage at , the only mental provision she be make for the evening of life , be the collecting and transcrib all the riddle of every sort that she could meet with , into a thin quarto of hot - press paper , make up by she friend , and ornament with cipher and trophy . in this age of literature , such collection on a very grand scale be not uncommon . , head - teacher at 's , have write out at least three hundr ; and , who have take the first hint of it from she , hope , with 's help , to get a great many more . assist with she invention , memory and taste ; and as write a very pretty hand , it be likely to be a arrangement of the first order , in form as well as quantity . be almost as much interested in the business as the girl , and try very often to recollect something worth they put in . " so many clever riddle as there use to be when he be young -- he wonder he could not remember they ! but he hope he should in time . " and it always end in " , a fair but freeze maid . " he good friend , too , whom he have speak to on the subject , do not at present recollect any thing of the riddle kind ; but he have desire to be upon the watch , and as he go about so much , something , he think , might come from that quarter . it be by no mean he daughter 's wish that the intellect of in general should be put under requisition . be the only one whose assistance she ask . he be invite to contribute any really good enigma , charade , or conundrums that he might recollect ; and she have the pleasure of see he most intently at work with he recollection ; and at the same time , as she could perceive , most earnestly careful that nothing ungallant , nothing that do not breathe a compliment to the sex should pass he lip . they owed to he they two or three politest puzzle ; and the joy and exultation with which at last he recall , and rather sentimentally recit , that well - know charade , my first doth affliction denote , my second be destin have to feel and my whole be the best antidote that affliction to soften and heal .-- make she quite sorry to acknowledge that they have transcribe it some page ago already . " why will not you write one yourself for we , ? " say she ; " that be the only security for its freshness ; and nothing could be easier to you . " " oh no ! he have never write , hardly ever , any thing of the kind in he life . the stupidest fellow ! he be afraid not even " -- he stopt a moment -- " or could inspire he . " the very next day however produce some proof of inspiration . he call for a few moment , just to leave a piece of paper on the table contain , as he say , a charade , which a friend of he have address to a young lady , the object of he admiration , but which , from he manner , be immediately convinced must be he own . " I do not offer it for 's collection , " say he . " be my friend 's , I have no right to expose it in any degree to the public eye , but perhaps you may not dislike look at it . " the speech be more to than to , which could understand . there be deep consciousness about he , and he find it easier to meet she eye than she friend 's . he be go the next moment :-- after another moment 's pause , " take it , " say , smile , and push the paper towards --" it be for you . take you own . " but be in a tremor , and could not touch it ; and , never loth to be first , be obliged to examine it herself . to -- . my first display the wealth and pomp of king , Lord of the earth ! they luxury and ease . another view of man , my second bring , behold he there , the monarch of the seas ! but ah ! , what reverse we have ! Man 's boast power and freedom , all be
be fly ; of the earth and sea , he bend a slave , and woman , lovely woman , reign alone . thy ready wit the word will soon supply , its approval beam in that soft eye ! she cast she eye over it , ponder , catch the meaning , read it through again to be quite certain , and quite mistress of the line , and then pass it to , sit happily smile , and say to herself , while be puzzl over the paper in all the confusion of hope and dulness , " very well , , very well indeed . I have read worse charade . _Courtship _-- a very good hint . I give you credit for it . this be feel you way . this be say very plainly --' pray , , give I leave to pay my address to you . approve my charade and my intention in the same glance . ' may its approval beam in that soft eye ! Harriet exactly . be the very word for she eye -- of all epithet , the justest that could be give . thy ready wit the word will soon supply . Humph -- 's ready wit ! all the better . a man must be very much in love , indeed , to describe she so . ah ! , I wish you have the benefit of this ; I think this would convince you . for once in you life you would be oblige to own yourself mistaken . a excellent charade indeed ! and very much to the purpose . thing must come to a crisis soon now . she be oblige to break off from these very pleasant observation , which be otherwise of a sort to run into great length , by the eagerness of 's wonder question . " what can it be , ?-- what can it be ? I have not a idea -- I can not guess it in the least . what can it possibly be ? do try to find it out , . do help I . I never see any thing so hard . be it kingdom ? I wonder who the friend be -- and who could be the young lady . do you think it be a good one ? can it be woman ? and woman , lovely woman , reign alone . can it be ? behold he there , the monarch of the seas ! or a trident ? or a mermaid ? or a shark ? oh , no ! shark be only one syllable . it must be very clever , or he would not have bring it . oh ! , do you think we shall ever find it out ? " " Mermaid and shark ! Nonsense ! my dear , what be you think of ? where would be the use of he bring we a charade make by a friend upon a mermaid or a shark ? give I the paper and listen . for ------, read . my first display the wealth and pomp of king , Lord of the earth ! they luxury and ease . that be _court . another view of man , my second bring ; behold he there , the monarch of the seas ! that be _ship _;--plain as it can be .-- now for the cream . but ah ! , ( _courtship , you know , ) what reverse we have ! Man 's boast power and freedom , all be fly . of the earth and sea , he bend a slave , and woman , lovely woman , reign alone . a very proper compliment !-- and then follow the application , which I think , my dear Harriet , you can not find much difficulty in comprehending . read it in comfort to yourself . there can be no doubt of its be write for you and to you . " Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion . she read the conclude line , and be all flutter and happiness . she could not speak . but she be not want to speak . it be enough for she to feel . speak for she . " there be so point , and so particular a meaning in this compliment , " say she , " that I can not have a doubt as to 's intention . you be he object -- and you will soon receive the completest proof of it . I think it must be so . I think I could not be so deceive ; but now , it be clear ; the state of he mind be as clear and decide , as my wish on the subject have be ever since I know you . yes , , just so long have I be want the very circumstance to happen what have happen . I could never tell whether a attachment between you and be most desirable or most natural . its probability and its eligibility have really so equall each other ! I be very happy . I congratulate you , my dear Harriet , with all my heart . this be a attachment which a woman may well feel pride in create . this be a connexion which offer nothing but good . it will give you every thing that you want --consideration , independence , a proper home -- it will fix you in the centre of all you real friend , close to and to I , and confirm we intimacy for ever . this , , be a alliance which can never raise a blush in either of we . " " dear ! " -- and " dear , " be all that Harriet , with many tender embrace could articulate at first ; but when
when they do arrive at something more like conversation , it be sufficiently clear to she friend that she see , feel , anticipat , and remember just as she ink . 's superiority have very ample acknowledgment . " whatever you say be always right , " cry , " and therefore I suppose , and believe , and hope it must be so ; but otherwise I could not have imagine it . it be so much beyond any thing I deserve . , who might marry any body ! there can not be two opinion about _him_. he be so very superior . only think of those sweet verse --'to ------. ' dear I , how clever !-- could it really be mean for I ? " " I can not make a question , or listen to a question about that . it be a certainty . receive it on my judgment . it be a sort of prologue to the play , a motto to the chapter ; and will be soon follow by matter - of - fact prose . " " it be a sort of thing which nobody could have expect . I be sure , a month ago , I have no more idea myself !-- the strangest thing do take place ! " " when and get acquaint -- they do indeed -- and really it be strange ; it be out of the common course that what be so evidently , so palpably desirable -- what court the pre-arrangement of other people , should so immediately shape itself into the proper form . you and be by situation call together ; you belong to one another by every circumstance of you respective home . you marrying will be equal to the match at Randalls . there do seem to be a something in the air of which give love exactly the right direction , and send it into the very channel where it ought to flow . the course of true love never do run smooth -- a edition of would have a long note on that passage . " " that should really be in love with I , -- I , of all people , who do not know he , to speak to he , at ! and he , the very handsomest man that ever be , and a man that every body look up to , quite like ! he company so seek after , that every body say he need not eat a single meal by himself if he do not chuse it ; that he have more invitation than there be day in the week . and so excellent in the Church ! have put down all the text he have ever preach from since he come to . dear I ! when I look back to the first time I see he ! how little do I think !-- the two Abbot and I run into the front room and pee through the blind when we hear he be go by , and come and scold we away , and stay to look through herself ; however , she call I back presently , and let I look too , which be very good - natured . and how beautiful we think he look ! he be arm - in - arm with . " " this be a alliance which , whoever -- whatever you friend may be , must be agreeable to they , provide at least they have common sense ; and we be not to be address we conduct to fool . if they be anxious to see you _happily married , here be a man whose amiable character give every assurance of it ; -- if they wish to have you settle in the same country and circle which they have choose to place you in , here it will be accomplish ; and if they only object be that you should , in the common phrase , be _well_ marry , here be the comfortable fortune , the respectable establishment , the rise in the world which must satisfy they . " " yes , very true . how nicly you talk ; I love to hear you . you understand every thing . you and be one as clever as the other . this charade !-- if I have study a twelvemonth , I could never have make any thing like it . " " I think he mean to try he skill , by he manner of decline it yesterday . " " I do think it be , without exception , the best charade I ever read . " " I never read one more to the purpose , certainly . " " it be as long again as almost all we have have before . " " I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour . such thing in general can not be too short . " be too intent on the line to hear . the most satisfactory comparison be rise in she mind . " it be one thing , " say she , presently -- she cheek in a glow -- " to have very good sense in a common way , like every body else , and if there be any thing to say , to sit down and write a letter , and say just what you must , in a short way ; and another , to write verse and charade like this . " could not have desire a more spirited rejection of 's prose . " such sweet line ! " continue --" these two last ! -- but how shall I ever be able to return the paper , or say I have find it out ?-- oh ! , what can we do about that ? " " leave
leave it to I . you do nothing . he will be here this evening , I dare say , and then I will give it he back , and some nonsense or other will pass between we , and you shall not be commit .-- you soft eye shall chuse they own time for beaming . trust to I . " " oh ! , what a pity that I must not write this beautiful charade into my book ! I be sure I have not get one half so good . " " leave out the two last line , and there be no reason why you should not write it into you book . " " oh ! but those two line be " -- --" the best of all . grant ;-- for private enjoyment ; and for private enjoyment keep they . they be not at all the less write you know , because you divide they . the couplet do not cease to be , nor do its mean change . but take it away , and all _appropriation_ cease , and a very pretty gallant charade remain , fit for any collection . Depend upon it , he would not like to have he charade slighted , much better than he passion . a poet in love must be encourage in both capacity , or neither . give I the book , I will write it down , and then there can be no possible reflection on you . " submit , though she mind could hardly separate the part , so as to feel quite sure that she friend be not write down a declaration of love . it seem too precious a offering for any degree of publicity . " I shall never let that book go out of my own hand , " say she . " very well , " reply ; " a most natural feeling ; and the longer it last , the better I shall be pleased . but here be my father come : you will not object to my read the charade to he . it will be give he so much pleasure ! he love any thing of the sort , and especially any thing that pay woman a compliment . he have the tenderest spirit of gallantry towards we all !-- you must let I read it to he . " look grave . " my dear Harriet , you must not refine too much upon this charade . -- you will betray you feeling improperly , if you be too conscious and too quick , and appear to affix more meaning , or even quite all the meaning which may be affix to it . do not be overpower by such a little tribute of admiration . if he have be anxious for secrecy , he would not have leave the paper while I be by ; but he rather push it towards I than towards you . do not let we be too solemn on the business . he have encouragement enough to proceed , without we sigh out we soul over this charade . " " oh ! no -- I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it . do as you please . " come in , and very soon lead to the subject again , by the recurrence of he very frequent inquiry of " well , my dear , how do you book go on ?-- have you get any thing fresh ? " " yes , papa ; we have something to read you , something quite fresh . a piece of paper be find on the table this morning --( dropt , we suppose , by a fairy ) -- contain a very pretty charade , and we have just copy it in . " she read it to he , just as he like to have any thing read , slowly and distinctly , and two or three time over , with explanation of every part as she proceed -- and he be very much pleased , and , as she have foreseen , especially struck with the complimentary conclusion . " aye , that be very just , indeed , that be very properly say . very true . ' woman , lovely woman . ' it be such a pretty charade , my dear , that I can easily guess what fairy bring it .-- nobody could have write so prettily , but you , . " only nod , and smile . -- after a little thinking , and a very tender sigh , he add , " ah ! it be no difficulty to see who you take after ! you dear mother be so clever at all those thing ! if I have but she memory ! but I can remember nothing ; -- not even that particular riddle which you have hear I mention ; I can only recollect the first stanza ; and there be several . , a fair but freeze maid , Kindl a flame I yet deplore , the hood - wink would boy I call to aid , through of he near approach afraid , so fatal to my suit before . and that be all that I can recollect of it -- but it be very clever all the way through . but I think , my dear , you say you have get it . " " yes , papa , it be write out in we second page . we copy it from the . it be 's , you know . " " aye , very true .-- I wish I could recollect more of it . , a fair but freeze maid . the name make I think of poor ; for she be very near be christen after she grandmama . I hope we shall have
have she here next week . have you think , my dear , where you shall put she -- and what room there will be for the child ? " " oh ! yes -- she will have she own room , of course ; the room she always have ; -- and there be the nursery for the child , -- just as usual , you know . why should there be any change ? " " I do not know , my dear -- but it be so long since she be here !-- not since last , and then only for a few day .-- 's be a lawyer be very inconvenient .-- poor Isabella !-- she be sadly take away from we all !-- and how sorry she will be when she come , not to see here ! " " she will not be surprize , papa , at least . " " I do not know , my dear . I be sure I be very much surprize when I first hear she be go to be marry . " " we must ask and to dine with we , while be here . " " yes , my dear , if there be time .-- but --( in a very depressed tone ) -- she be come for only one week . there will not be time for any thing . " " it be unfortunate that they can not stay longer -- but it seem a case of necessity . must be in town again on the 28th , and we ought to be thankful , papa , that we be to have the whole of the time they can give to the country , that two or three day be not to be take out for the . promise to give up he claim this -- though you know it be longer since they be with he , than with we . " " it would be very hard , indeed , my dear , if poor be to be anywhere but at . " could never allow for 's claim on he brother , or any body 's claim on , except he own . he sit muse a little while , and then say , " but I do not see why poor should be oblige to go back so soon , though he do . I think , , I shall try and persuade she to stay longer with we . she and the child might stay very well . " " ah ! papa -- that be what you never have be able to accomplish , and I do not think you ever will . can not bear to stay behind she husband . " this be too true for contradiction . Unwelcome as it be , could only give a submissive sigh ; and as see he spirits affect by the idea of he daughter 's attachment to she husband , she immediately lead to such a branch of the subject as must raise they . " Harriet must give we as much of she company as she can while my brother and sister be here . I be sure she will be pleased with the child . we be very proud of the child , be not we , papa ? I wonder which she will think the handsomest , or ? " " aye , I wonder which she will . poor little dear , how glad they will be to come . they be very fond of be at , . " " I dare say they be , sir . I be sure I do not know who be not . " " Henry be a fine boy , but be very like he mama . be the eldest , he be name after I , not after he father . , the second , be name after he father . some people be surprize , I believe , that the eldest be not , but would have he call , which I think very pretty of she . and he be a very clever boy , indeed . they be all remarkably clever ; and they have so many pretty way . they will come and stand by my chair , and say , ' Grandpapa , can you give I a bit of string ? ' and once ask I for a knife , but I tell he knife be only make for grandpapa . I think they father be too rough with they very often . " " he appear rough to you , " say , " because you be so very gentle yourself ; but if you could compare he with other papa , you would not think he rough . he wish he boy to be active and hardy ; and if they misbehave , can give they a sharp word now and then ; but he be a affectionate father -- certainly be a affectionate father . the child be all fond of he . " " and then they uncle come in , and toss they up to the ceiling in a very frightful way ! " " but they like it , papa ; there be nothing they like so much . it be such enjoyment to they , that if they uncle do not lay down the rule of they take turn , whichever begin would never give way to the other . " " well , I can not understand it . " " that be the case with we all , papa . one half of the world can not understand the pleasure of the other . " later in the morning , and just as the girl be go to separate in preparation for the regular four o'clock dinner , the hero of this inimitable charade walk in again .
. turn away ; but could receive he with the usual smile , and she quick eye soon discern in he the consciousness of have make a push -- of have throw a die ; and she imagine he be come to see how it might turn up . he ostensible reason , however , be to ask whether 's party could be make up in the evening without he , or whether he should be in the smallest degree necessary at . if he be , every thing else must give way ; but otherwise he friend have be say so much about he dining with he -- have make such a point of it , that he have promise he conditionally to come . thank he , but could not allow of he disappoint he friend on they account ; she father be sure of he rubber . he re-urge -- she re-declin ; and he seem then about to make he bow , when take the paper from the table , she return it -- " oh ! here be the charade you be so obliging as to leave with we ; thank you for the sight of it . we admire it so much , that I have venture to write it into 's collection . you friend will not take it amiss I hope . of course I have not transcribe beyond the first eight line . " certainly do not very well know what to say . he look rather doubtingly -- rather confused ; say something about " honour , " -- glance at and at , and then see the book open on the table , take it up , and examine it very attentively . with the view of pass off a awkward moment , smilingly say , " you must make my apology to you friend ; but so good a charade must not be confine to one or two . he may be sure of every woman 's approbation while he write with such gallantry . " " I have no hesitation in say , " reply , though hesitat a good deal while he speak ; " I have no hesitation in say -- at least if my friend feel at all as _i_ do -- I have not the smallest doubt that , could he see he little effusion honoure as _I_ see it , ( look at the book again , and replace it on the table ) , he would consider it as the proudest moment of he life . " after this speech he be go as soon as possible . could not think it too soon ; for with all he good and agreeable quality , there be a sort of parade in he speech which be very apt to incline she to laugh . she run away to indulge the inclination , leave the tender and the sublime of pleasure to 's share . though now the middle of , there have yet be no weather to prevent the young lady from tolerably regular exercise ; and on the morrow , have a charitable visit to pay to a poor sick family , who liv a little way out of . they road to this detached cottage be down , a lane lead at right angles from the broad , though irregular , main street of the place ; and , as may be infer , contain the bless abode of . a few inferior dwelling be first to be pass , and then , about a quarter of a mile down the lane rise the Vicarage , a old and not very good house , almost as close to the road as it could be . it have no advantage of situation ; but have be very much smarten up by the present proprietor ; and , such as it be , there could be no possibility of the two friend pass it without a slackened pace and observe eye .-- 's remark be -- " there it be . there go you and you riddle - book one of these day . " -- 's be -- " oh , what a sweet house !-- how very beautiful !-- there be the yellow curtain that admire so much . " " I do not often walk this way _now , " say , as they proceed , " but _then_ there will be a inducement , and I shall gradually get intimately acquainted with all the hedge , gate , pool and pollard of this part of . " , she find , have never in she life be within side the Vicarage , and she curiosity to see it be so extreme , that , consider exterior and probability , could only class it , as a proof of love , with 's see ready wit in she . " I wish we could contrive it , " say she ; " but I can not think of any tolerable pretence for go in ; -- no servant that I want to inquire about of he housekeeper -- no message from my father . " she ponder , but could think of nothing . after a mutual silence of some minute , thus begin again -- " I do so wonder , Woodhouse , that you should not be married , or go to be marry ! so charme as you be ! " -- laugh , and reply , " my be charme , , be not quite enough to induce I to marry ; I must find other people charme -- one other person at least . and I be not only , not go to be married , at present , but have very little intention of ever marry at all . " " ah !--so you say ; but I can not believe it . "
" " I must see somebody very superior to any one I have see yet , to be temp ; , you know , ( recollect herself , ) be out of the question : and I do _not wish to see any such person . I would rather not be tempt . I can not really change for the better . if I be to marry , I must expect to repent it . " " dear I !-- it be so odd to hear a woman talk so ! " -- " I have none of the usual inducement of woman to marry . be I to fall in love , indeed , it would be a different thing ! but I never have be in love ; it be not my way , or my nature ; and I do not think I ever shall . and , without love , I be sure I should be a fool to change such a situation as mine . Fortune I do not want ; employment I do not want ; consequence I do not want : I believe few married woman be half as much mistress of they husband 's house as I be of ; and never , never could I expect to be so truly beloved and important ; so always first and always right in any man 's eye as I be in my father 's . " " but then , to be a old maid at last , like ! " " that be as formidable a image as you could present , ; and if I think I should ever be like ! so silly -- so satisfied -- so smiling -- so prosing -- so undistinguishing and unfastidious -- and so apt to tell every thing relative to every body about I , I would marry to - morrow . but between _us_, I be convince there never can be any likeness , except in be unmarry . " " but still , you will be a old maid ! and that be so dreadful ! " " never mind , , I shall not be a poor old maid ; and it be poverty only which make celibacy contemptible to a generous public ! a single woman , with a very narrow income , must be a ridiculous , disagreeable old maid ! the proper sport of boy and girl , but a single woman , of good fortune , be always respectable , and may be as sensible and pleasant as any body else . and the distinction be not quite so much against the candour and common sense of the world as appear at first ; for a very narrow income have a tendency to contract the mind , and sour the temper . those who can barely live , and who live perforce in a very small , and generally very inferior , society , may well be illiberal and cross . this do not apply , however , to ; she be only too good natured and too silly to suit I ; but , in general , she be very much to the taste of every body , though single and though poor . Poverty certainly have not contract she mind : I really believe , if she have only a shilling in the world , she would be very likely to give away sixpence of it ; and nobody be afraid of she : that be a great charm . " " dear I ! but what shall you do ? how shall you employ yourself when you grow old ? " " if I know myself , , mine be a active , busy mind , with a great many independent resource ; and I do not perceive why I should be more in want of employment at forty or fifty than one - and - twenty . 's usual occupation of hand and mind will be as open to I then as they be now ; or with no important variation . if I draw less , I shall read more ; if I give up music , I shall take to carpet-work . and as for object of interest , object for the affections , which be in truth the great point of inferiority , the want of which be really the great evil to be avoid in _not_ marry , I shall be very well off , with all the child of a sister I love so much , to care about . there will be enough of they , in all probability , to supply every sort of sensation that decline life can need . there will be enough for every hope and every fear ; and though my attachment to none can equal that of a parent , it suit my idea of comfort better than what be warmer and blinder . my nephew and niece !-- I shall often have a niece with I . " " do you know 's niece ? that be , I know you must have see she a hundred time -- but be you acquaint ? " " oh ! yes ; we be always force to be acquaint whenever she come to . by the bye , _that be almost enough to put one out of conceit with a niece . heaven forbid ! at least , that I should ever bear people half so much about all the together , as she do about . one be sick of the very name of . every letter from she be read forty time over ; she compliment to all friend go round and round again ; and if she do but send she aunt the pattern of a stomacher , or knit a pair of garter for she grandmother , one hear of nothing else for a month . I wish
wish very well ; but she tire I to death . " they be now approach the cottage , and all idle topics be supersed . be very compassionate ; and the distress of the poor be as sure of relief from she personal attention and kindness , she counsel and she patience , as from she purse . she understand they way , could allow for they ignorance and they temptation , have no romantic expectation of extraordinary virtue from those for whom education have do so little ; enter into they trouble with ready sympathy , and always give she assistance with as much intelligence as good - will . in the present instance , it be sickness and poverty together which she come to visit ; and after remain there as long as she could give comfort or advice , she quit the cottage with such a impression of the scene as make she say to , as they walk away , " these be the sight , , to do one good . how trifl they make every thing else appear !-- I feel now as if I could think of nothing but these poor creature all the rest of the day ; and yet , who can say how soon it may all vanish from my mind ? " " very true , " say . " poor creature ! one can think of nothing else . " " and really , I do not think the impression will soon be over , " say , as she cross the low hedge , and totter footstep which end the narrow , slippery path through the cottage garden , and bring they into the lane again . " I do not think it will , " stop to look once more at all the outward wretchedness of the place , and recall the still greater withing . " oh ! dear , no , " say she companion . they walk on . the lane make a slight bend ; and when that bend be pass , be immediately in sight ; and so near as to give time only to say farther , " ah ! , here come a very sudden trial of we stability in good thought . well , ( smile , ) I hope it may be allow that if compassion have produce exertion and relief to the sufferer , it have do all that be truly important . if we feel for the wretched , enough to do all we can for they , the rest be empty sympathy , only distressing to ourselves . " Harriet could just answer , " oh ! dear , yes , " before the gentleman join they . the want and suffering of the poor family , however , be the first subject on meeting . he have be go to call on they . he visit he would now defer ; but they have a very interesting parley about what could be do and should be do . then turn back to accompany they . " to fall in with each other on such a errand as this , " think ; " to meet in a charitable scheme ; this will bring a great increase of love on each side . I should not wonder if it be to bring on the declaration . it must , if I be not here . I wish I be anywhere else . " anxious to separate herself from they as far as she could , she soon afterwards take possession of a narrow footpath , a little raise on one side of the lane , leave they together in the main road . but she have not be there two minute when she find that 's habits of dependence and imitation be bring she up too , and that , in short , they would both be soon after she . this would not do ; she immediately stop , under pretence of have some alteration to make in the lacing of she half - boot , and stoop down in complete occupation of the footpath , beg they to have the goodness to walk on , and she would follow in half a minute . they do as they be desire ; and by the time she judge it reasonable to have do with she boot , she have the comfort of farther delay in she power , be overtake by a child from the cottage , set out , accord to order , with she pitcher , to fetch broth from . to walk by the side of this child , and talk to and question she , be the most natural thing in the world , or would have be the most natural , have she be ac just then without design ; and by this mean the other be still able to keep ahead , without any obligation of wait for she . she gain on they , however , involuntarily : the child 's pace be quick , and theirs rather slow ; and she be the more concerned at it , from they be evidently in a conversation which interest they . be speak with animation , listen with a very pleased attention ; and , have send the child on , be begin to think how she might draw back a little more , when they both look around , and she be oblige to join they . be still talk , still engage in some interesting detail ; and experience some disappointment when she find that he be only give he fair companion a account of the yesterday 's party at he friend 's , and that she be come in herself for the cheese , the north , the butter , the cellery , the boot - root , and all the dessert . "
" this would soon have lead to something better , of course , " be she consol reflection ; " any thing interest between those who love ; and any thing will serve as introduction to what be near the heart . if I could but have keep longer away ! " they now walk on together quietly , till within view of the vicarage pale , when a sudden resolution , of at least get into the house , make she again find something very much amiss about she boot , and fall behind to arrange it once more . she then break the lace off short , and dexterously throw it into a ditch , be presently obliged to entreat they to stop , and acknowledge she inability to put herself to rights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort . " part of my lace be gone , " say she , " and I do not know how I be to contrive . I really be a most troublesome companion to you both , but I hope I be not often so ill - equip . , I must beg leave to stop at you house , and ask you housekeeper for a bit of ribband or string , or any thing just to keep my boot on . " look all happiness at this proposition ; and nothing could exceed he alertness and attention in conduct they into he house and endeavour to make every thing appear to advantage . the room they be take into be the one he chiefly occupi , and look forwards ; behind it be another with which it immediately communicate ; the door between they be open , and pass into it with the housekeeper to receive she assistance in the most comfortable manner . she be obliged to leave the door ajar as she find it ; but she fully intend that should close it . it be not close , however , it still remain ajar ; but by engage the housekeeper in incessant conversation , she hope to make it practicable for he to chuse he own subject in the adjoining room . for ten minute she could hear nothing but herself . it could be protract no longer . she be then oblige to be finish , and make she appearance . the lover be stand together at one of the window . it have a most favourable aspect ; and , for half a minute , feel the glory of have scheme successfully . but it would not do ; he have not come to the point . he have be most agreeable , most delightful ; he have tell Harriet that he have see they go by , and have purposely follow they ; other little gallantry and allusion have be dropt , but nothing serious . " cautious , very cautious , " think ; " he advance inch by inch , and will hazard nothing till he believe himself secure . " still , however , though every thing have not be accomplish by she ingenious device , she could not but flatter herself that it have be the occasion of much present enjoyment to both , and must be lead they forward to the great event . must now be leave to himself . it be no longer in 's power to superintend he happiness or quicke he measure . the come of she sister 's family be so very near at hand , that first in anticipation , and then in reality , it become henceforth she prime object of interest ; and during the ten day of they stay at it be not to be expect -- she do not herself expect -- that any thing beyond occasional , fortuitous assistance could be afforde by she to the lover . they might advance rapidly if they would , however ; they must advance somehow or other whether they would or no . she hardly wish to have more leisure for they . there be people , who the more you do for they , the less they will do for themselves . and , from have be longer than usual absent from , be exciting of course rather more than the usual interest . till this year , every long vacation since they marriage have be divide between and ; but all the holiday of this autumn have be give to sea - bathing for the child , and it be therefore many month since they have be see in a regular way by they Surry connexion , or see at all by , who could not be induce to get so far as , even for poor 's sake ; and who consequently be now most nervously and apprehensively happy in forestall this too short visit . he think much of the evils of the journey for she , and not a little of the fatigue of he own horsis and coachman who be to bring some of the party the last half of the way ; but he alarms be needless ; the sixteen mile be happily accomplish , and and , they five child , and a competent number of nursery - maid , all reach in safety . the bustle and joy of such a arrival , the many to be talk to , welcome , encourage , and variously disperse and dispose of , produce a noise and confusion which he nerve could not have borne under any other cause , nor have endure much longer even for this ; but the way of and the feeling of she father be so respect by , that in spite of maternal solicitude for the immediate enjoyment of she little one , and for they have instantly all the liberty and attendance , all the eating and drink , and sleep and
and play , which they could possibly wish for , without the smallest delay , the child be never allow to be long a disturbance to he , either in themselves or in any restless attendance on they . be a pretty , elegant little woman , of gentle , quiet manners , and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate ; wrapt up in she family ; a devoted wife , a doating mother , and so tenderly attach to she father and sister that , but for these higher tie , a warmer love might have seem impossible . she could never see a fault in any of they . she be not a woman of strong understanding or any quickness ; and with this resemblance of she father , she inherit also much of he constitution ; be delicate in she own health , over -careful of that of she child , have many fear and many nerve , and be as fond of she own in town as she father could be of . they be alike too , in a general benevolence of temper , and a strong habit of regard for every old acquaintance . be a tall , gentleman - like , and very clever man ; rise in he profession , domestic , and respectable in he private character ; but with reserve manners which prevent he be generally pleasing ; and capable of be sometimes out of humwe . he be not a ill - temper man , not so often unreasonably cross as to deserve such a reproach ; but he temper be not he great perfection ; and , indeed , with such a worshipping wife , it be hardly possible that any natural defect in it should not be increase . the extreme sweetness of she temper must hurt he . he have all the clearness and quickness of mind which she want , and he could sometimes act a ungracious , or say a severe thing . he be not a great favourite with he fair sister - in - law . nothing wrong in he escap she . she be quick in feel the little injury to , which never feel herself . perhaps she might have pass over more have he manners be flatter to 's sister , but they be only those of a calmly kind brother and friend , without praise and without blindness ; but hardly any degree of personal compliment could have make she regardless of that greatest fault of all in she eye which he sometimes fall into , the want of respectful forbearance towards she father . there he have not always the patience that could have be wish . 's peculiarity and fidgetiness be sometimes provoke he to a rational remonstrance or sharp retort equally ill - bestowed . it do not often happen ; for have really a great regard for he father - in - law , and generally a strong sense of what be due to he ; but it be too often for 's charity , especially as there be all the pain of apprehension frequently to be endure , though the offence come not . the beginning , however , of every visit display none but the properest feeling , and this be of necessity so short might be hope to pass away in unsullied cordiality . they have not be long seat and compose when , with a melancholy shake of the head and a sigh , call he daughter 's attention to the sad change at since she have be there last . " ah , my dear , " say he , " poor -- it be a grievous business . " " oh yes , sir , " cry she with ready sympathy , " how you must miss she ! and dear , too ! -- what a dreadful loss to you both !-- I have be so grieve for you .-- I could not imagine how you could possibly do without she .-- it be a sad change indeed .-- but I hope she be pretty well , sir . " " pretty well , my dear -- I hope -- pretty well .--i do not know but that the place agree with she tolerably . " here ask quietly whether there be any doubt of the air of Randalls . " oh ! no -- none in the least . I never see better in my life -- never look so well . be only speak he own regret . " " very much to the honour of both , " be the handsome reply . " and do you see she , sir , tolerably often ? " ask in the plaintive tone which just sui she father . hesitate .-- " not near so often , my dear , as I could wish . " " oh ! papa , we have miss see they but one entire day since they marry . either in the morning or evening of every day , except one , have we see either or , and generally both , either at Randalls or here -- and as you may suppose , , most frequently here . they be very , very kind in they visit . be really as kind as herself . , if you speak in that melancholy way , you will be give a false idea of we all . every body must be aware that must be miss , but every body ought also to be assure that and do really prevent we miss she by any means to the extent we ourselves anticipate -- which be the exact truth . " " just as it should be , " say , " and just as I hope it be from you letter . she wish of shew you attention could not be doubt ,
, and he be a disengaged and social man make it all easy . I have be always tell you , my love , that I have no idea of the change be so very material to Hartfield as you apprehend ; and now you have 's account , I hope you will be satisfied . " " why , to be sure , " say --" yes , certainly -- I can not deny that , poor , do come and see we pretty often -- but then -- she be always obliged to go away again . " " it would be very hard upon if she do not , papa .-- you quite forget poor . " " I think , indeed , " say pleasantly , " that have some little claim . you and I , , will venture to take the part of the poor husband . I , be a husband , and you not be a wife , the claim of the man may very likely strike we with equal force . as for , she have be marry long enough to see the convenience of put all the aside as much as she can . " " I , my love , " cry he wife , hearing and understanding only in part .-- " be you talk about I ?-- I be sure nobody ought to be , or can be , a greater advocate for matrimony than I be ; and if it have not be for the misery of she leave , I should never have think of but as the most fortunate woman in the world ; and as to slighte , that excellent , I think there be nothing he do not deserve . I believe he be one of the very best - tempered man that ever exist . Except yourself and you brother , I do not know he equal for temper . I shall never forget he fly 's kite for he that very windy day last -- and ever since he particular kindness last twelvemonth in writing that note , at twelve o'clock at night , on purpose to assure I that there be no scarlet fever at , I have be convince there could not be a more feeling heart nor a better man in existence .-- if any body can deserve he , it must be . " " where be the young man ? " say . " have he be here on this occasion -- or have he not ? " " he have not be here yet , " reply . " there be a strong expectation of he come soon after the marriage , but it end in nothing ; and I have not hear he mention lately . " " but you should tell they of the letter , my dear , " say she father . " he write a letter to poor , to congratulate she , and a very proper , handsome letter it be . she shew it to I . I think it very well do of he indeed . whether it be he own idea you know , one can not tell . he be but young , and he uncle , perhaps -- " " my dear papa , he be three - and - twenty . you forget how time pass . " " - and - twenty !-- be he indeed ?-- well , I could not have think it -- and he be but two year old when he lose he poor mother ! well , time do fly indeed !-- and my memory be very bad . however , it be a exceed good , pretty letter , and give and a great deal of pleasure . I remember it be write from , and date 28th -- and begin , ' my dear madam , ' but I forget how it go on ; and it be sign . .'-- I remember that perfectly . " " how very pleasing and proper of he ! " cry the good - hear . " I have no doubt of he be a most amiable young man . but how sad it be that he should not live at home with he father ! there be something so shock in a child 's be take away from he parent and natural home ! I never could comprehend how could part with he . to give up one 's child ! I really never could think well of any body who propose such a thing to any body else . " " nobody ever do think well of the Churchill , I fancy , " observe coolly . " but you need not imagine to have felt what you would feel in give up or . be rather a easy , cheerful - temper man , than a man of strong feeling ; he take thing as he find they , and make enjoyment of they somehow or other , depend , I suspect , much more upon what be call society for he comforts , that be , upon the power of eating and drinking , and play whist with he neighbour five time a week , than upon family affection , or any thing that home affords . " could not like what border on a reflection on , and have half a mind to take it up ; but she struggle , and let it pass . she would keep the peace if possible ; and there be something honourable and valuable in the strong domestic habit , the all - sufficiency of home to himself , whence result she brother 's disposition to look down on the common rate of social intercourse , and those to whom it be important .-- it have a high claim to forbearance . be to dine with
with they -- rather against the inclination of , who do not like that any one should share with he in 's first day . 's sense of right however have decide it ; and besides the consideration of what be due to each brother , she have particular pleasure , from the circumstance of the late disagreement between and herself , in procure he the proper invitation . she hope they might now become friend again . she think it be time to make up . make - up indeed would not do . She_ certainly have not be in the wrong , and _he_ would never own that he have . Concession must be out of the question ; but it be time to appear to forget that they have ever quarrell ; and she hope it might rather assist the restoration of friendship , that when he come into the room she have one of the child with she -- the youngest , a nice little girl about eight month old , who be now make she first visit to , and very happy to be dance about in she aunt 's arm . it do assist ; for though he begin with grave look and short question , he be soon lead on to talk of they all in the usual way , and to take the child out of she arm with all the unceremoniousness of perfect amity . feel they be friend again ; and the conviction give she at first great satisfaction , and then a little sauciness , she could not help say , as he be admir the baby , " what a comfort it be , that we think alike about we nephew and niece . as to man and woman , we opinion be sometimes very different ; but with regard to these child , I observe we never disagree . " " if you be as much guide by nature in you estimate of man and woman , and as little under the power of fancy and whe in you dealings with they , as you be where these child be concerned , we might always think alike . " " to be sure -- we discordancy must always arise from my be in the wrong . " " yes , " say he , smile -- " and reason good . I be sixteen year old when you be bear . " " a material difference then , " she reply -- " and no doubt you be much my superior in judgment at that period of we life ; but do not the lapse of one - and - twenty year bring we understanding a good deal nearer ? " " yes -- a good deal _nearer _. " " but still , not near enough to give I a chance of be right , if we think differently . " " I have still the advantage of you by sixteen year ' experience , and by not be a pretty young woman and a spoiled child . come , my dear , let we be friend , and say no more about it . tell you aunt , little , that she ought to set you a better example than to be renew old grievance , and that if she be not wrong before , she be now . " " that be true , " she cry -- " very true . , grow up a better woman than you aunt . be infinitely cleverer and not half so conceited . now , , a word or two more , and I have do . as far as good intentions go , we be _both_ right , and I must say that no effect on my side of the argument have yet prove wrong . I only want to know that be not very , very bitterly disappoint . " " a man can not be more so , " be he short , full answer . " ah !-- indeed I be very sorry .-- come , shake hand with I . " this have just take place and with great cordiality , when make he appearance , and " how would 'ye do , ? " and " , how be you ? " succeed in the true style , bury under a calmness that see all but indifference , the real attachment which would have lead either of they , if requisite , to do every thing for the good of the other . the evening be quiet and conversable , as decline card entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with he dear , and the little party make two natural division ; on one side he and he daughter ; on the other the two ; they subject totally distinct , or very rarely mix -- and only occasionally join in one or the other . the brother talk of they own concern and pursuit , but principally of those of the elder , whose temper be by much the most communicative , and who be always the greater talker . as a magistrate , he have generally some point of law to consult about , or , at least , some curiious anecdote to give ; and as a farmer , as keep in hand the home - farm at , he have to tell what every field be to bear next year , and to give all such local information as could not fail of be interesting to a brother whose home it have equally be the longest part of he life , and whose attachment be strong . the plan of a drain , the change of a fence , the felling of a tree , and the destination of every acre for wheat , turnip , or spring corn , be enter into with as much
much equality of interest by , as he cooler manners render possible ; and if he willing brother ever leave he any thing to inquire about , he inquirie even approach a tone of eagerness . while they be thus comfortably occupy , be enjoy a full flow of happy regret and fearful affection with he daughter . " my poor dear , " say he , fondly take she hand , and interrupt , for a few moment , she busy labour for some one of she five child -- " how long it be , how terribly long since you be here ! and how tired you must be after you journey ! you must go to bed early , my dear -- and I recommend a little gruel to you before you go .-- you and I will have a nice basin of gruel together . my dear , suppose we all have a little gruel . " could not suppose any such thing , know as she do , that both the Knightleys be as unpersuadable on that article as herself ; -- and two basin only be order . after a little more discourse in praise of gruel , with some wonder at it be not be take every evening by every body , he proceed to say , with a air of grave reflection , " it be a awkward business , my dear , you spend the autumn at instead of come here . I never have much opinion of the sea air . " " most strenuously recommend it , sir -- or we should not have go . he recommend it for all the child , but particularly for the weakness in little 's throat , -- both sea air and bathing . " " ah ! my dear , but have many doubt about the sea do she any good ; and as to myself , I have be long perfectly convinced , though perhaps I never tell you so before , that the sea be very rarely of use to any body . I be sure it almost kill I once . " " come , come , " cry , feel this to be a unsafe subject , " I must beg you not to talk of the sea . it make I envious and miserable ;-- I who have never see it ! be prohibit , if you please . my dear , I have not hear you make one inquiry about yet ; and he never forget you . " " oh ! good --how be he , sir ? " " why , pretty well ; but not quite well . poor Perry be bilious , and he have not time to take care of himself -- he tell I he have not time to take care of himself -- which be very sad -- but he be always want all round the country . I suppose there be not a man in such practice anywhere . but then there be not so clever a man any where . " " and and the child , how be they ? do the child grow ? I have a great regard for . I hope he will be call soon . he will be so pleased to see my little one . " " I hope he will be here to - morrow , for I have a question or two to ask he about myself of some consequence . and , my dear , whenever he come , you have better let he look at little 's throat . " " oh ! my dear sir , she throat be so much better that I have hardly any uneasiness about it . either bathing have be of the greatest service to she , or else it be to be attribute to a excellent embrocation of 's , which we have be apply at time ever since . " " it be not very likely , my dear , that bathing should have be of use to she -- and if I have know you be want a embrocation , I would have speak to -- " you seem to I to have forget and , " say , " I have not hear one inquiry after they . " " oh ! the good Bateses -- I be quite asham of myself -- but you mention they in most of you letter . I hope they be quite well . good old -- I will call upon she to - morrow , and take my child .-- they be always so pleased to see my child .-- and that excellent !--such thorough worthy people !-- how be they , sir ? " " why , pretty well , my dear , upon the whole . but poor . have a bad cold about a month ago . " " how sorry I be ! but cold be never so prevalent as they have be this autumn . tell I that he have never know they more general or heavy -- except when it have be quite a influenza . " " that have be a good deal the case , my dear ; but not to the degree you mention . say that cold have be very general , but not so heavy as he have very often know they in . do not call it altogether a sickly season . " " no , I do not know that consider it _very sickly except -- " ah ! my poor dear child , the truth be , that in it be always a sickly season . nobody be healthy in , nobody can be . it be a dreadful thing to have you force to live there ! so far off !-- and the air so bad ! " " no , indeed -- _we_
_we_ be not at all in a bad air . we part of be very superior to most other !-- you must not confound we with in general , my dear sir . the neighbourhood of be very different from almost all the rest . we be so very airy ! I should be unwilling , I own , to live in any other part of the town ; -- there be hardly any other that I could be satisfied to have my child in : but _we_ be so remarkably airy !-- think the vicinity of decidedly the most favourable as to air . " " ah ! my dear , it be not like . you make the best of it -- but after you have be a week at , you be all of you different creature ; you do not look like the same . now I can not say , that I think you be any of you look well at present . " " I be sorry to hear you say so , sir ; but I assure you , except those little nervous head - ach and palpitation which I be never entirely free from anywhere , I be quite well myself ; and if the child be rather pale before they go to bed , it be only because they be a little more tired than usual , from they journey and the happiness of come . I hope you will think better of they look to - morrow ; for I assure you tell I , that he do not believe he have ever send we off altogether , in such good case . I trust , at least , that you do not think look ill , " turn she eye with affectionate anxiety towards she husband . " Middle , my dear ; I can not compliment you . I think very far from look well . " " what be the matter , sir ? -- do you speak to I ? " cry , hear he own name . " I be sorry to find , my love , that my father do not think you look well -- but I hope it be only from be a little fatigue . I could have wish , however , as you know , that you have see before you leave home . " " my dear , " -- exclaim he hastily --" pray do not concern yourself about my look . be satisfied with doctoring and coddl yourself and the child , and let I look as I chuse . " " I do not thoroughly understand what you be tell you brother , " cry , " about you friend 's intend to have a bailiff from , to look after he new estate . what will it answer ? will not the old prejudice be too strong ? " and she talk in this way so long and successfully that , when force to give she attention again to she father and sister , she have nothing worse to hear than 's kind inquiry after ; and , though no great favourite with she in general , she be at that moment very happy to assist in praising . " that sweet , amiable ! " say .-- " it be so long since I have see she , except now and then for a moment accidentally in town ! what happiness it must be to she good old grandmother and excellent aunt , when she come to visit they ! I always regret excessively on dear 's account that she can not be more at ; but now they daughter be marry , I suppose and Campbell will not be able to part with she at all . she would be such a delightful companion for . " agree to it all , but add , " we little friend , however , be just such another pretty kind of young person . you will like . could not have a better companion than . " " I be most happy to hear it -- but only one know to be so very accomplished and superior !-- and exactly 's age . " this topic be discuss very happily , and other succeed of similar moment , and pass away with similar harmony ; but the evening do not close without a little return of agitation . the gruel come and supply a great deal to be say -- much praise and many comment -- undoubt decision of its wholesomeness for every constitution , and pretty severe upon the many house where it be never meet with tolerable ; -- but , unfortunately , among the failure which the daughter have to instance , the most recent , and therefore most prominent , be in she own cook at , a young woman hire for the time , who never have be able to understand what she mean by a basin of nice smooth gruel , thin , but not too thin . often as she have wish for and order it , she have never be able to get any thing tolerable . here be a dangerous opening . " ah ! " say , shak he head and fix he eye on she with tender concern .-- the ejaculation in 's ear express , " ah ! there be no end of the sad consequence of you go to . it do not bear talk of . " and for a little while she hope he would not talk of it , and that a silent rumination might suffice to restore he to the relish of he own smooth gruel . after a interval of some minute , however , he begin with , " I shall always be very sorry that you go to the sea this autumn , instead of come
come here . " " but why should you be sorry , sir ?-- I assure you , it do the child a great deal of good . " " and , moreover , if you must go to the sea , it have better not have be to . be a unhealthy place . be surprize to hear you have fix upon . " " I know there be such a idea with many people , but indeed it be quite a mistake , sir .-- we all have we health perfectly well there , never find the least inconvenience from the mud ; and say it be entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy ; and I be sure he may be depend on , for he thoroughly understand the nature of the air , and he own brother and family have be there repeatedly . " " you should have go to , my dear , if you go anywhere .-- be a week at once , and he hold it to be the best of all the sea - bathing place . a fine open sea , he say , and very pure air . and , by what I understand , you might have have lodging there quite away from the sea -- a quarter of a mile off -- very comfortable . you should have consult . " " but , my dear sir , the difference of the journey ; -- only consider how great it would have be .-- a hundr mile , perhaps , instead of forty . " " ah ! my dear , as Perry say , where health be at stake , nothing else should be consider ; and if one be to travel , there be not much to chuse between forty mile and a hundr .-- not move at all , better stay in altogether than travel forty mile to get into a worse air . this be just what say . it seem to he a very ill - judge measure . " 's attempt to stop she father have be vain ; and when he have reach such a point as this , she could not wonder at she brother - in - law 's break out . " , " say he , in a voice of very strong displeasure , " would do as well to keep he opinion till it be ask for . why do he make it any business of he , to wonder at what I do ?-- at my take my family to one part of the coast or another ?-- I may be allow , I hope , the use of my judgment as well as .-- I want he direction no more than he drug . " he pause -- and grow cooler in a moment , add , with only sarcastic dryness , " if can tell I how to convey a wife and five child a distance of a hundred and thirty mile with no greater expense or inconvenience than a distance of forty , I should be as willing to prefer to as he could himself . " " true , true , " cry , with most ready interposition -- " very true . that be a consideration indeed .-- but , as to what I be tell you of my idea of move the path to , of turn it more to the right that it may not cut through the home meadow , I can not conceive any difficulty . I should not attempt it , if it be to be the means of inconvenience to the Highbury people , but if you call to mind exactly the present line of the path . . . . the only way of prove it , however , will be to turn to we map . I shall see you at the to - morrow morning I hope , and then we will look they over , and you shall give I you opinion . " be rather agitate by such harsh reflection on he friend , to whom he have , in fact , though unconsciously , be attribute many of he own feeling and expression ; -- but the soothing attention of he daughter gradually remove the present evil , and the immediate alertness of one brother , and better recollection of the other , prevent any renewal of it . chapter xiii there could hardly be a happier creature in the world than , in this short visit to , go about every morning among she old acquaintance with she five child , and talk over what she have do every evening with she father and sister . she have nothing to wish otherwise , but that the day do not pass so swiftly . it be a delightful visit ;--perfect , in be much too short . in general they evening be less engage with friend than they morning ; but one complete dinner engagement , and out of the house too , there be no avoiding , though at . would take no denial ; they must all dine at Randalls one day ; -- even be persuade to think it a possible thing in preference to a division of the party . how they be all to be convey , he would have make a difficulty if he could , but as he son and daughter 's carriage and horse be actually at , he be not able to make more than a simple question on that head ; it hardly amount to a doubt ; nor do it occupy long to convince he that they might in one of the carriage find room for also . , , and , they own especial set , be the only person invite to meet they ; -- the hour be to be early , as well
well as the number few ; 's habit and inclination be consult in every thing . the evening before this great event ( for it be a very great event that should dine out , on the 24th of ) have be spend by at , and she have go home so much indispose with a cold , that , but for she own earnest wish of be nurse by , could not have allow she to leave the house . call on she the next day , and find she doom already sign with regard to Randalls . she be very feverish and have a bad sore throat : be full of care and affection , be talk of , and herself be too ill and low to resist the authority which exclude she from this delightful engagement , though she could not speak of she loss without many tear . sit with she as long as she could , to attend she in 's unavoidable absence , and raise she spirits by represent how much 's would be depresse when he know she state ; and leave she at last tolerably comfortable , in the sweet dependence of he have a most comfortless visit , and of they all miss she very much . she have not advance many yard from 's door , when she be meet by himself , evidently come towards it , and as they walk on slowly together in conversation about the invalid -- of whom he , on the rumour of considerable illness , have be go to inquire , that he might carry some report of she to Hartfield -- they be overtake by return from the daily visit to , with he two eldest boy , whose healthy , glow face shew all the benefit of a country run , and seem to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton and rice pudd they be hasten home for . they join company and proceed together . be just describe the nature of she friend 's complaint ;--" a throat very much inflam , with a great deal of heat about she , a quick , low pulse , & c. and she be sorry to find from that be liable to very bad sore - throats , and have often alarme she with they . " look all alarm on the occasion , as he exclaim , " a sore - throat !-- I hope not infectious . I hope not of a putrid infectious sort . have see she ? indeed you should take care of yourself as well as of you friend . let I entreat you to run no risk . why do not Perry see she ? " , who be not really at all frightene herself , tranquillise this excess of apprehension by assurance of 's experience and care ; but as there must still remain a degree of uneasiness which she could not wish to reason away , which she would rather feed and assist than not , she add soon afterwards -- as if quite another subject , " it be so cold , so very cold -- and look and feel so very much like snow , that if it be to any other place or with any other party , I should really try not to go out to - day -- and dissuade my father from venturing ; but as he have make up he mind , and do not seem to feel the cold himself , I do not like to interfere , as I know it would be so great a disappointment to and . but , upon my word , , in you case , I should certainly excuse myself . you appear to I a little hoarse already , and when you consider what demand of voice and what fatigue to - morrow will bring , I think it would be no more than common prudence to stay at home and take care of yourself to - night . " look as if he do not very well know what answer to make ; which be exactly the case ; for though very much gratify by the kind care of such a fair lady , and not like to resist any advice of she 's , he have not really the least inclination to give up the visit ;-- but , too eager and busy in she own previous conception and view to hear he impartially , or see he with clear vision , be very well satisfied with he muttering acknowledgment of its be " very cold , certainly very cold , " and walk on , rejoice in have extricate he from Randalls , and secure he the power of send to inquire after every hour of the evening . " you do quite right , " say she ; --" we will make you apology to and . " but hardly have she so spoken , when she find she brother be civilly offer a seat in he carriage , if the weather be 's only objection , and actually accept the offer with much prompt satisfaction . it be a done thing ; be to go , and never have he broad handsome face express more pleasure than at this moment ; never have he smile be stronger , nor he eye more exulting than when he next look at she . " well , " say she to herself , " this be most strange !-- after I have get he off so well , to chuse to go into company , and leave ill behind !-- most strange indeed ! -- but there be , I believe , in many man , especially single man , such a inclination -- such a passion for dine out -- a dinner engagement be so high in the class of they pleasure ,
, they employment , they dignity , almost they duty , that any thing give way to it -- and this must be the case with ; a most valuable , amiable , pleasing young man undoubtedly , and very much in love with ; but still , he can not refuse a invitation , he must dine out wherever he be ask . what a strange thing love be ! he can see ready wit in , but will not dine alone for she . " afterwards quit they , and she could not but do he the justice of feeling that there be a great deal of sentiment in he manner of name at part ; in the tone of he voice while assure she that he should call at 's for news of she fair friend , the last thing before he prepare for the happiness of meet she again , when he hope to be able to give a better report ; and he sigh and smile himself off in a way that leave the balance of approbation much in he favour . after a few minute of entire silence between they , begin with -- " I never in my life see a man more intent on be agreeable than . it be downright labour to he where lady be concerned . with man he can be rational and unaffected , but when he have lady to please , every feature work . " " 's manners be not perfect , " reply ; " but where there be a wish to please , one ought to overlook , and one do overlook a great deal . where a man do he best with only moderate power , he will have the advantage over negligent superiority . there be such perfect good - temper and good - will in as one can not but value . " " yes , " say presently , with some slyness , " he seem to have a great deal of good - will towards you . " " I ! " she reply with a smile of astonishment , " be you imagine I to be 's object ? " " such a imagination have cross I , I own , ; and if it never occur to you before , you may as well take it into consideration now . " " in love with I !-- what a idea ! " " I do not say it be so ; but you will do well to consider whether it be so or not , and to regulate you behaviour accordingly . I think you manners to he encourage . I speak as a friend , . you have better look about you , and ascertain what you do , and what you mean to do . " " I thank you ; but I assure you you be quite mistaken . and I be very good friend , and nothing more ; " and she walk on , amuse herself in the consideration of the blunder which often arise from a partial knowledge of circumstance , of the mistake which people of high pretension to judgment be for ever fal into ; and not very well pleased with she brother for imagine she blind and ignorant , and in want of counsel . he say no more . have so completely make up he mind to the visit , that in spite of the increase coldness , he seem to have no idea of shrinking from it , and set forward at last most punctually with he eldest daughter in he own carriage , with less apparent consciousness of the weather than either of the other ; too full of the wonder of he own go , and the pleasure it be to afford at Randalls to see that it be cold , and too well wrapt up to feel it . the cold , however , be severe ; and by the time the second carriage be in motion , a few flake of snow be find they way down , and the sky have the appearance of be so overcharged as to want only a milder air to produce a very white world in a very short time . soon see that she companion be not in the happiest humour . the preparing and the go abroad in such weather , with the sacrifice of he child after dinner , be evils , be disagreeable at least , which do not by any means like ; he anticipat nothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchase ; and the whole of they drive to the vicarage be spend by he in express he discontent . " a man , " say he , " must have a very good opinion of himself when he ask people to leave they own fireside , and encounter such a day as this , for the sake of come to see he . he must think himself a most agreeable fellow ; I could not do such a thing . it be the greatest absurdity -- actually snow at this moment !-- the folly of not allow people to be comfortable at home -- and the folly of people be not stay comfortably at home when they can ! if we be oblige to go out such a evening as this , by any call of duty or business , what a hardship we should deem it ; -- and here be we , probably with rather thinner clothing than usual , set forward voluntarily , without excuse , in defiance of the voice of nature , which tell man , in every thing give to he view or he feeling , to stay at home himself , and keep all under shelter that he can ; -- here be we set forward to spend
spend five dull hour in another man 's house , with nothing to say or to hear that be not say and hear yesterday , and may not be say and hear again to - morrow . go in dismal weather , to return probably in worse ; -- four horse and four servants take out for nothing but to convey five idle , shiver creature into colder room and worse company than they might have have at home . " do not find herself equal to give the pleased assent , which no doubt he be in the habit of receive , to emulate the " very true , my love , " which must have be usually administer by he travel companion ; but she have resolution enough to refrain from make any answer at all . she could not be comply , she dread be quarrelsome ; she heroism reach only to silence . she allow he to talk , and arrange the glass , and wrap herself up , without open she lip . they arrive , the carriage turn , the step be let down , and , spruce , black , and smile , be with they instantly . think with pleasure of some change of subject . be all obligation and cheerfulness ; he be so very cheerful in he civility indeed , that she begin to think he must have receive a different account of Harriet from what have reach she . she have send while dress , and the answer have be , " much the same -- not better . " " _my report from 's , " say she presently , " be not so pleasant as I have hope --' not better ' be _my answer . " he face lengthen immediately ; and he voice be the voice of sentiment as he answer . " oh ! no --i be grieved to find -- I be on the point of tell you that when I call at 's door , which I do the very last thing before I return to dress , I be tell that be not better , by no means better , rather worse . very much grieved and concerned -- I have flatter myself that she must be better after such a cordial as I know have be give she in the morning . " smile and answer -- " my visit be of use to the nervous part of she complaint , I hope ; but not even I can charm away a sore throat ; it be a most severe cold indeed . have be with she , as you probably hear . " " yes -- I imagine -- that be -- I do not -- " " he have be use to she in these complaint , and I hope to - morrow morning will bring we both a more comfortable report . but it be impossible not to feel uneasiness . such a sad loss to we party to - day ! " " Dreadful !-- exactly so , indeed .-- she will be miss every moment . " this be very proper ; the sigh which accompany it be really estimable ; but it should have last longer . be rather in dismay when only half a minute afterwards he begin to speak of other thing , and in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment . " what a excellent device , " say he , " the use of a sheepskin for carriage . how very comfortable they make it ;-- impossible to feel cold with such precaution . the contrivance of modern day indeed have render a gentleman 's carriage perfectly complete . one be so fenced and guard from the weather , that not a breath of air can find its way unpermitted . become absolutely of no consequence . it be a very cold afternoon -- but in this carriage we know nothing of the matter .-- ! snow a little I see . " " yes , " say , " and I think we shall have a good deal of it . " " weather , " observ . " quite seasonable ; and extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it do not begin yesterday , and prevent this day 's party , which it might very possibly have do , for would hardly have venture have there be much snow on the ground ; but now it be of no consequence . this be quite the season indeed for friendly meeting . at every body invite they friend about they , and people think little of even the worst weather . I be snow up at a friend 's house once for a week . nothing could be pleasanter . I go for only one night , and could not get away till that very day se'nnight . " look as if he do not comprehend the pleasure , but say only , coolly , " I can not wish to be snow up a week at Randalls . " at another time might have be amuse , but she be too much astonished now at 's spirit for other feeling . seem quite forgotten in the expectation of a pleasant party . " we be sure of excellent fir , " continue he , " and every thing in the greatest comfort . charme people , and ;-- indeed be much beyond praise , and he be exactly what one value , so hospitable , and so fond of society ; -- it will be a small party , but where small party be select , they be perhaps the most agreeable of any . 's dining - room do not accommodate more than ten comfortably ; and for my part , I would rather , under such circumstance , fall short by two than exceed
exceed by two . I think you will agree with I , ( turn with a soft air to , ) I think I shall certainly have you approbation , though perhaps , from be use to the large party of , may not quite enter into we feeling . " " I know nothing of the large party of , sir -- I never dine with any body . " " indeed ! ( in a tone of wonder and pity , ) I have no idea that the law have be so great a slavery . well , sir , the time must come when you will be pay for all this , when you will have little labour and great enjoyment . " " my first enjoyment , " reply , as they pass through the sweep - gate , " will be to find myself safe at again . " some change of countenance be necessary for each gentleman as they walk into 's drawing - room ;-- must compose he joyous look , and disperse he ill - humour . must smile less , and more , to fit they for the place .-- Emma only might be as nature prompt , and show herself just as happy as she be . to she it be real enjoyment to be with the Weston . be a great favourite , and there be not a creature in the world to whom she speak with such unreserve , as to he wife ; not any one , to whom she related with such conviction of be listen to and understood , of be always interesting and always intelligible , the little affair , arrangement , perplexity , and pleasur of she father and herself . she could tell nothing of , in which have not a lively concern ; and half a hour 's uninterrupted communication of all those little matter on which the daily happiness of private life depend , be one of the first gratification of each . this be a pleasure which perhap the whole day 's visit might not afford , which certainly do not belong to the present half - hour ; but the very sight of , she smile , she touch , she voice be grateful to , and she determine to think as little as possible of 's oddity , or of any thing else unpleasant , and enjoy all that be enjoyable to the utmost . the misfortune of 's could have be pretty well go through before she arrival . have be safely seat long enough to give the history of it , besides all the history of he own and 's come , and of 's be to follow , and have indeed just get to the end of he satisfaction that should come and see he daughter , when the other appear , and , who have be almost wholly engross by she attention to he , be able to turn away and welcome she dear . 's project of forget for a while make she rather sorry to find , when they have all take they place , that he be close to she . the difficulty be great of drive he strange insensibility towards , from she mind , while he not only sit at she elbow , but be continually obtrud he happy countenance on she notice , and solicitously address she upon every occasion . instead of forget he , he behaviour be such that she could not avoid the internal suggestion of " can it really be as my brother imagine ? can it be possible for this man to be begin to transfer he affections from to I ?--Absurd and insufferable ! " -- yet he would be so anxious for she be perfectly warm , would be so interested about she father , and so delighted with ; and at last would begin admir she drawing with so much zeal and so little knowledge as see terribly like a would - be lover , and make it some effort with she to preserve she good manners . for she own sake she could not be rude ; and for 's , in the hope that all would yet turn out right , she be even positively civil ; but it be a effort ; especially as something be go on amongst the other , in the most overpowering period of 's nonsense , which she particularly wish to listen to . she hear enough to know that be give some information about he son ; she hear the word " my son , " and " , " and " my son , " repeat several time over ; and , from a few other half - syllable very much suspect that he be announce a early visit from he son ; but before she could quiet , the subject be so completely past that any revive question from she would have be awkward . now , it so happen that in spite of 's resolution of never marry , there be something in the name , in the idea of , which always interes she . she have frequently think --especially since he father 's marriage with -- that if she _were to marry , he be the very person to suit she in age , character and condition . he seem by this connexion between the family , quite to belong to she . she could not but suppose it to be a match that every body who know they must think of . that and do think of it , she be very strongly persuade ; and though not meane to be induce by he , or by any body else , to give up a situation which she believe more replete with good than any she could change it for , she have a great
great curiosity to see he , a decide intention of find he pleasant , of be like by he to a certain degree , and a sort of pleasure in the idea of they be couple in they friend 's imagination . with such sensation , 's civility be dreadfully ill - time ; but she have the comfort of appear very polite , while feel very cross -- and of think that the rest of the visit could not possibly pass without bring forward the same information again , or the substance of it , from the open - hear .-- so it prove ; -- for when happily release from , and seat by , at dinner , he make use of the very first interval in the care of hospitality , the very first leisure from the saddle of , to say to she , " we want only two more to be just the right number . I should like to see two more here , -- you pretty little friend , , and my son -- and then I should say we be quite complete . I believe you do not hear I tell the other in the drawing - room that we be expect . I have a letter from he this morning , and he will be with we within a fortnight . " speak with a very proper degree of pleasure ; and fully assent to he proposition of and make they party quite complete . " he have be want to come to we , " continue , " ever since : every letter have be full of it ; but he can not command he own time . he have those to please who must be pleased , and who ( between ourselves ) be sometimes to be pleas only by a good many sacrifice . but now I have no doubt of see he here about the second week in . " " what a very great pleasure it will be to you ! and be so anxious to be acquaint with he , that she must be almost as happy as yourself . " " yes , she would be , but that she think there will be another put -off . she do not depend upon he come so much as I do : but she do not know the party so well as I do . the case , you see , be --( but this be quite between ourselves : I do not mention a syllable of it in the other room . there be secret in all family , you know ) -- the case be , that a party of friend be invite to pay a visit at in ; and that 's come depends upon they be put off . if they be not put off , he can not stir . but I know they will , because it be a family that a certain lady , of some consequence , at , have a particular dislike to : and though it be thought necessary to invite they once in two or three year , they always be put off when it come to the point . I have not the smallest doubt of the issue . I be as confident of see here before the middle of , as I be of be here myself : but you good friend there ( nodd towards the upper end of the table ) have so few vagary herself , and have be so little use to they at , that she can not calculate on they effect , as I have be long in the practice of do . " " I be sorry there should be any thing like doubt in the case , " reply ; " but be dispose to side with you , . if you think he will come , I shall think so too ; for you know . " " yes -- I have some right to that knowledge ; though I have never be at the place in my life .-- she be a odd woman ! -- but I never allow myself to speak ill of she , on 's account ; for I do believe she to be very fond of he . I use to think she be not capable of be fond of any body , except herself : but she have always be kind to he ( in she way -- allow for little whim and caprice , and expect every thing to be as she like ) . and it be no small credit , in my opinion , to he , that he should excite such a affection ; for , though I would not say it to any body else , she have no more heart than a stone to people in general ; and the devil of a temper . " like the subject so well , that she begin upon it , to , very soon after they move into the drawing - room : wish she joy -- yet observe , that she know the first meeting must be rather alarm .-- agree to it ; but add , that she should be very glad to be secure of undergo the anxiety of a first meeting at the time talk of : " for I can not depend upon he come . I can not be so sanguine as . I be very much afraid that it will all end in nothing . , I dare say , have be tell you exactly how the matter stand ? " " yes -- it seem to depend upon nothing but the ill - humour of , which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world . " " my ! " reply , smile , " what be the certainty of caprice
caprice ? " then turn to , who have not be attend before -- " you must know , my dear , that we be by no means so sure of see , in my opinion , as he father think . it depend entirely upon he aunt 's spirit and pleasure ; in short , upon she temper . to you -- to my two daughter -- I may venture on the truth . rule at , and be a very odd - tempered woman ; and he come now , depend upon she be willing to spare he . " " oh , ; every body know , " reply : " and I be sure I never think of that poor young man without the greatest compassion . to be constantly live with a ill - tempere person , must be dreadful . it be what we happily have never know any thing of ; but it must be a life of misery . what a bless , that she never have any child ! poor little creature , how unhappy she would have make they ! " wish she have be alone with . she should then have hear more : would speak to she , with a degree of unreserve which she would not hazard with ; and , she really believe , would scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the Churchills from she , except those view on the young man , of which she own imagination have already give she such instinctive knowledge . but at present there be nothing more to be say . very soon follow they into the drawing - room . to be sit long after dinner , be a confinement that he could not endure . neither wine nor conversation be any thing to he ; and gladly do he move to those with whom he be always comfortable . while he talk to , however , find a opportunity of say , " and so you do not consider this visit from you son as by any mean certain . I be sorry for it . the introduction must be unpleasant , whenever it take place ; and the sooner it could be over , the better . " " yes ; and every delay make one more apprehensive of other delay . even if this family , the , be put off , I be still afraid that some excuse may be find for disappoint we . I can not bear to imagine any reluctance on he side ; but I be sure there be a great wish on the Churchill ' to keep he to themselves . there be jealousy . they be jealous even of he regard for he father . in short , I can feel no dependence on he come , and I wish be less sanguine . " " he ought to come , " say . " if he could stay only a couple of day , he ought to come ; and one can hardly conceive a young man be not have it in he power to do as much as that . a young _woman , if she fall into bad hand , may be teaze , and keep at a distance from those she want to be with ; but one can not comprehend a young _man _'s be under such restraint , as not to be able to spend a week with he father , if he like it . " " one ought to be at , and know the way of the family , before one decide upon what he can do , " reply . " one ought to use the same caution , perhaps , in judging of the conduct of any one individual of any one family ; but , I believe , certainly must not be judge by general rule : _she be so very unreasonable ; and every thing give way to she . " " but she be so fond of the nephew : he be so very great a favourite . now , accord to my idea of , it would be most natural , that while she make no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband , to whom she owe every thing , while she exercise incessant caprice towards _him , she should frequently be govern by the nephew , to whom she owe nothing at all . " " my dearest , do not pretend , with you sweet temper , to understand a bad one , or to lay down rule for it : you must let it go its own way . I have no doubt of he having , at time , considerable influence ; but it may be perfectly impossible for he to know beforehand _when it will be . " listen , and then coolly say , " I shall not be satisfied , unless he come . " " he may have a great deal of influence on some point , " continue , " and on other , very little : and among those , on which she be beyond he reach , it be but too likely , may be this very circumstance of he come away from they to visit we . " be soon ready for he tea ; and when he have drank he tea he be quite ready to go home ; and it be as much as he three companion could do , to entertain away he notice of the lateness of the hour , before the other gentleman appear . be chatty and convivial , and no friend to early separation of any sort ; but at last the drawing - room party do receive a augmentation . , in very good spirit , be one of the first to walk in . and be sit together on a
a sofa . he join they immediately , and , with scarcely a invitation , seat himself between they . , in good spirits too , from the amusement afford she mind by the expectation of , be willing to forget he late impropriety , and be as well satisfied with he as before , and on he make Harriet he very first subject , be ready to listen with most friendly smile . he profess himself extremely anxious about she fair friend -- she fair , lovely , amiable friend . " do she know ?--had she hear any thing about she , since they be at Randalls ?-- he feel much anxiety -- he must confess that the nature of she complaint alarme he considerably . " and in this style he talk on for some time very properly , not much attend to any answer , but altogether sufficiently awake to the terror of a bad sore throat ; and be quite in charity with he . but at last there seem a perverse turn ; it seem all at once as if he be more afraid of its be a bad sore throat on she account , than on 's -- more anxious that she should escape the infection , than that there should be no infection in the complaint . he begin with great earnestness to entreat she to refrain from visit the sick - chamber again , for the present -- to entreat she to _promise _him not to venture into such hazard till he have see and lear not he opinion ; and though she try to laugh it off and bring the subject back into its proper course , there be no put a end to he extreme solicitude about she . she be vex . it do appear -- there be no concealing it -- exactly like the pretence of be in love with she , instead of ; a inconstancy , if real , the most contemptible and abominable ! and she have difficulty in behaving with temper . he turn to to implore she assistance , " would not she give he she support ?--would not she add she persuasion to he , to induce not to go to 's till it be certain that 's disorder have no infection ? he could not be satisfy without a promise -- would not she give he she influence in procure it ? " " so scrupulous for other , " he continue , " and yet so careless for herself ! she want I to nurse my cold by stay at home to - day , and yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catch a ulcerated sore throat herself . be this fair , between we . have not I some right to complain ? I be sure of you kind support and aid . " see 's surprize , and feel that it must be great , at a address which , in word and manner , be assume to himself the right of first interest in she ; and as for herself , she be too much provoke and offend to have the power of directly say any thing to the purpose . she could only give he a look ; but it be such a look as she think must restore he to he sense , and then leave the sofa , remove to a seat by she sister , and give she all she attention . she have not time to know how take the reproof , so rapidly do another subject succeed ; for now come into the room from examine the weather , and open on they all with the information of the ground be cover with snow , and of its still snow fast , with a strong drifting wind ; conclude with these word to : " this will prove a spirited beginning of you winter engagement , sir . something know for you coachman and horse to be make they way through a storm of snow . " poor be silent from consternation ; but every body else have something to say ; every body be either surprized or not surprize , and have some question to ask , or some comfort to offer . and try earnestly to cheer he and turn he attention from he son - in - law , who be pursue he triumph rather unfeelingly . " I admire you resolution very much , sir , " say he , " in venture out in such weather , for of course you see there would be snow very soon . every body must have see the snow come on . I admire you spirit ; and I dare say we shall get home very well . another hour or two 's snow can hardly make the road impassable ; and we be two carriage ; if one be blow over in the bleak part of the common field there will be the other at hand . I dare say we shall be all safe at before midnight . " , with triumph of a different sort , be confess that he have know it to be snow some time , but have not say a word , lest it should make Woodhouse uncomfortable , and be a excuse for he hurrie away . as to there be any quantity of snow fallen or likely to fall to impede they return , that be a mere joke ; he be afraid they would find no difficulty . he wish the road might be impassable , that he might be able to keep they all at Randall ; and with the utmost good - will be sure that accommodation might be find for every body , call on he wife to agree with he , that with a little contrivance , every body might be lod
lod , which she hardly know how to do , from the consciousness of there be but two spare room in the house . " what be to be do , my dear ?-- what be to be do ? " be 's first exclamation , and all that he could say for some time . to she he look for comfort ; and she assurance of safety , she representation of the excellence of the horse , and of , and of they have so many friend about they , revive he a little . he eldest daughter 's alarm be equal to he own . the horror of be block up at Randalls , while she child be at , be full in she imagination ; and fancie the road to be now just passable for adventurous people , but in a state that admit no delay , she be eager to have it settled , that she father and should remain at Randalls , while she and she husband set forward instantly through all the possible accumulation of drifted snow that might impede they . " you have better order the carriage directly , my love , " say she ; " I dare say we shall be able to get along , if we set off directly ; and if we do come to any thing very bad , I can get out and walk . I be not at all afraid . I should not mind walk half the way . I could change my shoe , you know , the moment I get home ; and it be not the sort of thing that give I cold . " " indeed ! " reply he . " then , my dear , it be the most extraordinary sort of thing in the world , for in general every thing do give you cold . walk home !-- you be prettily shod for walk home , I dare say . it will be bad enough for the horse . " turn to for she approbation of the plan . could only approve . then go to ; but could not so entirely give up the hope of they be all able to get away ; and they be still discuss the point , when , who have leave the room immediately after he brother 's first report of the snow , come back again , and tell they that he have be out of door to examine , and could answer for there not be the smallest difficulty in they get home , whenever they like it , either now or a hour hence . he have go beyond the sweep -- some way along the road -- the snow be nowhere above half a inch deep -- in many place hardly enough to whiten the ground ; a very few flake be fall at present , but the cloud be part , and there be every appearance of its be soon over . he have see the coachman , and they both agree with he in there be nothing to apprehend . to , the relief of such tiding be very great , and they be scarcely less acceptable to on she father 's account , who be immediately set as much at ease on the subject as he nervous constitution allow ; but the alarm that have be raise could not be appease so as to admit of any comfort for he while he continue at . he be satisfied of there be no present danger in return home , but no assurance could convince he that it be safe to stay ; and while the other be variously urge and recommend , and settle it in a few brief sentence : thus -- " you father will not be easy ; why do not you go ? " " I be ready , if the other be . " " shall I ring the bell ? " " yes , do . " and the bell be ring , and the carriage speak for . a few minute more , and hope to see one troublesome companion deposite in he own house , to get sober and cool , and the other recover he temper and happiness when this visit of hardship be over . the carriage come : and Woodhouse , always the first object on such occasion , be carefully attend to he own by and ; but not all that either could say could prevent some renewal of alarm at the sight of the snow which have actually fall , and the discovery of a much darker night than he have be prepare for . " he be afraid they should have a very bad drive . he be afraid poor would not like it . and there would be poor in the carriage behind . he do not know what they have best do . they must keep as much together as they could ; " and be talk to , and give a charge to go very slow and wait for the other carriage . steep in after she father ; , forgett that he do not belong to they party , steep in after he wife very naturally ; so that find , on be escort and follow into the second carriage by , that the door be to be lawfully shut on they , and that they be to have a tete - a - tete drive . it would not have be the awkwardness of a moment , it would have be rather a pleasure , previous to the suspicion of this very day ; she could have talk to he of , and the three - quarter of a mile would have see but one . but now , she would rather it have not happen . she believe he have be drink too
too much of 's good wine , and feel sure that he would want to be talk nonsense . to restrain he as much as might be , by she own manners , she be immediately prepare to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity of the weather and the night ; but scarcely have she begun , scarcely have they pass the sweep - gate and join the other carriage , than she find she subject cut up -- she hand seize -- she attention demand , and actually make violent love to she : avail himself of the precious opportunity , declare sentiment which must be already well know , hope -- fear -- adoring -- ready to die if she refuse he ; but flatter himself that he ardent attachment and unequalled love and unexampled passion could not fail of have some effect , and in short , very much resolve on be seriously accept as soon as possible . it really be so . without scruple -- without apology -- without much apparent diffidence , , the lover of , be professe himself _her lover . she try to stop he ; but vainly ; he would go on , and say it all . angry as she be , the thought of the moment make she resolve to restrain herself when she do speak . she feel that half this folly must be drunkenness , and therefore could hope that it might belong only to the passing hour . accordingly , with a mixture of the serious and the playful , which she hope would best suit he half and half state , she reply , " I be very much astonished , . this to _me _! you forget yourself -- you take I for my friend -- any message to I shall be happy to deliver ; but no more of this to _me_ , if you please . " " !--message to ! -- what could she possibly mean ! " -- and he repeat she word with such assurance of accent , such boastful pretence of amazement , that she could not help reply with quickness , " , this be the most extraordinary conduct ! and I can account for it only in one way ; you be not yourself , or you could not speak either to I , or of , in such a manner . Command yourself enough to say no more , and I will endeaavor to forget it . " but have only drink wine enough to elevate he spirits , not at all to confuse he intellect . he perfectly know he own meaning ; and have warmly protest against she suspicion as most injuriious , and slightly touch upon he respect for as she friend , -- but acknowledge he wonder that should be mention at all , -- he resume the subject of he own passion , and be very urgent for a favourable answer . as she think less of he inebriety , she think more of he inconstancy and presumption ; and with fewer struggle for politeness , reply , " it be impossible for I to doubt any longer . you have make yourself too clear . , my astonishment be much beyond any thing I can express . after such behaviour , as I have witness during the last month , to -- such attention as I have be in the daily habit of observe -- to be address I in this manner -- this be a unsteadiness of character , indeed , which I have not suppose possible ! believe I , sir , I be far , very far , from gratify in be the object of such profession . " " ! " cry , " what can be the meaning of this ?-- !-- I never think of in the whole course of my existence -- never pay she any attention , but as you friend : never care whether she be dead or alive , but as you friend . if she have fancie otherwise , she own wish have misl she , and I be very sorry -- extremely sorry -- but , , indeed !-- oh ! ! who can think of , when be near ! no , upon my honour , there be no unsteadiness of character . I have think only of you . I protest against have pay the smallest attention to any one else . every thing that I have say or do , for many week past , have be with the sole view of mark my adoration of yourself . you can not really , seriously , doubt it . no !--( in a accent mean to be insinuat ) -- I be sure you have see and understand I . " it would be impossible to say what feel , on hear this -- which of all she unpleasant sensation be uppermost . she be too completely overpower to be immediately able to reply : and two moment of silence be ample encouragement for 's sanguine state of mind , he try to take she hand again , as he joyously exclaim -- " charme ! allow I to interpret this interesting silence . it confess that you have long understand I . " " no , sir , " cry , " it confess no such thing . so far from have long understand you , I have be in a most complete error with respect to you view , till this moment . as to myself , I be very sorry that you should have be give way to any feeling -- nothing could be farther from my wish -- you attachment to my friend -- you pursuit of she , ( pursuit , it appear , ) give I great pleasure , and I have be very earnestly wish you success :
: but have I suppose that she be not you attraction to , I should certainly have think you judge ill in make you visit so frequent . be I to believe that you have never seek to recommend yourself particularly to ?-- that you have never think seriously of she ? " " never , madam , " cry he , affront in he turn : " never , I assure you . _I_ think seriously of be a very good sort of girl ; and I should be happy to see she respectably settle . I wish she extremely well : and , no doubt , there be man who might not object to -- every body have they level : but as for myself , I be not , I think , quite so much at a loss . I need not so totally despair of a equal alliance , as to be address myself to !-- no , madam , my visit to have be for yourself only ; and the encouragement I receive -- " " encouragement !-- I give you encouragement ! -- , you have be entirely mistaken in suppose it . I have see you only as the admirer of my friend . in no other light could you have be more to I than a common acquaintance . I be exceedingly sorry : but it be well that the mistake end where it do . have the same behaviour continue , might have be lead into a misconception of you view ; not be aware , probably , any more than myself , of the very great inequality which you be so sensible of . but , as it be , the disappointment be single , and , I trust , will not be last . I have no thought of matrimony at present . " he be too angry to say another word ; she manner too decide to invite supplication ; and in this state of swelling resentment , and mutually deep mortification , they have to continue together a few minute longer , for the fear of have confine they to a foot - pace . if there have not be so much anger , there would have be desperate awkwardness ; but they straightforward emotion leave no room for the little zigzag of embarrassment . without know when the carriage turn into , or when it stop , they find themselves , all at once , at the door of he house ; and he be out before another syllable pass .-- then feel it indispensable to wish he a good night . the compliment be just return , coldly and proudly ; and , under indescribable irritation of spirit , she be then convey to . there she be welcome , with the utmost delight , by she father , who have be trembl for the dangers of a solitary drive from -- turn a corner which he could never bear to think of -- and in strange hand -- a mere common coachman -- no ; and there it seem as if she return only be want to make every thing go well : for , asham of he ill - humour , be now all kindness and attention ; and so particularly solicitous for the comfort of she father , as to seem -- if not quite ready to join he in a basin of gruel -- perfectly sensible of its be exceedingly wholesome ; and the day be conclude in peace and comfort to all they little party , except herself . -- but she mind have never be in such perturbation ; and it need a very strong effort to appear attentive and cheerful till the usual hour of separa allow she the relief of quiet reflection . the hair be curl , and the maid send away , and sit down to think and be miserable .-- it be a wretched business indeed !-- such a overthrow of every thing she have be wish for !-- such a development of every thing most unwelcome !-- such a blow for !-- that be the worst of all . every part of it bring pain and humiliation , of some sort or other ; but , compare with the evil to , all be light ; and she would gladly have submit to feel yet more mistaken -- more in error -- more disgrac by mis-judgment , than she actually be , could the effect of she blunder have be confine to herself . " if I have not persuade Harriet into like the man , I could have borne any thing . he might have double he presumption to I -- but poor ! " how she could have be so deceiv ! -- he protest that he have never think seriously of -- never ! she look back as well as she could ; but it be all confusion . she have take up the idea , she suppose , and make every thing bend to it . he manners , however , must have be unmark , wave , dubious , or she could not have be so misled . the picture !-- how eager he have be about the picture !-- and the charade !-- and a hundred other circumstance ; -- how clearly they have seem to point at . to be sure , the charade , with its " ready wit " -- but then the " soft eye " -- in fact it suite neither ; it be a jumble without taste or truth . who could have see through such thick - head nonsense ? certainly she have often , especially of late , think he manners to herself unnecessarily gallant ; but it have pass as he way , as a mere error of judgment , of knowledge , of taste , as one proof
proof among other that he have not always live in the best society , that with all the gentleness of he address , true elegance be sometimes want ; but , till this very day , she have never , for a instant , suspect it to mean any thing but grateful respect to she as 's friend . to be she indebt for she first idea on the subject , for the first start of its possibility . there be no denying that those brother have penetration . she remembe what have once say to she about , the caution he have give , the conviction he have profess that would never marry indiscreetly ; and blush to think how much truer a knowledge of he character have be there shew than any she have reach herself . it be dreadfully mortify ; but be prove himself , in many respects , the very reverse of what she have mean and believe he ; proud , assume , conceit ; very full of he own claim , and little concerned about the feeling of other . contrary to the usual course of thing , 's want to pay he address to she have sink he in she opinion . he profession and he proposal do he no service . she think nothing of he attachment , and be insult by he hope . he want to marry well , and have the arrogance to raise he eye to she , pretend to be in love ; but she be perfectly easy as to he not suffer any disappointment that need be car for . there have be no real affection either in he language or manners . Sighs and fine word have be give in abundance ; but she could hardly devise any set of expression , or fancy any tone of voice , less allied with real love . she need not trouble herself to pity he . he only want to aggrandise and enrich himself ; and if of , the heiress of thirty thousand pound , be not quite so easily obtain as he have fancie , he would soon try for else with twenty , or with ten . but -- that he should talk of encouragement , should consider she as aware of he view , accept he attention , mean ( in short ) , to marry he !-- should suppose himself she equal in connexion or mind !-- look down upon she friend , so well understand the gradation of rank below he , and be so blind to what rise above , as to fancy himself shew no presumption in address she !-- it be most provoke . perhaps it be not fair to expect he to feel how very much he be she inferior in talent , and all the elegancy of mind . the very want of such equality might prevent he perception of it ; but he must know that in fortune and consequence she be greatly he superior . he must know that the have be settle for several generation at , the younger branch of a very ancient family -- and that the be nobody . the landed property of certainly be inconsiderable , be but a sort of notch in the estate , to which all the rest of belonge ; but they fortune , from other source , be such as to make they scarcely secondary to itself , in every other kind of consequence ; and the Woodhouse have long hold a high place in the consideration of the neighbourhood which have first enter not two year ago , to make he way as he could , without any alliances but in trade , or any thing to recommend he to notice but he situation and he civility .-- but he have fancie she in love with he ; that evidently must have be he dependence ; and after rave a little about the see incongruity of gentle manners and a conceit head , be oblige in common honesty to stop and admit that she own behaviour to he have be so complaisant and obliging , so full of courtesy and attention , as ( suppose she real motive unperceive ) might warrant a man of ordinary observation and delicacy , like , in fancie himself a very decided favourite . if _she have so misinterpret he feeling , she have little right to wonder that _o , with self - interest to blind he , should have mistaken hers . the first error and the worst lay at she door . it be foolish , it be wrong , to take so active a part in bring any two people together . it be adventure too far , assume too much , make light of what ought to be serious , a trick of what ought to be simple . she be quite concerned and asham , and resolve to do such thing no more . " here have I , " say she , " actually talk poor Harriet into be very much attach to this man . she might never have think of he but for I ; and certainly never would have think of he with hope , if I have not assure she of he attachment , for she be as modest and humble as I use to think he . oh ! that I have be satisfied with persuade she not to accept young . there I be quite right . that be well do of I ; but there I should have stop , and leave the rest to time and chance . I be introduce she into good company , and give she the opportunity of pleasing some one worth have ; I ought not to have attempt more . but now , poor girl , she peace be cut up for some time . I
I have be but half a friend to she ; and if she be _not to feel this disappointment so very much , I be sure I have not a idea of any body else who would be at all desirable for she ;-- -- oh ! no , I could not endure -- a pert young lawyer . " she stopt to blush and laugh at she own relapse , and then resume a more serious , more dispiriting cogitation upon what have be , and might be , and must be . the distressing explanation she have to make to , and all that poor Harriet would be suffer , with the awkwardness of future meeting , the difficulty of continue or discontinue the acquaintance , of subdue feeling , conceal resentment , and avoid eclat , be enough to occupy she in most unmirthful reflection some time longer , and she go to be at last with nothing settle but the conviction of she have blunder most dreadfully . to youth and natural cheerfulness like 's , though under temporary gloom at night , the return of day will hardly fail to bring return of spirit . the youth and cheerfulness of morning be in happy analogy , and of powerful operation ; and if the distress be not poignant enough to keep the eye unclosed , they will be sure to open to sensation of softened pain and brighter hope . get up on the morrow more dispose for comfort than she have go to bed , more ready to see alleviation of the evil before she , and to depend on get tolerably out of it . it be a great consolation that should not be really in love with she , or so particularly amiable as to make it shock to disappoint he -- that 's nature should not be of that superior sort in which the feeling be most acute and retentive -- and that there could be no necessity for any body 's know what have pass except the three principal , and especially for she father 's be give a moment 's uneasiness about it . these be very cheering thought ; and the sight of a great deal of snow on the ground do she further service , for any thing be welcome that might justify they all three be quite asunder at present . the weather be most favourable for she ; though , she could not go to church . would have be miserable have he daughter attempt it , and she be therefore safe from either excit or receive unpleasant and most unsuitable idea . the ground cover with snow , and the atmosphere in that unsettled state between frost and thaw , which be of all other the most unfriendly for exercise , every morning begin in rain or snow , and every evening set in to freeze , she be for many day a most honourable prisoner . no intercourse with possible but by note ; no church for she on any more than on ; and no need to find excuse for 's absent himself . it be weather which might fairly confine every body at home ; and though she hope and believe he to be really take comfort in some society or other , it be very pleasant to have she father so well satisfied with he be all alone in he own house , too wise to stir out ; and to hear he say to , whom no weather could keep entirely from they ,-- " ah ! , why do not you stay at home like poor ? " these day of confinement would have be , but for she private perplexity , remarkably comfortable , as such seclusion exactly suit she brother , whose feeling must always be of great importance to he companion ; and he have , besides , so thoroughly clear off he ill - humour at Randalls , that he amiableness never fail he during the rest of he stay at . he be always agreeable and oblige , and speak pleasantly of every body . but with all the hope of cheerfulness , and all the present comfort of delay , there be still such a evil hang over she in the hour of explanation with , as make it impossible for to be ever perfectly at ease . and be not detain long at . the weather soon improve enough for those to move who must move ; and Woodhouse have , as usual , try to persuade he daughter to stay behind with all she child , be obliged to see the whole party set off , and return to he lamentation over the destiny of poor ;-- which poor Isabella , pass she life with those she doate on , full of they merit , blind to they fault , and always innocently busy , might have be a model of right feminine happiness . the evening of the very day on which they go bring a note from to , a long , civil , ceremonious note , to say , with 's best compliment , " that he be propose to leave the follow morning in he way to ; where , in compliance with the pressing entreaty of some friend , he have engage to spend a few week , and very much regret the impossibility he be under , from various circumstance of weather and business , of take a personal leave of , of whose friendly civility he should ever retain a grateful sense -- and have Woodhause any command , should be happy to attend to they . " be most agreeably surprized .-- 's absence just at this time be the very thing to be desire . she admire he for contrive it , though not able to give he much credit for the
the manner in which it be announce . Resentment could not have be more plainly speak than in a civility to she father , from which she be so pointedly exclude . she have not even a share in he opening compliment . -- she name be not mention ; -- and there be so strike a change in all this , and such a ill - judge solemnity of leave - take in he graceful acknowledgment , as she think , at first , could not escape she father 's suspicion . it do , however . -- she father be quite take up with the surprize of so sudden a journey , and he fear that might never get safely to the end of it , and see nothing extraordinary in he language . it be a very useful note , for it suppli they with fresh matter for thought and conversation during the rest of they lonely evening . talk over he alarm , and be in spirit to persuade they away with all she usual promptitude . she now resolve to keep no longer in the dark . she have reason to believe she nearly recover from she cold , and it be desirable that she should have as much time as possible for get the better of she other complaint before the gentleman 's return . she go to 's accordingly the very next day , to undergo the necessary penance of communication ; and a severe one it be .-- she have to destroy all the hope which she have be so industriously feed -- to appear in the ungracious character of the one prefer -- and acknowledge herself grossly mistake and mis-judge in all she idea on one subject , all she observation , all she conviction , all she prophecy for the last six week . the confession completely renew she first shame -- and the sight of 's tear make she think that she should never be in charity with herself again . bear the intelligence very well -- blame nobody -- and in every thing testify such a ingenuousness of disposition and lowly opinion of herself , as must appear with particular advantage at that moment to she friend . be in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost ; and all that be amiable , all that ought to be attach , see on 's side , not she own . do not consider herself as have any thing to complain off . the affection of such a man as would have be too great a distinction .-- she never could have deserve he -- and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as would have think it possible . she tear fall abundantly -- but she grief be so truly artless , that no dignity could have make it more respectable in 's eye -- and she listen to she and try to conseal she with all she heart and understanding -- really for the time convince that be the superior creature of the two -- and that to resemble she would be more for she own welfare and happiness than all that genius or intelligence could do . it be rather too late in the day to set about be simple - minded and ignorant ; but she leave she with every previous resolution confirm of be humble and discreet , and repress imagination all the rest of she life . she second duty now , inferior only to she father 's claim , be to promote 's comfort , and endeavou to prove she own affection in some better method than by match - making . she get she to , and shew she the most unvarying kindness , strive to occupy and amuse she , and by book and conversation , to drive from she thought . time , she know , must be allow for this be thoroughly do ; and she could suppose herself but a indifferent judge of such matter in general , and very inadequate to sympathise in a attachment to in particular ; but it seem to she reasonable that at 's age , and with the entire extinction of all hope , such a progress might be make towards a state of composure by the time of 's return , as to allow they all to meet again in the common routine of acquaintance , without any danger of betraying sentiment or increase they . do think he all perfection , and maintain the non-existence of any body equal to he in person or goodness -- and do , in truth , prove herself more resolutely in love than have foreseen ; but yet it appear to she so natural , so inevitable to strive against a inclination of that sort _unrequit , that she could not comprehend its continue very long in equal force . if , on he return , make he own indifference as evident and indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do , she could not imagine 's persisting to place she happiness in the sight or the recollection of he . they be fix , so absolutely fix , in the same place , be bad for each , for all three . not one of they have the power of removal , or of effecting any material change of society . they must encounter each other , and make the best of it . be farther unfortunate in the tone of she companion at 's ; be the adoration of all the teacher and great girl in the school ; and it must be at only that she could have any chance of hear he speak of with cooling moderation or repellent truth . where the wound have be give , there must the cure be find if anywhere ; and feel that , till she see
see she in the way of cure , there could be no true peace for herself . do not come . when the time propose drew near , 's fear be justifi in the arrival of a letter of excuse . for the present , he could not be spare , to he " very great mortification and regret ; but still he look forward with the hope of come to Randall at no distant period . " be exceedingly disappointed -- much more disappointed , in fact , than she husband , though she dependence on see the young man have be so much more sober : but a sanguine temper , though for ever expect more good than occur , do not always pay for it be hope by any proportionate depression . it soon flie over the present failure , and begin to hope again . for half a hour be surprized and sorry ; but then he begin to perceive that 's come two or three month later would be a much better plan ; better time of year ; better weather ; and that he would be able , without any doubt , to stay considerably longer with they than if he have come sooner . these feeling rapidly restore he comfort , while , of a more apprehensive disposition , foresee nothing but a repetition of excuse and delay ; and after all she concern for what she husband be to suffer , suffer a great deal more herself . be not at this time in a state of spirit to care really about be not come , except as a disappointment at Randalls . the acquaintance at present have no charm for she . she want , rather , to be quiet , and out of temptation ; but still , as it be desirable that she should appear , in general , like she usual self , she take care to express as much interest in the circumstance , and enter as warmly into and 's disappointment , as might naturally belong to they friendship . she be the first to announce it to ; and exclaim quite as much as be necessary , ( or , be act a part , perhaps rather more , ) at the conduct of the Churchill , in keep he away . she then proceed to say a good deal more than she feel , of the advantage of such a addition to they confined society in ; the pleasure of look at somebody new ; the gala - day to , which the sight of he would have make ; and end with reflection on the again , find herself directly involve in a disagreement with ; and , to she great amusement , perceive that she be take the other side of the question from she real opinion , and make use of 's argument against herself . " the be very likely in fault , " say , coolly ; " but I dare say he might come if he would . " " I do not know why you should say so . he wish exceedingly to come ; but he uncle and aunt will not spare he . " " I can not believe that he have not the power of come , if he make a point of it . it be too unlikely , for I to believe it without proof . " " how odd you be ! what have do , to make you suppose he such a unnatural creature ? " " I be not suppose he at all a unnatural creature , in suspect that he may have learn to be above he connexion , and to care very little for any thing but he own pleasure , from live with those who have always set he the example of it . it be a great deal more natural than one could wish , that a young man , bring up by those who be proud , luxurious , and selfish , should be proud , luxurious , and selfish too . if have want to see he father , he would have contrive it between and . a man at he age -- what be he ?-- three or four - and - twenty -- can not be without the means of do as much as that . it be impossible . " " that be easily say , and easily feel by you , who have always be you own master . you be the worst judge in the world , , of the difficulty of dependence . you do not know what it be to have tempers to manage . " " it be not to be conceive that a man of three or four - and - twenty should not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount . he can not want money -- he can not want leisure . we know , on the contrary , that he have so much of both , that he be glad to get rid of they at the idlest haunt in the kingdom . we hear of he for ever at some watering - place or other . a little while ago , he be at . this prove that he can leave the Churchill . " " yes , sometimes he can . " " and those time be whenever he think it worth he while ; whenever there be any temptation of pleasure . " " it be very unfair to judge of any body 's conduct , without a intimate knowledge of they situation . nobody , who have not be in the interior of a family , can say what the difficulty of any individual of that family may be . we ought to be acquaint with , and with 's temper , before we pretend to
to decide upon what she nephew can do . he may , at time , be able to do a great deal more than he can at other . " " there be one thing , , which a man can always do , if he chuse , and that be , he duty ; not by manoeuvring and finesse , but by vigour and resolution . it be 's duty to pay this attention to he father . he know it to be so , by he promise and message ; but if he wish to do it , it might be done . a man who feel rightly would say at once , simply and resolutely , to -- ' every sacrifice of mere pleasure you will always find I ready to make to you convenience ; but I must go and see my father immediately . I know he would be hurt by my failing in such a mark of respect to he on the present occasion . I shall , therefore , set off to - morrow .'-- if he would say so to she at once , in the tone of decision become a man , there would be no opposition make to he go . " " no , " say , laugh ; " but perhaps there might be some make to he come back again . such language for a young man entirely dependent , to use !-- nobody but you , , would imagine it possible . but you have not a idea of what be requisite in situation directly opposite to you own . to be make such a speech as that to the uncle and aunt , who have bring he up , and be to provide for he !-- stand up in the middle of the room , I suppose , and speak as loud as he could !-- how can you imagine such conduct practicable ? " " Depend upon it , , a sensible man would find no difficulty in it . he would feel himself in the right ; and the declaration -- make , of course , as a man of sense would make it , in a proper manner --would do he more good , raise he higher , fix he interest stronger with the people he depend on , than all that a line of shift and expedient can ever do . respect would be add to affection . they would feel that they could trust he ; that the nephew who have do rightly by he father , would do rightly by they ; for they know , as well as he do , as well as all the world must know , that he ought to pay this visit to he father ; and while meanly exert they power to delay it , be in they heart not think the better of he for submit to they whim . respect for right conduct be feel by every body . if he would act in this sort of manner , on principle , consistently , regularly , they little mind would bend to he . " " I rather doubt that . you be very fond of bend little mind ; but where little mind belong to rich people in authority , I think they have a knack of swell out , till they be quite as unmanageable as great one . I can imagine , that if you , as you be , , be to be transport and place all at once in 's situation , you would be able to say and do just what you have be recommend for he ; and it might have a very good effect . the Churchill might not have a word to say in return ; but then , you would have no habits of early obedience and long observance to break through . to he who have , it might not be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect independence , and set all they claim on he gratitude and regard at nuy . he may have as strong a sense of what would be right , as you can have , without be so equal , under particular circumstance , to act up to it . " " then it would not be so strong a sense . if it fail to produce equal exertion , it could not be a equal conviction . " " oh , the difference of situation and habit ! I wish you would try to understand what a amiable young man may be likely to feel in directly oppose those , whom as child and boy he have be look up to all he life . " " we amiable young man be a very weak young man , if this be the first occasion of he carry through a resolution to do right against the will of other . it ought to have be a habit with he by this time , of follow he duty , instead of consulting expediency . I can allow for the fear of the child , but not of the man . as he become rational , he ought to have rouse himself and shake off all that be unworthy in they authority . he ought to have oppose the first attempt on they side to make he slight he father . have he begin as he ink , there would have be no difficulty now . " " we shall never agree about he , " cry ; " but that be nothing extraordinary . I have not the least idea of he be a weak young man : I feel sure that he be not . would not be blind to folly , though in he own son ; but he be very likely to have a more yielding , complying , mild
mild disposition than would suit you notion of man 's perfection . I dare say he have ; and though it may cut he off from some advantages , it will secure he many other . " " yes ; all the advantages of sit still when he ought to move , and of lead a life of mere idle pleasure , and fancie himself extremely expert in find excuse for it . he can sit down and write a fine flourishing letter , full of profession and falsehood , and persuade himself that he have hit upon the very best method in the world of preserve peace at home and prevent he father 's have any right to complain . he letter disgust I . " " you feeling be singular . they seem to satisfy every body else . " " I suspect they do not satisfy . they hardly can satisfy a woman of she good sense and quick feeling : stand in a mother 's place , but without a mother 's affection to blind she . it be on she account that attention to be doubly due , and she must doubly feel the omission . have she be a person of consequence herself , he would have come I dare say ; and it would not have signify whether he do or no . can you think you friend behindhand in these sort of considerations ? do you suppose she do not often say all this to herself ? no , , you amiable young man can be amiable only in french , not in . he may be very ' aimable , ' have very good manners , and be very agreeable ; but he can have no English delicacy towards the feeling of other people : nothing really amiable about he . " " you seem determined to think ill of he . " " I !-- not at all , " reply , rather displease ; " I do not want to think ill of he . I should be as ready to acknowledge he merit as any other man ; but I hear of none , except what be merely personal ; that he be well - grown and good - look , with smooth , plausible manners . " " well , if he have nothing else to recommend he , he will be a treasure at . we do not often look upon fine young man , well - breed and agreeable . we must not be nice and ask for all the virtue into the bargain . can not you imagine , , what a _sensation_ he come will produce ? there will be but one subject throughout the parish of and ; but one interest -- one object of curiosity ; it will be all ; we shall think and speak of nobody else . " " you will excuse my be so much over-powered . if I find he conversable , I shall be glad of he acquaintance ; but if he be only a chattering coxcomb , he will not occupy much of my time or thought . " " my idea of he be , that he can adapt he conversation to the taste of every body , and have the power as well as the wish of be universally agreeable . to you , he will talk of farming ; to I , of drawing or music ; and so on to every body , have that general information on all subject which will enable he to follow the lead , or take the lead , just as propriety may require , and to speak extremely well on each ; that be my idea of he . " " and mine , " say warmly , " be , that if he turn out any thing like it , he will be the most insufferable fellow breathing ! what ! at three - and - twenty to be the king of he company -- the great man -- the practise politician , who be to read every body 's character , and make every body 's talents conduce to the display of he own superiority ; to be dispense he flattery around , that he may make all appear like fools compare with himself ! my dear , you own good sense could not endure such a puppy when it come to the point . " " I will say no more about he , " cry , " you turn every thing to evil . we be both prejudice ; you against , I for he ; and we have no chance of agree till he be really here . " " Prejudice ! I be not prejudice . " " but I be very much , and without be at all asham of it . my love for and give I a decide prejudice in he favour . " " he be a person I never think of from one month 's end to another , " say , with a degree of vexation , which make immediately talk of something else , though she could not comprehend why he should be angry . to take a dislike to a young man , only because he appear to be of a different disposition from himself , be unworthy the real liberality of mind which she be always use to acknowledge in he ; for with all the high opinion of himself , which she have often laid to he charge , she have never before for a moment suppose it could make he unjust to the merit of another . I and have be walk together one morning , and , in 's opinion , have be talk enough of for that day . she could not think that 's solace or she own sins require more ; and she be
be therefore industriously get rid of the subject as they return ; -- but it burst out again when she think she have succeed , and after speak some time of what the poor must suffer in winter , and receive no other answer than a very plaintive -- " be so good to the poor ! " she find something else must be do . they be just approach the house where liv and . she determine to call upon they and seek safety in number . there be always sufficient reason for such a attention ; and love to be call on , and she know she be consider by the very few who presume ever to see imperfection in she , as rather negligent in that respect , and as not contribute what she ink to the stock of they scanty comforts . she have have many a hint from and some from she own heart , as to she deficiency -- but none be equal to counteract the persuasion of its be very disagreeable , -- a waste of time -- tiresome woman -- and all the horror of be in danger of falling in with the second - rate and third - rate of , who be call on they for ever , and therefore she seldom go near they . but now she make the sudden resolution of not pass they door without go in --observing , as she propose it to , that , as well as she could calculate , they be just now quite safe from any letter from . the house belong to people in business . and occupy the drawing - room floor ; and there , in the very moderate - size apartment , which be every thing to they , the visitor be most cordially and even gratefully welcome ; the quiet neat old lady , who with she knitting be seat in the warmest corner , want even to give up she place to , and she more active , talk daughter , almost ready to overpower they with care and kindness , thanks for they visit , solicitude for they shoe , anxious inquirie after 's health , cheerful communication about she mother 's , and sweet - cake from the beaufet -- " . Cole have just be there , just call in for ten minute , and have be so good as to sit a hour with they , and _she have take a piece of cake and be so kind as to say she like it very much ; and , therefore , she hope and would do they the favour to eat a piece too . " the mention of the be sure to be follow by that of . there be intimacy between they , and have hear from since he go away . know what be come ; they must have the letter over again , and settle how long he have be go , and how much he be engage in company , and what a favourite he be wherever he go , and how full the master of the 's ball have be ; and she go through it very well , with all the interest and all the commendation that could be requisite , and always put forward to prevent 's be obliged to say a word . this she have be prepare for when she enter the house ; but mean , have once talk he handsomely over , to be no farther incommod by any troublesome topic , and to wander at large amongst all the Mistress and Misse of , and they card - party . she have not be prepare to have succeed ; but he be actually hurrie off by , she jump away from he at last abruptly to the , to usher in a letter from she niece . " oh ! yes -- , I understand -- certainly as to dance -- . be tell I that dancing at the room at be -- . be so kind as to sit some time with we , talk of ; for as soon as she come in , she begin inquire after she , be so very great a favourite there . whenever she be with we , Mrs . do not know how to show she kindness enough ; and I must say that deserve it as much as any body can . and so she begin inquire after she directly , say , 'I know you can not have hear from lately , because it be not she time for writing ; ' and when I immediately say , ' but indeed we have , we have a letter this very morning ,' I do not know that I ever see any body more surprized . ' have you , upon you honour ? ' say she ; ' well , that be quite unexpected . do let I hear what she say . ' " 's politeness be at hand directly , to say , with smile interest -- " have you hear from so lately ? I be extremely happy . I hope she be well ? " " thank you . you be so kind ! " reply the happily deceive aunt , while eagerly hunt for the letter .-- " oh ! here it be . I be sure it could not be far off ; but I have put my huswife upon it , you see , without be aware , and so it be quite hid , but I have it in my hand so very lately that I be almost sure it must be on the table . I be read it to . , and since she go away , I be read it again to my mother , for it be such a pleasure to she -- a letter
letter from -- that she can never hear it often enough ; so I know it could not be far off , and here it be , only just under my huswife -- and since you be so kind as to wish to hear what she say ; -- but , first of all , I really must , in justice to , apologise for she write so short a letter -- only two page you see -- hardly two -- and in general she fill the whole paper and cross half . my mother often wonder that I can make it out so well . she often say , when the letter be first opened , ' well , Hetty , now I think you will be put to it to make out all that checker - work ' -- do not you , ma'am ? -- and then I tell she , I be sure she would contrive to make it out herself , if she have nobody to do it for she -- every word of it -- I be sure she would pore over it till she have make out every word . and , indeed , though my mother 's eyes be not so good as they be , she can see amazingly well still , thank ! with the help of spectacle . it be such a blessing ! my mother 's be really very good indeed . often say , when she be here , 'I be sure , grandmama , you must have have very strong eye to see as you do -- and so much fine work as you have do too !-- I only wish my eye may last I as well . ' " all this speak extremely fast oblige to stop for breath ; and say something very civil about the excellence of 's handwriting . " you be extremely kind , " reply , highly gratify ; " you who be such a judge , and write so beautifully yourself . I be sure there be nobody be praise that could give we so much pleasure as 's . my mother do not hear ; she be a little deaf you know . , " address she , " do you hear what be so obliging to say about 's handwriting ? " and have the advantage of hear she own silly compliment repeat twice over before the good old lady could comprehend it . she be ponder , in the meanwhile , upon the possibility , without see very rude , of make she escape from 's letter , and have almost resolve on hurrie away directly under some slight excuse , when turn to she again and seize she attention . " my mother 's deafness be very trifling you see -- just nothing at all . by only raise my voice , and say any thing two or three time over , she be sure to hear ; but then she be use to my voice . but it be very remarkable that she should always hear better than she do I . speak so distinct ! however , she will not find she grandmama at all deafer than she be two year ago ; which be say a great deal at my mother 's time of life -- and it really be full two year , you know , since she be here . we never be so long without see she before , and as I be tell . , we shall hardly know how to make enough of she now . " " be you expect here soon ? " " oh yes ; next week . " " indeed !-- that must be a very great pleasure . " " thank you . you be very kind . yes , next week . every body be so surprized ; and every body say the same obliging thing . I be sure she will be as happy to see she friend at , as they can be to see she . yes , or ; she can not say which , because will be want the carriage himself one of those day . so very good of they to send she the whole way ! but they always do , you know . oh yes , or next . that be what she write about . that be the reason of she write out of rule , as we call it ; for , in the common course , we should not have hear from she before next or . " " yes , so I imagine . I be afraid there could be little chance of my hear any thing of to - day . " " so oblige off you ! no , we should not have hear , if it have not be for this particular circumstance , of she be to come here so soon . my mother be so delighted ! -- for she be to be three month with we at least . three month , she say so , positively , as I be go to have the pleasure of reading to you . the case be , you see , that the Campbell be go to . have persuade she father and mother to come over and see she directly . they have not intend to go over till the summer , but she be so impatient to see they again -- for till she marry , last , she be never away from they so much as a week , which must make it very strange to be in different kingdom , I be go to say , but however different country , and so she write a very urgent letter to she mother -- or she father , I declare I do not know which it be , but we shall see
see presently in 's letter -- write in 's name as well as she own , to press they come over directly , and they would give they the meeting in , and take they back to they country seat , Bally - craig , a beautiful place , I fancy . have hear a great deal of its beauty ; from , I mean -- I do not know that she ever hear about it from any body else ; but it be very natural , you know , that he should like to speak of he own place while he be pay he address -- and as use to be very often walk out with they -- for and be very particular about they daughter be not walk out often with only , for which I do not at all blame they ; of course she hear every thing he might be tell about he own home in ; and I think she write we word that he have shew they some drawing of the place , view that he have take himself . he be a most amiable , charme young man , I believe . be quite long to go to , from he account of thing . " at this moment , a ingenious and anima suspicion enter 's brain with regard to , this charme , and the not go to , she say , with the insidious design of farther discovery , " you must feel it very fortunate that should be allow to come to you at such a time . consider the very particular friendship between she and , you could hardly have expect she to be excuse from accompany and . " " very true , very true , indeed . the very thing that we have always be rather afraid of ; for we should not have like to have she at such a distance from we , for month together -- not able to come if any thing be to happen . but you see , every thing turn out for the best . they want she ( and ) excessively to come over with and ; quite depend upon it ; nothing can be more kind or press than they _joint_ invitation , say , as you will hear presently ; do not seem in the least backward in any attention . he be a most charming young man . ever since the service he render at , when they be out in that party on the water , and she , by the sudden whirling round of something or other among the sail , would have be dash into the sea at once , and actually be all but gone , if he have not , with the greatest presence of mind , catch hold of she habit -- ( I can never think of it without trembling ! ) -- but ever since we have the history of that day , I have be so fond of ! " " but , in spite of all she friend ' urgency , and she own wish of see , prefer devote the time to you and ? " " yes -- entirely she own do , entirely she own choice ; and and . Campbell think she do quite right , just what they should recommend ; and indeed they particularly _wish_ she to try she native air , as she have not be quite so well as usual lately . " " I be concerned to hear of it . I think they judge wisely . but must be very much disappointed . , I understand , have no remarkable degree of personal beauty ; be not , by any means , to be compare with . " " oh ! no . you be very obliging to say such thing -- but certainly not . there be no comparison between they . always be absolutely plain -- but extremely elegant and amiable . " " yes , that of course . " " catch a bad cold , poor thing ! so long ago as the 7th of , ( as I be go to read to you , ) and have never be well since . a long time , be not it , for a cold to hang upon she ? she never mention it before , because she would not alarm we . just like she ! so considerate ! --but however , she be so far from well , that she kind friend the Campbell think she have better come home , and try a air that always agree with she ; and they have no doubt that three or four month at Highbury will entirely cure she -- and it be certainly a great deal better that she should come here , than go to , if she be unwell . nobody could nurse she , as we should do . " " it appear to I the most desirable arrangement in the world . " " and so she be to come to we next or , and the Campbell leave town in they way to Holyhead the follow -- as you will find from 's letter . so sudden !-- you may guess , dear , what a flurry it have throw I in ! if it be not for the drawback of she illness -- but I be afraid we must expect to see she grow thing , and look very poorly . I must tell you what a unlucky thing happen to I , as to that . I always make a point of read 's letter through to myself first , before I read they aloud to my mother , you know , for fear of there be any thing in they to distress she . desire I to do it , so I always
always do : and so I begin to - day with my usual caution ; but no sooner do I come to the mention of she be unwell , than I burst out , quite frightened , with ' I ! poor be ill ! '-- which my mother , be on the watch , hear distinctly , and be sadly alarme at . however , when I read on , I find it be not near so bad as I have fancie at first ; and I make so light of it now to she , that she do not think much about it . but I can not imagine how I could be so off my guard . if do not get well soon , we will call in . the expense shall not be think of ; and though he be so liberal , and so fond of that I dare say he would not mean to charge any thing for attendance , we could not suffer it to be so , you know . he have a wife and family to maintain , and be not to be give away he time . well , now I have just give you a hint of what write about , we will turn to she letter , and I be sure she tell she own story a great deal better than I can tell it for she . " " I be afraid we must be run away , " say , glance at , and begin to rise -- " my father will be expect we . I have no intention , I think I have no power of stay more than five minute , when I first enter the house . I merely call , because I would not pass the door without inquire after ; but I have be so pleasantly detain ! now , however , we must wish you and good morning . " and not all that could be urge to detain she succeed . she regain the street -- happy in this , that though much have be force on she against she will , though she have in fact hear the whole substance of 's letter , she have be able to escape the letter itself . chapter ii be a orphan , the only child of 's youngest daughter . the marriage of . Fairfax of the _______ regiment of infantry , and , have have its day of fame and pleasure , hope and interest ; but nothing now remain of it , save the melancholy remembrance of he die in action abroad -- of he widow sinke under consumption and grief soon afterwards -- and this girl . by birth she belong to : and when at three year old , on lose she mother , she become the property , the charge , the consolation , the fondling of she grandmother and aunt , there have see every probability of she be permanently fix there ; of she be teach only what very limited means could command , and grow up with no advantages of connexion or improvement , to be engraft on what nature have give she in a pleasing person , good understanding , and warm - hear , well - mean relation . but the compassionate feeling of a friend of she father give a change to she destiny . this be , who have very highly regard Fairfax , as a excellent officer and most deserve young man ; and farther , have be indebt to he for such attention , during a severe camp - fever , as he believe have save he life . these be claim which he do not learn to overlook , though some year pass away from the death of poor Fairfax , before he own return to put any thing in he power . when he do return , he seek out the child and take notice of she . he be a married man , with only one living child , a girl , about 's age : and become they guest , pay they long visit and grow a favourite with all ; and before she be nine year old , he daughter 's great fondness for she , and he own wish of be a real friend , to produce a offer from of undertake the whole charge of she education . it be accept ; and from that period have belong to 's family , and have live with they entirely , only visit she grandmother from time to time . the plan be that she should be bring up for educating other ; the very few hundred pound which she inherit from she father make independence impossible . to provide for she otherwise be out of 's power ; for through he income , by pay and appointment , be handsome , he fortune be moderate and must be all he daughter 's ; but , by give she a education , he hope to be supply the means of respectable subsistence hereafter . be 's history . she have fall into good hand , kny nothing but kindness from the Campbell , and be give a excellent education . live constantly with right - minded and well - inform people , she heart and understanding have receive every advantage of discipline and culture ; and 's residence be in , every lighter talent have be do full justice to , by the attendance of first - rate master . she disposition and abilitie be equally worthy of all that friendship could do ; and at eighteen or nineteen she be , as far as such a early age can be qualified for the care of child , fully competent to the office of instruction herself ; but she be too much belove to be part with . neither father nor
nor mother could promote , and the daughter could not endure it . the evil day be put off . it be easy to decide that she be still too young ; and remain with they , share , as another daughter , in all the rational pleasure of a elegant society , and a judicious mixture of home and amusement , with only the drawback of the future , the sober suggestion of she own good understanding to remind she that all this might soon be over . the affection of the whole family , the warm attachment of in particular , be the more honourable to each party from the circumstance of 's decided superiority both in beauty and acquirement . that nature have give it in feature could not be unseen by the young woman , nor could she higher power of mind be unfelt by the parent . they continue together with unabated regard however , till the marriage of , who by that chance , that like which so often defy anticipation in matrimonial affair , give attraction to what be moderate rather than to what be superior , engage the affections of , a young man , rich and agreeable , almost as soon as they be acquaint ; and be eligibly and happily settled , while have yet she bread to earn . this event have very lately take place ; too lately for any thing to be yet attempt by she less fortunate friend towards enter on she path of duty ; though she have now reach the age which she own judgment have fix on for beginning . she have long resolve that one - and - twenty should be the period . with the fortitude of a devoted novitiate , she have resolve at one - and - twenty to complete the sacrifice , and retire from all the pleasure of life , of rational intercourse , equal society , peace and hope , to penance and mortification for ever . the good sense of and Campbell could not oppose such a resolution , though they feeling do . as long as they live , no exertion would be necessary , they home might be hers for ever ; and for they own comfort they would have retain she wholly ; but this would be selfishness :-- what must be at last , have better be soon . perhaps they begin to feel it might have be kinder and wiser to have resist the temptation of any delay , and spare she from a taste of such enjoyment of ease and leisure as must now be relinquish . still , however , affection be glad to catch at any reasonable excuse for not hurrie on the wretched moment . she have never be quite well since the time of they daughter 's marriage ; and till she should have completely recover she usual strength , they must forbid she engage in duty , which , so far from be compatible with a weakened frame and varie spirit , see , under the most favourable circumstance , to require something more than human perfection of body and mind to be dischar with tolerable comfort . with regard to she not accompany they to , she account to she aunt contain nothing but truth , though there might be some truth not tell . it be she own choice to give the time of they absence to ; to spend , perhaps , she last month of perfect liberty with those kind relation to whom she be so very dear : and the Campbell , whatever might be they motive or motive , whether single , or double , or treble , give the arrangement they ready sanction , and say , that they depend more on a few month spend in she native air , for the recovery of she health , than on any thing else . certain it be that she be to come ; and that Highbury , instead of welcome that perfect novelty which have be so long promise it -- -- must put up for the present with , who could bring only the freshness of a two year ' absence . be sorry ; -- to have to pay civility to a person she do not like through three long month ! -- to be always do more than she wish , and less than she ought ! why she do not like might be a difficult question to answer ; have once tell she it be because she see in she the really accomplished young woman , which she want to be think herself ; and though the accusation have be eagerly refute at the time , there be moment of self - examination in which she conscience could not quite acquit she . but " she could never get acquainted with she : she do not know how it be , but there be such coldness and reserve -- such apparent indifference whether she please or not -- and then , she aunt be such a eternal talker !-- and she be make such a fuss with by every body !-- and it have be always imagine that they be to be so intimate -- because they ag be the same , every body have suppose they must be so fond of each other . " these be she reason -- she have no better . it be a dislike so little just -- every imputed fault be so magnify by fancy , that she never see the first time after any considerable absence , without feel that she have injure she ; and now , when the due visit be pay , on she arrival , after a two year ' interval , she be particularly strike with the very appearance and manners , which for those two whole year she have be
be depreciat . be very elegant , remarkably elegant ; and she have herself the highest value for elegance . she height be pretty , just such as almost every body would think tall , and nobody could think very tall ; she figure particularly graceful ; she size a most become medium , between fat and thing , though a slight appearance of ill - health seem to point out the likeliest evil of the two . could not but feel all this ; and then , she face -- she feature -- there be more beauty in they altogether than she have remember ; it be not regular , but it be very pleasing beauty . she eye , a deep grey , with dark eye - lash and eyebrow , have never be deny they praise ; but the skin , which she have be use to cavil at , as want colour , have a clearness and delicacy which really need no fuller bloom . it be a style of beauty , of which elegance be the reign character , and as such , she must , in honour , by all she principle , admire it :-- elegance , which , whether of person or of mind , she see so little in . there , not to be vulgar , be distinction , and merit . in short , she sit , during the first visit , look at with twofold complacency ; the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering justice , and be determine that she would dislike she no longer . when she take in she history , indeed , she situation , as well as she beauty ; when she consider what all this elegance be destin to , what she be go to sink from , how she be go to live , it seem impossible to feel any thing but compassion and respect ; especially , if to every well - know particular entitle she to interest , be add the highly probable circumstance of a attachment to , which she have so naturally start to herself . in that case , nothing could be more pitiable or more honourable than the sacrifice she have resolve on . be very willing now to acquit she of have seduce 's action from he wife , or of any thing mischievous which she imagination have suggest at first . if it be love , it might be simple , single , successless love on she side alone . she might have be unconsciously suck in the sad poison , while a sharer of he conversation with she friend ; and from the best , the purest of motive , might now be deny herself this visit to , and resolve to divide herself effectually from he and he connexion by soon begin she career of laborious duty . upon the whole , leave she with such softened , charitable feeling , as make she look around in walk home , and lament that afford no young man worthy of give she independence ; nobody that she could wish to scheme about for she . these be charme feeling -- but not last . before she have commit herself by any public profession of eternal friendship for , or do more towards a recantation of past prejudice and error , than say to , " she certainly be handsome ; she be better than handsome ! " have spend a evening at with she grandmother and aunt , and every thing be relapse much into its usual state . former provocation reappear . the aunt be as tiresome as ever ; more tiresome , because anxiety for she health be now add to admiration of she power ; and they have to listen to the description of exactly how little bread and butter she eat for breakfast , and how small a slice of mutton for dinner , as well as to see exhibition of new cap and new workbag for she mother and herself ; and 's offence rise again . they have music ; be obliged to play ; and the thanks and praise which necessarily follow appear to she a affectation of candour , a air of greatness , mean only to show off in higher style she own very superior performance . she be , besides , which be the worst of all , so cold , so cautious ! there be no getting at she real opinion . Wrapt up in a cloak of politeness , she seem determined to hazard nothing . she be disgustingly , be suspiciously reserve . if any thing could be more , where all be most , she be more reserve on the subject of and the Dixon than any thing . she seem bent on give no real insight into 's character , or she own value for he company , or opinion of the suitableness of the match . it be all general approbation and smoothness ; nothing delineate or distinguished . it do she no service however . she caution be throw away . see it be artifice , and return to she first surmise . there probably _was_ something more to conceal than she own preference ; , perhaps , have be very near change one friend for the other , or be fix only to , for the sake of the future twelve thousand pound . the like reserve prevail on other topics . she and have be at at the same time . it be know that they be a little acquainted ; but not a syllable of real information could procure as to what he truly be . " be he handsome ? " --" she believe he be reckon a very fine young man . " " be he agreeable ?" -- " he be generally think so . " " do
do he appear a sensible young man ; a young man of information ? " --" at a watering - place , or in a common acquaintance , it be difficult to decide on such point . manners be all that could be safely judge of , under a much longer knowledge than they have yet have of . she believe every body find he manners pleasing . " could not forgive she . could not forgive she ; -- but as neither provocation nor resentment be discern by , who have be of the party , and have see only proper attention and pleas behaviour on each side , he be express the next morning , be at again on business with , he approbation of the whole ; not so openly as he might have do have she father be out of the room , but speak plain enough to be very intelligible to . he have be use to think she unjust to , and have now great pleasure in mark a improvement . " a very pleasant evening , " he begin , as soon as have be talk into what be necessary , tell that he understand , and the papers sweep away ; --" particularly pleasant . you and give we some very good music . I do not know a more luxurious state , sir , than sit at one 's ease to be entertain a whole evening by two such young woman ; sometimes with music and sometimes with conversation . I be sure must have find the evening pleasant , . you leave nothing undone . I be glad you make she play so much , for have no instrument at she grandmother 's , it must have be a real indulgence . " " I be happy you approve , " say , smile ; " but I hope I be not often deficient in what be due to guest at . " " no , my dear , " say she father instantly ; " _that I be sure you be not . there be nobody half so attentive and civil as you be . if any thing , you be too attentive . the muffin last night -- if it have be hand round once , I think it would have be enough . " " no , " say , nearly at the same time ; " you be not often deficient ; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension . I think you understand I , therefore . " a arch look express --" I understand you well enough ; " but she say only , " be reserve . " " I always tell you she be -- a little ; but you will soon overcome all that part of she reserve which ought to be overcome , all that have its foundation in diffidence . what arise from discretion must be honoure . " " you think she diffident . I do not see it . " " my dear , " say he , move from he chair into one close by she , " you be not go to tell I , I hope , that you have not a pleasant evening . " " oh ! no ; I be pleased with my own perseverance in ask question ; and amuse to think how little information I obtain . " " I be disappointed , " be he only answer . " I hope every body have a pleasant evening , " say , in he quiet way . " I have . once , I feel the fire rather too much ; but then I move back my chair a little , a very little , and it do not disturb I . be very chatty and good - humour , as she always be , though she speak rather too quick . however , she be very agreeable , and . too , in a different way . I like old friend ; and be a very pretty sort of young lady , a very pretty and a very well - behave young lady indeed . she must have find the evening agreeable , , because she have . " " true , sir ; and , because she have . " see he anxiety , and wish to appease it , at least for the present , say , and with a sincerity which no one could question -- " she be a sort of elegant creature that one can not keep one 's eye from . I be always watch she to admire ; and I do pity she from my heart . " look as if he be more gratified than he care to express ; and before he could make any reply , , whose thought be on the 's , say -- " it be a great pity that they circumstance should be so confin ! a great pity indeed ! and I have often wish -- but it be so little one can venture to do -- small , trifling present , of any thing uncommon -- now we have kill a porker , and think of send they a loin or a leg ; it be very small and delicate -- pork be not like any other pork -- but still it be pork -- and , my dear , unless one could be sure of they make it into steak , nicly fry , as ours be fry , without the smallest grease , and not roast it , for no stomach can bear roast pork -- I think we have better send the leg -- do not you think so , my dear ? " " my dear papa , I send the whole hind - quarter . I know you would wish it . there will be the leg
leg to be salt , you know , which be so very nice , and the loin to be dress directly in any manner they like . " " that be right , my dear , very right . I have not think of it before , but that be the best way . they must not over -sal the leg ; and then , if it be not over -salt , and if it be very thoroughly boil , just as boil ours , and eat very moderately of , with a boiled turnip , and a little carrot or parsnip , I do not consider it unwholesome . " " , " say presently , " I have a piece of news for you . you like news -- and I hear a article in my way hither that I think will interest you . " " news ! oh ! yes , I always like news . what be it ?-- why do you smile so ?--where do you hear it ?-- at Randalls ? " he have time only to say , " no , not at ; I have not be near Randalls , " when the door be thrown open , and and walk into the room . full of thanks , and full of news , know not which to give quickest . soon see that he have lose he moment , and that not another syllable of communication could rest with he . " oh ! my dear sir , how be you this morning ? my dear miss Woodhouse -- I come quite over-powered . such a beautiful hind - quarter of pork ! you be too bountiful ! have you hear the news ? be go to be marry . " have not have time even to think of , and she be so completely surprize that she could not avoid a little start , and a little blush , at the sound . " there be my news :-- I think it would interest you , " say , with a smile which imply a conviction of some part of what have pass between they . " but where could _you_ hear it ? " cry . " where could you possibly hear it , ? for it be not five minute since I receive 's note -- no , it can not be more than five -- or at least ten -- for I have get my bonnet and spencer on , just ready to come out -- I be only go down to speak to again about the pork -- be stand in the passage -- be not you , ?-- for my mother be so afraid that we have not any salting - pan large enough . so I say I would go down and see , and say , ' shall I go down instead ? for I think you have a little cold , and have be wash the kitchen .'--'Oh ! my dear , ' say I -- well , and just then come the note . a -- that be all I know . a of . but , , how could you possibly have hear it ? for the very moment tell . Cole of it , she sit down and write to I . a -- " " I be with Cole on business a hour and a half ago . he have just read 's letter as I be shewn in , and hand it to I directly . " " well ! that be quite -- I suppose there never be a piece of news more generally interesting . my dear sir , you really be too bountiful . my mother desire she very best compliment and regards , and a thousand thanks , and say you really quite oppress she . " " we consider we pork , " reply -- " indeed it certainly be , so very superior to all other pork , that and I can not have a greater pleasure than -- " " oh ! my dear sir , as my mother say , we friend be only too good to we . if ever there be people who , without have great wealth themselves , have every thing they could wish for , I be sure it be we . we may well say that 'ou lot be cast in a goodly heritage . ' well , , and so you actually see the letter ; well -- " " it be short -- merely to announce -- but cheerful , exulting , of course ." -- here be a sly glance at . " he have be so fortunate as to -- I forget the precise word -- one have no business to remember they . the information be , as you state , that he be go to be marry to a . by he style , I should imagine it just settle . " " go to be marry ! " say , as soon as she could speak . " he will have every body 's wish for he happiness . " " he be very young to settle , " be 's observation . " he have better not be in a hurry . he seem to I very well off as he be . we be always glad to see he at . " " a new neighbour for we all , ! " say , joyfully ; " my mother be so pleased !-- she say she can not bear to have the poor old Vicarage without a mistress . this be great news , indeed . , you have never see !-- no wonder that you have such a curiosity to see he . " 's curiosity do not appear of that absorb nature as wholly to occupy she . " no -- I
I have never see , " she reply , start on this appeal ; " be he -- be he a tall man ? " " who shall answer that question ? " cry . " my father would say ' yes , ' 'no ; ' and and I that he be just the happy medium . when you have be here a little longer , , you will understand that be the standard of perfection in , both in person and mind . " " very true , , so she will . he be the very best young man -- but , my dear , if you remember , I tell you yesterday he be precisely the height of . , -- I dare say , a excellent young woman . he extreme attention to my mother -- want she to sit in the vicarage pew , that she might hear the better , for my mother be a little deaf , you know -- it be not much , but she do not hear quite quick . say that be a little deaf . he fancie bathing might be good for it -- the warm bath -- but she say it do he no lasting benefit . , you know , be quite we angel . and seem a very charming young man , quite worthy of he . it be such a happiness when good people get together -- and they always do . now , here will be and ; and there be the Coles , such very good people ; and the Perry -- I suppose there never be a happier or a better couple than and . I say , sir , " turn to , " I think there be few place with such society as . I always say , we be quite bless in we neighbour .-- my dear sir , if there be one thing my mother love better than another , it be pork -- a roast loin of pork --" " as to who , or what be , or how long he have be acquaint with she , " say , " nothing I suppose can be know . one feel that it can not be a very long acquaintance . he have be go only four week . " nobody have any information to give ; and , after a few more wonderings , say , " you be silent , -- but I hope you mean to take a interest in this news . you , who have be hear and see so much of late on these subject , who must have be so deep in the business on 's account -- we shall not excuse you be indifferent about and . " " when I have see , " reply , " I dare say I shall be interested -- but I believe it require _that_ with I . and as it be some month since marry , the impression may be a little worn off . " " yes , he have be go just four week , as you observe , , " say , " four week yesterday .-- a !-- well , I have always rather fancie it would be some young lady hereabout ; not that I ever -- . once whisper to I -- but I immediately say , ' no , be a most worthy young man -- but '-- in short , I do not think I be particularly quick at those sort of discoveries . I do not pretend to it . what be before I , I see . at the same time , nobody could wonder if should have aspire -- let I chatter on , so good - humouredly . she know I would not offend for the world . how do do ? she seem quite recover now . have you hear from lately ? oh ! those dear little child . , do you know I always fancy like . I mean in person -- tall , and with that sort of look -- and not very talkative . " " quite wrong , my dear aunt ; there be no likeness at all . " " very odd ! but one never do form a just idea of any body beforehand . one take up a notion , and run away with it . , you say , be not , strictly speak , handsome ? " " ! oh ! no --far from it -- certainly plain . I tell you he be plain . " " my dear , you say that would not allow he to be plain , and that you yourself -- " " oh ! as for I , my judgament be worth nothing . where I have a regard , I always think a person well - look . but I give what I believe the general opinion , when I call he plain . " " well , my dear , I believe we must be run away . the weather do not look well , and grandmama will be uneasy . you be too obliging , my dear miss Woodhouse ; but we really must take leave . this have be a most agreeable piece of news indeed . I shall just go round by . 's ; but I shall not stop three minute : and , , you have better go home directly -- I would not have you out in a shower !-- we think she be the better for already . thank you , we do indeed . I shall not attempt call on , for I really do not think she care for any thing but _boil pork : when we dress the leg it will be another thing . good morning to you , my dear sir . oh ! be come
come too . well , that be so very !-- I be sure if be tired , you will be so kind as to give she you arm .-- , and !-- good morning to you . " , alone with she father , have half she attention wante by he while he lament that young people would be in such a hurry to marry -- and to marry stranger too -- and the other half she could give to she own view of the subject . it be to herself a amuse and a very welcome piece of news , as prove that could not have suffer long ; but she be sorry for : Harriet must feel it -- and all that she could hope be , by give the first information herself , to save she from hear it abruptly from other . it be now about the time that she be likely to call . if she be to meet in she way ! -- and upon its begin to rain , be obliged to expect that the weather would be detain she at 's , and that the intelligence would undoubtedly rush upon she without preparation . the shower be heavy , but short ; and it have not be over five minute , when in come , with just the heated , agitated look which hurrie thither with a full heart be likely to give ; and the " oh ! , what do you think have happen ! " which instantly burst forth , have all the evidence of corresponding perturbation . as the blow be give , feel that she could not now show greater kindness than in listen ; and , unchecked , run eagerly through what she have to tell . " she have set out from 's half a hour ago -- she have be afraid it would rain -- she have be afraid it would pour down every moment -- but she think she might get to first -- she have hurrie on as fast as possible ; but then , as she be pass by the house where a young woman be make up a gown for she , she think she would just step in and see how it go on ; and though she do not seem to stay half a moment there , soon after she come out it begin to rain , and she do not know what to do ; so she run on directly , as fast as she could , and take shelter at 's . " -- 's be the principal woollen - draper , linen - draper , and haberdasher 's shop ; the shop first in size and fashion in the place .--" and so , there she have set , without a idea of any thing in the world , full ten minute , perhaps -- when , all of a sudden , who should come in -- to be sure it be so very odd !-- but they always deal at 's -- who should come in , but and she brother !-- dear miss Woodhouse ! only think . I think I should have faint . I do not know what to do . I be sit near the door -- see I directly ; but he do not ; he be busy with the umbrella . I be sure she see I , but she look away directly , and take no notice ; and they both go to quite the farther end of the shop ; and I keep sit near the door !-- oh ! dear ; I be so miserable ! I be sure I must have be as white as my gown . I could not go away you know , because of the rain ; but I do so wish myself anywhere in the world but there .-- oh ! dear , -- well , at last , I fancy , he look round and see I ; for instead of go on with she buying , they begin whisper to one another . I be sure they be talk of I ; and I could not help think that he be persuade she to speak to I --( do you think he be , ? ) -- for presently she come forward -- come quite up to I , and ask I how I do , and seem ready to shake hand , if I would . she do not do any of it in the same way that she use ; I could see she be alte ; but , however , she seem to _try to be very friendly , and we shook hand , and stood talk some time ; but I know no more what I say -- I be in such a tremble !-- I remember she say she be sorry we never meet now ; which I think almost too kind ! dear , , I be absolutely miserable ! by that time , it be begin to hold up , and I be determine that nothing should stop I from get away -- and then -- only think !-- I find he be come up towards I too -- slowly you know , and as if he do not quite know what to do ; and so he come and speak , and I answer -- and I stand for a minute , feel dreadfully , you know , one can not tell how ; and then I take courage , and say it do not rain , and I must go ; and so off I set ; and I have not get three yard from the door , when he come after I , only to say , if I be go to , he think I have much better go round by 's stable , for I should
should find the near way quite float by this rain . oh ! dear , I think it would have be the death of I ! so I say , I be very much oblige to he : you know I could not do less ; and then he go back to , and I come round by the stable -- I believe I do -- but I hardly know where I be , or any thing about it . oh ! , I would rather do any thing than have it happen : and yet , you know , there be a sort of satisfaction in see he behave so pleasantly and so kindly . and , too . oh ! , do talk to I and make I comfortable again . " very sincerely do wish to do so ; but it be not immediately in she power . she be oblige to stop and think . she be not thoroughly comfortable herself . the young man 's conduct , and he sister 's , seem the result of real feeling , and she could not but pity they . as describe it , there have be a interesting mixture of wounded affection and genuine delicacy in they behaviour . but she have believe they to be well - mean , worthy people before ; and what difference do this make in the evils of the connexion ? it be folly to be disturb by it . of course , he must be sorry to lose she -- they must be all sorry . Ambition , as well as love , have probably be mortify . they might all have hope to rise by 's acquaintance : and beside , what be the value of 's description ?-- so easily pleased -- so little discerning ; -- what signify she praise ? she exert herself , and do try to make she comfortable , by consider all that have pass as a mere trifle , and quite unworthy of be dwelt on , " it might be distresse , for the moment , " say she ; " but you seem to have behave extremely well ; and it be over -- and may never -- can never , as a first meeting , occur again , and therefore you need not think about it . " say , " very true , " and she " would not think about it ; " but still she talk of it -- still she could talk of nothing else ; and , at last , in order to put the out of she head , be obliged to hurry on the news , which she have mean to give with so much tender caution ; hardly know herself whether to rejoice or be angry , asham or only amused , at such a state of mind in poor --such a conclusion of 's importance with she ! 's right , however , gradually revive . though she do not feel the first intelligence as she might have do the day before , or a hour before , its interest soon increase ; and before they first conversation be over , she have talk herself into all the sensation of curiosity , wonder and regret , pain and pleasure , as to this fortunate , which could conduce to place the under proper subordination in she fancy . learn to be rather glad that there have be such a meeting . it have be serviceable in deaden the first shock , without retain any influence to alarm . as now live , the could not get at she , without seek she , where hitherto they have want either the courage or the condescension to seek she ; for since she refusal of the brother , the sister never have be at 's ; and a twelvemonth might pass without they be throw together again , with any necessity , or even any power of speech . human nature be so well dispose towards those who be in interesting situation , that a young person , who either marry or die , be sure of be kindly speak of . a week have not pass since 's name be first mention in , before she be , by some means or other , discover to have every recommendation of person and mind ; to be handsome , elegant , highly accomplished , and perfectly amiable : and when himself arrive to triumph in he happy prospect , and circulate the fame of she merit , there be very little more for he to do , than to tell she Christian name , and say whose music she principally play . return , a very happy man . he have go away reject and mortify -- disappoint in a very sanguine hope , after a series of what appear to he strong encouragement ; and not only lose the right lady , but find himself debase to the level of a very wrong one . he have go away deeply offended -- he come back engage to another -- and to another as superior , of course , to the first , as under such circumstance what be gain always be to what be lose . he come back gay and self - satisfied , eager and busy , car nothing for , and defy . the , in addition to all the usual advantage of perfect beauty and merit , be in possession of a independent fortune , of so many thousand as would always be call ten ; a point of some dignity , as well as some convenience : the story tell well ; he have not throw himself away -- he have gain a woman of 10,000 l . or thereabout ; and he have gain she with such delightful rapidity -- the first hour of introduction have
have be so very soon follow by distinguishing notice ; the history which he have to give . Cole of the rise and progress of the affair be so glorious -- the step so quick , from the accidental rencontre , to the dinner at 's , and the party at 's -- smile and blush rise in importance -- with consciousness and agitation richly scatter -- the lady have be so easily impressed -- so sweetly dispose -- have in short , to use a most intelligible phrase , be so very ready to have he , that vanity and prudence be equally contente . he have catch both substance and shadow -- both fortune and affection , and be just the happy man he ought to be ; talk only of himself and he own concern -- expect to be congratulate -- ready to be laugh at -- and , with cordial , fearless smile , now address all the young lady of the place , to whom , a few week ago , he would have be more cautiously gallant . the wedding be no distant event , as the party have only themselves to please , and nothing but the necessary preparation to wait for ; and when he set out for again , there be a general expectation , which a certain glance of Mrs . 's do not seem to contradict , that when he next enter he would bring he bride . during he present short stay , have barely see he ; but just enough to feel that the first meeting be over , and to give she the impression of he not be improve by the mixture of pique and pretension , now spread over he air . she be , in fact , begin very much to wonder that she have ever think he pleas at all ; and he sight be so inseparably connect with some very disagreeable feeling , that , except in a moral light , as a penance , a lesson , a source of profitable humiliation to she own mind , she would have be thankful to be assure of never see he again . she wish he very well ; but he give she pain , and he welfare twenty mile off would administer most satisfaction . the pain of he continue residence in , however , must certainly be lessen by he marriage . many vain solicitude would be prevented -- many awkwardness smoothe by it . a ._ _elton_ would be a excuse for any change of intercourse ; former intimacy might sink without remark . it would be almost begin they life of civility again . of the lady , individually , think very little . she be good enough for , no doubt ; accomplish enough for -- handsome enough -- to look plain , probably , by 's side . as to connexion , there be perfectly easy ; persuade , that after all he own vaunted claim and disdain of , he have do nothing . on that article , truth seem attainable . what she be , must be uncertain ; but _who_ she be , might be find out ; and set aside the 10,000 l. , it do not appear that she be at all 's superior . she bring no name , no blood , no alliance . be the youngest of the two daughter of a -- merchant , of course , he must be call ; but , as the whole of the profit of he mercantile life appear so very moderate , it be not unfair to guess the dignity of he line of trade have be very moderate also . part of every winter she have be use to spend in ; but be she home , the very heart of ; for though the father and mother have die some year ago , a uncle remain -- in the law line -- nothing more distinctly honourable be hazard of he , than that he be in the law line ; and with he the daughter have liv . guess he to be the drudge of some attorney , and too stupid to rise . and all the grandeur of the connexion seem dependent on the elder sister , who be _very _well_ _marry , to a gentleman in a _great_ _way , near , who keep two carriage ! that be the wind - up of the history ; that be the glory of . could she but have give she feeling about it all ! she have talk she into love ; but , alas ! she be not so easily to be talk out of it . the charm of a object to occupy the many vacancy of 's mind be not to be talk away . he might be supersed by another ; he certainly would indeed ; nothing could be clearer ; even a would have be sufficient ; but nothing else , she fear , would cure she . be one of those , who , have once begin , would be always in love . and now , poor girl ! she be considerably worse from this reappearance of . she be always have a glimpse of he somewhere or other . see he only once ; but two or three time every day Harriet be sure _just to meet with he , or _just to miss he , _just to hear he voice , or see he shoulder , _just to have something yooccu to preserve he in she fancy , in all the favouring warmth of surprize and conjecture . she be , moreover , perpetually hear about he ; for , except when at , she be always among those who see no fault in , and find nothing so interesting as the discussion of he concern ; and every report
report , therefore , every guess -- all that have already occur , all that might occur in the arrangement of he affair , comprehend income , servants , and furniture , be continually in agitation around she . she regard be receive strength by invariable praise of he , and she regret keep alive , and feeling irritate by ceaseless repetition of 's happiness , and continual observation of , how much he seem attach !-- he air as he walk by the house -- the very sitting of he hat , be all in proof of how much he be in love ! have it be allowable entertainment , have there be no pain to she friend , or reproach to herself , in the wavering of 's mind , would have be amuse by its variation . sometimes predominate , sometimes the ; and each be occasionally useful as a check to the other . 's engagement have be the cure of the agitation of meeting . the unhappiness produce by the knowledge of that engagement have be a little put aside by 's call at 's a few day afterwards . have not be at home ; but a note have be prepare and leave for she , write in the very style to touch ; a small mixture of reproach , with a great deal of kindness ; and till himself appear , she have be much occupy by it , continually ponder over what could be do in return , and wish to do more than she da to confess . but , in person , have drive away all such car . while he stay , the be forget ; and on the very morning of he set off for again , , to dissipate some of the distress it occasion , judge it best for she to return 's visit . how that visit be to be acknowledge -- what would be necessary -- and what might be safest , have be a point of some doubtful consideration . absolute neglect of the mother and sister , when invite to come , would be ingratitude . it must not be : and yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintance !-- after much think , she could determine on nothing better , than 's return the visit ; but in a way that , if they have understanding , should convince they that it be to be only a formal acquaintance . she mean to take she in the carriage , leave she at the , while she drive a little farther , and call for she again so soon , as to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerous recurrence to the past , and give the most decided proof of what degree of intimacy be choose for the future . she could think of nothing better : and though there be something in it which she own heart could not approve -- something of ingratitude , merely gloss over -- it must be do , or what would become of ? small heart have for visiting . only half a hour before she friend call for she at 's , she evil star have lead she to the very spot where , at that moment , a trunk , direct to the , - , , be to be see under the operation of be lift into the butcher 's cart , which be to convey it to where the coach past ; and every thing in this world , except that trunk and the direction , be consequently a blank . she go , however ; and when they reach the farm , and she be to be put down , at the end of the broad , neat gravel walk , which lead between espalier apple - tree to the front door , the sight of every thing which have give she so much pleasure the autumn before , be begin to revive a little local agitation ; and when they part , observe she to be look around with a sort of fearful curiosity , which determine she not to allow the visit to exceed the propose quarter of a hour . she go on herself , to give that portion of time to a old servant who be married , and settle in . the quarter of a hour bring she punctually to the white gate again ; and receive she summon , be with she without delay , and unattend by any alarming young man . she come solitarily down the gravel walk -- a just appear at the door , and part with she seemingly with ceremonious civility . Harriet could not very soon give a intelligible account . she be feel too much ; but at last collect from she enough to understand the sort of meeting , and the sort of pain it be create . she have see only and the two girl . they have receive she doubtingly , if not coolly ; and nothing beyond the merest commonplace have be talk almost all the time -- till just at last , when 's say , all of a sudden , that she think be grow , have bring on a more interesting subject , and a warmer manner . in that very room she have be measure last , with she two friend . there be the pencilled mark and memorandum on the wainscot by the window . _he have do it . they all seem to remember the day , the hour , the party , the occasion -- to feel the same consciousness , the same regret -- to be ready to return to the same good understanding ; and they be just grow again like themselves , ( , as must suspect , as ready as the best of they to be cordial and happy
happy , ) when the carriage reappear , and all be over . the style of the visit , and the shortness of it , be then feel to be decisive . Fourteen minute to be give to those with whom she have thankfully pass six week not six month ago could not but picture it all , and feel how justly they might resent , how naturally must suffer . it be a bad business . she would have give a great deal , or endure a great deal , to have have the in a higher rank of life . they be so deserve , that a _little_ higher should have be enough : but as it be , how could she have do otherwise ?--Impossible !--She could not repent . they must be separate ; but there be a great deal of pain in the process -- so much to herself at this time , that she soon feel the necessity of a little consolation , and resolve on go home by way of Randalls to procure it . she mind be quite sick of and the . the refreshment of be absolutely necessary . it be a good scheme ; but on drive to the door they hear that neither " master nor mistress be at home ; " they have both be out some time ; the man believe they be go to . " this be too bad , " cry , as they turn away . " and now we shall just miss they ; too provoke !-- I do not know when I have be so disappointed . " and she lean back in the corner , to indulge she murmur , or to reason they away ; probably a little of both -- such be the commonest process of a not ill - dispose mind . presently the carriage stopt ; she look up ; it be stopt by and , who be stand to speak to she . there be instant pleasure in the sight of they , and still greater pleasure be convey in sound -- for immediately accost she with , " how d'ye do ?--how 'ye do ?-- we have be sit with you father -- glad to see he so well . come to - morrow -- I have a letter this morning -- we see he to - morrow by dinner - time to a certainty -- he be at to - day , and he come for a whole fortnight ; I know it would be so . if he have come at he could not have stay three day ; I be always glad he do not come at ; now we be go to have just the right weather for he , fine , dry , settled weather . we shall enjoy he completely ; every thing have turn out exactly as we could wish . " there be no resisting such news , no possibility of avoid the influence of such a happy face as 's , confirm as it all be by the word and the countenance of he wife , fewer and quieter , but not less to the purpose . to know that _she think he come certain be enough to make consider it so , and sincerely do she rejoice in they joy . it be a most delightful reanimation of exhausted spirit . the worn - out past be sunk in the freshness of what be come ; and in the rapidity of half a moment 's thought , she hope would now be talk of no more . give she the history of the engagement at , which allow he son to answer for have a entire fortnight at he command , as well as the route and the method of he journey ; and she listen , and smile , and congratulate . " I shall soon bring he over to , " say he , at the conclusion . could imagine she see a touch of the arm at this speech , from he wife . " we have better move on , , " say she , " we be detain the girl . " " well , well , I be ready ; " -- and turn again to , " but you must not be expect such a _very fine young man ; you have only have _my account you know ; I dare say he be really nothing extraordinary : " -- though he own sparkling eye at the moment be speak a very different conviction . could look perfectly unconscious and innocent , and answer in a manner that appropriate nothing . " think of I to - morrow , my dear , about four o'clock , " be 's part injunction ; speak with some anxiety , and mean only for she . " four o'clock !-- depend upon it he will be here by three , " be 's quick amendment ; and so end a most satisfactory meeting . 's spirit be mount quite up to happiness ; every thing wear a different air ; and he horse seem not half so sluggish as before . when she look at the hedge , she think the elder at least must soon be come out ; and when she turn round to , she see something like a look of spring , a tender smile even there . " will pass through as well as ? " --be a question , however , which do not augur much . but neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once , and be now in a humour to resolve that they should both come in time . the morning of the interesting day arrive , and 's faithful pupil do not forget either at ten , or eleven , or twelve o'clock , that she be to think
think of she at four . " my dear , dear anxious friend , " -- say she , in mental soliloquy , while walk downstairs from she own room , " always overcareful for every body 's comfort but you own ; I see you now in all you little fidget , go again and again into he room , to be sure that all be right . " the clock struck twelve as she pass through the hall . " 'Tis twelve ; I shall not forget to think of you four hour hence ; and by this time to - morrow , perhaps , or a little later , I may be think of the possibility of they all call here . I be sure they will bring he soon . " she open the parlour door , and see two gentleman sit with she father -- and he son . they have be arrive only a few minute , and have scarcely finish he explanation of 's be a day before he time , and she father be yet in the midst of he very civil welcome and congratulation , when she appear , to have she share of surprize , introduction , and pleasure . the so long talk of , so high in interest , be actually before she -- he be present to she , and she do not think too much have be say in he praise ; he be a _very good look young man ; height , air , address , all be unexceptionable , and he countenance have a great deal of the spirit and liveliness of he father 's ; he look quick and sensible . she feel immediately that she should like he ; and there be a well - breed ease of manner , and a readiness to talk , which convince she that he come intend to be acquaint with she , and that acquaint they soon must be . he have reach Randalls the evening before . she be pleased with the eagerness to arrive which have make he alter he plan , and travel earlier , later , and quicker , that he might gain half a day . " I tell you yesterday , " cry with exultation , " I tell you all that he would be here before the time name . I remembe what I use to do myself . one can not creep upon a journey ; one can not help get on faster than one have plan ; and the pleasure of come in upon one 's friend before the look - out begin , be worth a great deal more than any little exertion it need . " " it be a great pleasure where one can indulge in it , " say the young man , " though there be not many house that I should presume on so far ; but in come _home_ I feel I might do any thing . " the word _home_ make he father look on he with fresh complacency . be directly sure that he know how to make himself agreeable ; the conviction be strengthen by what follow . he be very much pleased with , think it a most admirably arrange house , would hardly allow it even to be very small , admire the situation , the walk to , itself , Hartfield still more , and profess himself to have always feel the sort of interest in the country which no but one be _own_ country give , and the greatest curiosity to visit it . that he should never have be able to indulge so amiable a feeling before , pass suspiciously through 's brain ; but still , if it be a falsehood , it be a pleasant one , and pleasantly handle . he manner have no air of study or exaggeration . he do really look and speak as if in a state of no common enjoyment . they subject in general be such as belong to a opening acquaintance . on he side be the inquiry ,-- " be she a horsewoman ?-- pleasant ride ? -- pleasant walks ? --have they a large neighbourhood ?--Highbury , perhaps , afford society enough ?-- there be several very pretty house in and about it .-- ball --have they ball ?-- be it a musical society ? " but when satisfied on all these point , and they acquaintance proportionably advanc , he contrive to find a opportunity , while they two fathers be engage with each other , of introduce he mother - in - law , and speak of she with so much handsome praise , so much warm admiration , so much gratitude for the happiness she secure to he father , and she very kind reception of himself , as be a additional proof of he know how to please -- and of he certainly think it worth while to try to please she . he do not advance a word of praise beyond what she know to be thoroughly deserve by ; but , undoubtedly he could know very little of the matter . he understood what would be welcome ; he could be sure of little else . " he father 's marriage , " he say , " have be the wisest measure , every friend must rejoice in it ; and the family from whom he have receive such a blessing must be ever consider as have confer the highest obligation on he . " he get as near as he could to thanke she for 's merit , without see quite to forget that in the common course of thing it be to be rather suppose that have form 's character , than 's . and at last , as if resolve to qualify he opinion completely for travel round to its object
object , he wound it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of she person . " elegant , agreeable manners , I be prepare for , " say he ; " but I confess that , consider every thing , I have not expect more than a very tolerably well - look woman of a certain age ; I do not know that I be to find a pretty young woman in . " " you can not see too much perfection in for my feeling , " say ; " be you to guess she to be _eightee _, I should listen with pleasure ; but _she would be ready to quarrel with you for use such word . do not let she imagine that you have speak of she as a pretty young woman . " " I hope I should know better , " he reply ; " no , depend upon it , ( with a gallant bow , ) that in address I should understand whom I might praise without any danger of be think extravagant in my term . " wonder whether the same suspicion of what might be expect from they know each other , which have take strong possession of she mind , have ever cross he ; and whether he compliment be to be consider as mark of acquiescence , or proof of defiance . she must see more of he to understand he way ; at present she only feel they be agreeable . she have no doubt of what be often think about . he quick eye she detect again and again glance towards they with a happy expression ; and even , when he might have determine not to look , she be confident that he be often listen . she own father 's perfect exemption from any thought of the kind , the entire deficiency in he of all such sort of penetration or suspicion , be a most comfortable circumstance . happily he be not farther from approve matrimony than from foresee it .-- though always object to every marriage that be arrange , he never suffer beforehand from the apprehension of any ; it seem as if he could not think so ill of any two person ' understanding as to suppose they mean to marry till it be prove against they . she bless the favouring blindness . he could now , without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise , without a glance forward at any possible treachery in he guest , give way to all he natural kind - hear civility in solicitous inquirie after 's accommodation on he journey , through the sad evils of sleeping two night on the road , and express very genuine unmixed anxiety to know that he have certainly escape catche cold -- which , however , he could not allow he to feel quite assured of himself till after another night . a reasonable visit pay , begin to move .--" he must be go . he have business at the about he hay , and a great many errand for at 's , but he need not hurry any body else . " he son , too well breed to hear the hint , rise immediately also , say , " as you be go farther on business , sir , I will take the opportunity of pay a visit , which must be pay some day or other , and therefore may as well be pay now . I have the honour of be acquaint with a neighbour of yours , ( turn to , ) a lady residing in or near ; a family of the name of . I shall have no difficulty , I suppose , in find the house ; though Fairfax , I believe , be not the proper name -- I should rather say , or . do you know any family of that name ? " " to be sure we do , " cry he father ; " . Bates -- we pass she house -- I see at the window . true , true , you be acquaint with ; I remember you know she at , and a fine girl she be . call upon she , by all mean . " " there be no necessity for my call this morning , " say the young man ; " another day would do as well ; but there be that degree of acquaintance at which -- " " oh ! go to - day , go to - day . do not defer it . what be right to be do can not be do too soon . and , besides , I must give you a hint , ; any want of attention to she _here should be carefully avoid . you see she with the Campbell , when she be the equal of every body she mix with , but here she be with a poor old grandmother , who have barely enough to live on . if you do not call early it will be a slight . " the son look convinced . " I have hear she speak of the acquaintance , " say ; " she be a very elegant young woman . " he agree to it , but with so quiet a " yes , " as inclin she almost to doubt he real concurrence ; and yet there must be a very distinct sort of elegance for the fashionable world , if could be think only ordinarily gif with it . " if you be never particularly strike by she manners before , " say she , " I think you will to - day . you will see she to advantage ; see she and hear she -- no , I be afraid you will not hear she at all
all , for she have a aunt who never hold she tongue . " " you be acquaint with , sir , be you ? " say , always the last to make he way in conversation ; " then give I leave to assure you that you will find she a very agreeable young lady . she be stay here on a visit to she grandmama and aunt , very worthy people ; I have know they all my life . they will be extremely glad to see you , I be sure ; and one of my servants shall go with you to show you the way . " " my dear sir , upon no account in the world ; my father can direct I . " " but you father be not go so far ; he be only go to the Crown , quite on the other side of the street , and there be a great many house ; you might be very much at a loss , and it be a very dirty walk , unless you keep on the footpath ; but my coachman can tell you where you have best cross the street . " still decline it , look as serious as he could , and he father give he hearty support by call out , " my good friend , this be quite unnecessary ; know a puddle of water when he see it , and as to . 's , he may get there from the Crown in a hop , step , and jump . " they be permit to go alone ; and with a cordial nod from one , and a graceful bow from the other , the two gentleman take leave . remain very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance , and could now engage to think of they all at Randalls any hour of the day , with full confidence in they comfort . the next morning bring again . he come with , to whom and to he seem to take very cordially . he have be sit with she , it appear , most companionably at home , till she usual hour of exercise ; and on be desire to chuse they walk , immediately fix on Highbury .--" he do not doubt there be very pleasant walk in every direction , but if leave to he , he should always chuse the same . Highbury , that airy , cheerful , happy - look , would be he constant attraction . " -- Highbury , with , stood for ; and she trust to its bear the same construction with he . they walk thither directly . have hardly expect they : for , who have call in for half a minute , in order to hear that he son be very handsome , kknow nothing of they plan ; and it be a agreeable surprize to she , therefore , to perceive they walk up to the house together , arm in arm . she be want to see he again , and especially to see he in company with , upon he behaviour to whom she opinion of he be to depend . if he be deficient there , nothing should make amend for it . but on see they together , she become perfectly satisfied . it be not merely in fine word or hyperbolical compliment that he pay he duty ; nothing could be more proper or pleasing than he whole manner to she -- nothing could more agreeably denote he wish of consider she as a friend and secure she affection . and there be time enough for to form a reasonable judgment , as they visit include all the rest of the morning . they be all three walk about together for a hour or two -- first round the shrubbery of , and afterwards in . he be delighted with every thing ; admire sufficiently for 's ear ; and when they go farther be resolve on , confess he wish to be make acquainted with the whole village , and find matter of commendation and interest much oftener than could have suppose . some of the object of he curiosity speak very amiable feeling . he beg to be shew the house which he father have live in so long , and which have be the home of he father 's father ; and on recollect that a old woman who have nurse he be still live , walk in quest of she cottage from one end of the street to the other ; and though in some point of pursuit or observation there be no positive merit , they shew , altogether , a good - will towards in , which must be very like a merit to those he be with . watch and decide , that with such feeling as be now shew , it could not be fairly suppose that he have be ever voluntarily absent himself ; that he have not be act a part , or make a parade of insincere profession ; and that certainly have not do he justice . they first pause be at the , a inconsiderable house , though the principal one of the sort , where a couple of pair of post-horse be keep , more for the convenience of the neighbourhood than from any run on the road ; and he companion have not expect to be detain by any interest excit there ; but in pass it they give the history of the large room visibly add ; it have be build many year ago for a ball - room , and while the neighbourhood have be in a particularly populious , dancing state , have be occasionally use as such ; -- but such brilliant day have long pass away , and now the highest purpose
purpose for which it be ever want be to accommodate a whist club establish among the gentleman and half - gentleman of the place . he be immediately interested . it be character as a ball - room catch he ; and instead of passing on , he stopt for several minute at the two superior sash window which be open , to look in and contemplate its capability , and lament that its original purpose should have cease . he see no fault in the room , he would acknowledge none which they suggest . no , it be long enough , broad enough , handsome enough . it would hold the very number for comfort . they ought to have ball there at least every fortnight through the winter . why have not revive the former good old day of the room ?-- she who could do any thing in ! the want of proper family in the place , and the conviction that no beyond the place and its immediate environ could be temp to attend , be mention ; but he be not satisfied . he could not be persuade that so many good - look house as he see around he , could not furnish number enough for such a meeting ; and even when particular be give and family describe , he be still unwilling to admit that the inconvenience of such a mixture would be any thing , or that there would be the smallest difficulty in every body be return into they proper place the next morning . he argue like a young man very much bent on dancing ; and be rather surprized to see the constitution of the prevail so decidedly against the habits of the Churchill . he seem to have all the life and spirit , cheerful feeling , and social inclination of he father , and nothing of the pride or reserve of . of pride , indeed , there be , perhaps , scarcely enough ; he indifference to a confusion of rank , bordere too much on inelegance of mind . he could be no judge , however , of the evil he be hold cheap . it be but a effusion of lively spirit . at last he be persuade to move on from the front of the Crown ; and be now almost face the house where the lod , recollect he intend visit the day before , and ask he if he have pay it . " yes , oh ! yes " -- he reply ; " I be just go to mention it . a very successful visit :-- I see all the three lady ; and feel very much oblige to you for you preparatory hint . if the talking aunt have take I quite by surprize , it must have be the death of I . as it be , I be only betraye into pay a most unreasonable visit . ten minute would have be all that be necessary , perhaps all that be proper ; and I have tell my father I should certainly be at home before he -- but there be no get away , no pause ; and , to my utter astonishment , I find , when he ( finde I nowhere else ) join I there at last , that I have be actually sit with they very nearly three - quarter of a hour . the good lady have not give I the possibility of escape before . " " and how do you think look ? " " Ill , very ill -- that be , if a young lady can ever be allow to look ill . but the expression be hardly admissible , , be it ? lady can never look ill . and , seriously , be naturally so pale , as almost always to give the appearance of ill health .-- a most deplorable want of complexion . " would not agree to this , and begin a warm defence of 's complexion . " it be certainly never brilliant , but she would not allow it to have a sickly hue in general ; and there be a softness and delicacy in she skin which give peculiar elegance to the character of she face . " he listen with all due deference ; acknowledge that he have hear many people say the same -- but yet he must confess , that to he nothing could make amend for the want of the fine glow of health . where feature be indifferent , a fine complexion give beauty to they all ; and where they be good , the effect be -- fortunately he need not attempt to describe what the effect be . " well , " say , " there be no disputing about taste .-- at least you admire she except she complexion . " he shook he head and laugh .--" I can not separate and she complexion . " " do you see she often at ? be you often in the same society ? " at this moment they be approach 's , and he hastily exclaim , " ! this must be the very shop that every body attend every day of they life , as my father inform I . he come to Highbury himself , he say , six day out of the seven , and have always business at 's . if it be not inconveniend to you , pray let we go in , that I may prove myself to belong to the place , to be a true citizen of . I must buy something at 's . it will be take out my freedom .-- I dare say they sell glove . " " oh ! yes , glove and every thing . I do admire you patriotism . you will be adore
adore in . you be very popular before you come , because you be 's son -- but lay out half a guinea at 's , and you popularity will stand upon you own virtue . " they go in ; and while the sleek , well - tie parcel of " 's " and " " be bring down and display on the counter , he say -- " but I beg you pardon , Woodhouse , you be speak to I , you be say something at the very moment of this burst of my _amor _patria . do not let I lose it . I assure you the utmost stretch of public fame would not make I amend for the loss of any happiness in private life . " " I merely ask , whether you have know much of and she party at . " " and now that I understand you question , I must pronounce it to be a very unfair one . it be always the lady 's right to decide on the degree of acquaintance . must already have give she account .-- I shall not commit myself by claim more than she may chuse to allow . " " upon my word ! you answer as discreetly as she could do herself . but she account of every thing leave so much to be guess , she be so very reserved , so very unwilling to give the least information about any body , that I really think you may say what you like of you acquaintance with she . " " may I , indeed ?-- then I will speak the truth , and nothing suit I so well . I meet she frequently at . I have know the Campbell a little in town ; and at we be very much in the same set . be a very agreeable man , and a friendly , warm - hear woman . I like they all . " " you know 's situation in life , I conclude ; what she be destin to be ? " " yes --( rather hesitatingly ) -- I believe I do . " " you get upon delicate subject , , " say smile ; " remember that I be here .-- hardly know what to say when you speak of 's situation in life . I will move a little farther off . " " I certainly do forget to think of _her _, " say , " as have ever be any thing but my friend and my dearest friend . " he look as if he fully understand and honoure such a sentiment . when the glove be buy , and they have quit the shop again , " do you ever hear the young lady we be speak of , play ? " say . " ever hear she ! " repeat . " you forget how much she belong to . I have hear she every year of we life since we both began . she play charmingly . " " you think so , do you ?-- I want the opinion of some one who could really judge . she appear to I to play well , that be , with considerable taste , but I know nothing of the matter myself .-- I be excessively fond of music , but without the smallest skill or right of judging of any body 's performance .-- I have be use to hear she be admired ; and I remember one proof of she be think to play well :-- a man , a very musical man , and in love with another woman -- engage to she -- on the point of marriage -- would yet never ask that other woman to sit down to the instrument , if the lady in question could sit down instead -- never seem to like to hear one if he could hear the other . that , I think , in a man of know musical talent , be some proof . " " proor indeed ! " say , highly amused .-- " be very musical , be he ? we shall know more about they all , in half a hour , from you , than would have vouchsaf in half a year . " " yes , and be the person ; and I think it a very strong proof . " " certainly -- very strong it be ; to own the truth , a great deal stronger than , if _i_ have be , would have be at all agreeable to I . I could not excuse a man 's have more music than love -- more ear than eye -- a more acute sensibility to fine sound than to my feeling . how do appear to like it ? " " it be she very particular friend , you know . " " poor comfort ! " say , laugh . " one would rather have a stranger prefer than one be very particular friend -- with a stranger it might not recur again -- but the misery of have a very particular friend always at hand , to do every thing better than one do oneself !-- poor ! well , I be glad she be gone to settle in . " " you be right . it be not very flatter to ; but she really do not seem to feel it . " " so much the better -- or so much the worse :-- I do not know which . but be it sweetness or be it stupidity in she -- quickness of friendship , or dulness of feeling -- there be one person , I think , who must have feel it : herself . she must have feel the improper and dangerous distinction . " " as to that --
-- I do not -- " " oh ! do not imagine that I expect a account of 's sensation from you , or from any body else . they be know to no human being , I guess , but herself . but if she continue to play whenever she be ask by , one may guess what one chuse . " " there appear such a perfectly good understanding among they all -- " he begin rather quickly , but check himself , add , " however , it be impossible for I to say on what term they really be -- how it might all be behind the scene . I can only say that there be smoothness outwardly . but you , who have know from a child , must be a better judge of she character , and of how she be likely to conduct herself in critical situation , than I can be . " " I have know she from a child , undoubtedly ; we have be child and woman together ; and it be natural to suppose that we should be intimate , -- that we should have take to each other whenever she visit she friend . but we never do . I hardly know how it have happen ; a little , perhaps , from that wickedness on my side which be prone to take disgust towards a girl so idolize and so cry up as she always be , by she aunt and grandmother , and all they set . and then , she reserve -- I never could attach myself to any one so completely reserve . " " it be a most repulsive quality , indeed , " say he . " Oftentimes very convenient , no doubt , but never please . there be safety in reserve , but no attraction . one can not love a reserve person . " " not till the reserve cease towards oneself ; and then the attraction may be the greater . but I must be more in want of a friend , or a agreeable companion , than I have yet been , to take the trouble of conquer any body 's reserve to procure one . intimacy between and I be quite out of the question . I have no reason to think ill of she -- not the least -- except that such extreme and perpetual cautiousness of word and manner , such a dread of give a distinct idea about any body , be apt to suggest suspicion of there be something to conceal . " he perfectly agree with she : and after walk together so long , and think so much alike , feel herself so well acquaint with he , that she could hardly believe it to be only they second meeting . he be not exactly what she have expect ; less of the man of the world in some of he notion , less of the spoiled child of fortune , therefore better than she have expect . he idea seem more moderate -- he feeling warmer . she be particularly strike by he manner of consider 's house , which , as well as the church , he would go and look at , and would not join they in find much fault with . no , he could not believe it a bad house ; not such a house as a man be to be pitie for have . if it be to be share with the woman he love , he could not think any man to be pitie for have that house . there must be ample room in it for every real comfort . the man must be a blockhead who want more . laugh , and say he do not know what he be talk about . use only to a large house himself , and without ever think how many advantage and accommodation be attach to its size , he could be no judge of the privation inevitably belong to a small one . but , in she own mind , determine that he _did_ know what he be talk about , and that he shew a very amiable inclination to settle early in life , and to marry , from worthy motive . he might not be aware of the inroad on domestic peace to be occasion by no housekeeper 's room , or a bad butler 's pantry , but no doubt he do perfectly feel that could not make he happy , and that whenever he be attach , he would willingly give up much of wealth to be allow a early establishment . 's very good opinion of be a little shaken the follow day , by hear that he be go off to , merely to have he hair cut . a sudden freak seem to have seize he at breakfast , and he have send for a chaise and set off , intend to return to dinner , but with no more important view that appear than have he hair cut . there be certainly no harm in he travel sixteen mile twice over on such a errand ; but there be a air of foppery and nonsense in it which she could not approve . it do not accord with the rationality of plan , the moderation in expense , or even the unselfish warmth of heart , which she have believe herself to discern in he yesterday . Vanity , extravagance , love of change , restlessness of temper , which must be do something , good or bad ; heedlessness as to the pleasure of he father and , indifferent as to how he conduct might appear in general ; he become liable to all these charge . he father only call he a coxcomb , and think it a very good story ;
; but that do not like it , be clear enough , by she pass it over as quickly as possible , and make no other comment than that " all young people would have they little whim . " with the exception of this little blot , find that he visit hithertoo have give she friend only good idea of he . be very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion he make himself -- how much she see to like in he disposition altogether . he appear to have a very open temper -- certainly a very cheerful and lively one ; she could observe nothing wrong in he notion , a great deal decidedly right ; he speak of he uncle with warm regard , be fond of talking of he -- say he would be the best man in the world if he be leave to himself ; and though there be no be attach to the aunt , he acknowledge she kindness with gratitude , and seem to mean always to speak of she with respect . this be all very promising ; and , but for such a unfortunate fancy for have he hair cut , there be nothing to denote he unworthy of the distinguished honour which she imagination have give he ; the honour , if not of be really in love with she , of be at least very near it , and save only by she own indifference --( for still she resolution hold of never marry ) -- the honour , in short , of be mark out for she by all they joint acquaintance . , on he side , add a virtue to the account which must have some weight . he give she to understand that admire she extremely -- think she very beautiful and very charming ; and with so much to be say for he altogether , she find she must not judge he harshly . as observ , " all young people would have they little whim . " there be one person among he new acquaintance in , not so leniently dispose . in general he be judge , throughout the parish of and , with great candour ; liberal allowances be make for the little excess of such a handsome young man -- one who smile so often and bow so well ; but there be one spirit among they not to be soften , from its power of censure , by bow or smile -- . the circumstance be tell he at ; for the moment , he be silent ; but hear he almost immediately afterwards say to himself , over a newspaper he hold in he hand , " ! just the trifling , silly fellow I take he for . " she have half a mind to resent ; but a instant 's observation convince she that it be really say only to relieve he own feeling , and not mean to provoke ; and therefore she let it pass . although in one instance the bearer of not good tiding , and 's visit this morning be in another respect particularly opportune . something occur while they be at , to make want they advice ; and , which be still more lucky , she want exactly the advice they give . this be the occurrence :-- the Cole have be settle some year in , and be very good sort of people --friendly , liberal , and unpretending ; but , on the other hand , they be of low origin , in trade , and only moderately genteel . on they first come into the country , they have live in proportion to they income , quietly , keep little company , and that little unexpensively ; but the last year or two have bring they a considerable increase of mean -- the house in town have yield greater profit , and fortune in general have smile on they . with they wealth , they views increase ; they want of a larger house , they inclination for more company . they add to they house , to they number of servants , to they expense of every sort ; and by this time be , in fortune and style of living , second only to the family at . they love of society , and they new dining - room , prepare every body for they keeping dinner - company ; and a few party , chiefly among the single man , have already take place . the regular and best family could hardly suppose they would presume to invite -- neither , nor , nor Randalls . nothing should tempt _her to go , if they do ; and she regret that she father 's know habits would be give she refusal less mean than she could wish . the Cole be very respectable in they way , but they ought to be teach that it be not for they to arrange the term on which the superior family would visit they . this lesson , she very much fear , they would receive only from herself ; she have little hope of , none of . but she have make up she mind how to meet this presumption so many week before it appear , that when the insult come at last , it find she very differently affect . and have receive they invitation , and none have come for she father and herself ; and 's accounting for it with " I suppose they will not take the liberty with you ; they know you do not dine out , " be not quite sufficient . she feel that she should like to have have the power of refusal ; and afterwards , as the idea of the party to be assemble there , consist precisely of those
those whose society be dearest to she , occur again and again , she do not know that she might not have be temp to accept . be to be there in the evening , and the Bateses . they have be speak of it as they walk about the day before , and have most earnestly lament she absence . might not the evening end in a dance ? have be a question of he . the bare possibility of it act as a farther irritation on she spirit ; and she be leave in solitary grandeur , even suppose the omission to be intend as a compliment , be but poor comfort . it be the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons be at , which make they presence so acceptable ; for though she first remark , on read it , be that " of course it must be decline , " she so very soon proceed to ask they what they advise she to do , that they advice for she go be most prompt and successful . she own that , consider every thing , she be not absolutely without inclination for the party . the Cole express themselves so properly -- there be so much real attention in the manner of it -- so much consideration for she father . " they would have solicit the honour earlier , but have be wait the arrival of a folding - screen from , which they hope might keep Woodhouse from any dratch of air , and therefore induce he the more readily to give they the honour of he company . " upon the whole , she be very persuadable ; and it be briefly settle among themselves how it might be do without neglect he comfort -- how certainly , if not , might be depend on for bear he company -- be to be talk into a acquiescence of he daughter 's go out to dinner on a day now near at hand , and spend the whole evening away from he . as for _his_ go , do not wish he to think it possible , the hour would be too late , and the party too numerous . he be soon pretty well resign . " I be not fond of dinner- visit , " say he -- " I never be . no more be . late hour do not agree with we . I be sorry and . Cole should have do it . I think it would be much better if they would come in one afternoon next summer , and take they tea with we -- take we in they afternoon walk ; which they might do , as we hour be so reasonable , and yet get home without be out in the damp of the evening . the dew of a summer evening be what I would not expose any body to . however , as they be so very desirous to have dear dine with they , and as you will both be there , and too , to take care of she , I can not wish to prevent it , provide the weather be what it ought , neither damp , nor cold , nor windy . " then turn to , with a look of gentle reproach -- " ah ! , if you have not marry , you would have stay at home with I . " " well , sir , " cry , " as I take away , it be incumbent on I to supply she place , if I can ; and I will step to in a moment , if you wish it . " but the idea of any thing to be do in a _moment , be increase , not lessen , 's agitation . the lady know better how to allay it . must be quiet , and every thing deliberately arrange . with this treatment , be soon compose enough for talk as usual . " he should be happy to see . he have a great regard for ; and should write a line , and invite she . could take the note . but first of all , there must be a answer write to . " " you will make my excuse , my dear , as civilly as possible . you will say that I be quite a invalid , and go no where , and therefore must decline they oblige invitation ; begin with my _compliment , of course . but you will do every thing right . I need not tell you what be to be do . we must remember to let know that the carriage will be want on . I shall have no fear for you with he . we have never be there above once since the new approach be make ; but still I have no doubt that will take you very safely . and when you get there , you must tell he at what time you would have he come for you again ; and you have better name a early hour . you will not like stay late . you will get very tired when tea be over . " " but you would not wish I to come away before I be tired , papa ? " " oh ! no , my love ; but you will soon be tired . there will be a great many people talk at once . you will not like the noise . " " but , my dear sir , " cry , " if come away early , it will be break up the party . " " and no great harm if it do , " say . " the sooner every party break up , the better . " " but you do not
not consider how it may appear to the Coles . be go away directly after tea might be give offence . they be good - natured people , and think little of they own claim ; but still they must feel that any body 's hurrying away be no great compliment ; and 's do it would be more think of than any other person 's in the room . you would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles , I be sure , sir ; friendly , good sort of people as ever liv , and who have be you neighbour these _ten_ year . " " no , upon no account in the world , ; I be much oblige to you for remind I . I should be extremely sorry to be give they any pain . I know what worthy people they be . tell I that never touch malt liquor . you would not think it to look at he , but he be bilious -- . be very bilious . no , I would not be the means of give they any pain . my dear , we must consider this . I be sure , rather than run the risk of hurt and . , you would stay a little longer than you might wish . you will not regard be tired . you will be perfectly safe , you know , among you friend . " " oh yes , papa . I have no fear at all for myself ; and I should have no scruple of stay as late as , but on you account . I be only afraid of you sit up for I . I be not afraid of you not be exceedingly comfortable with . she love piquet , you know ; but when she be go home , I be afraid you will be sit up by yourself , instead of go to be at you usual time -- and the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort . you must promise I not to sit up . " he do , on the condition of some promise on she side : such as that , if she come home cold , she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly ; if hungry , that she would take something to eat ; that she own maid should sit up for she ; and that and the butler should see that every thing be safe in the house , as usual . come back again ; and if he keep he father 's dinner wait , it be not know at ; for be too anxious for he be a favourite with , to betray any imperfection which could be conceal . he come back , have have he hair cut , and laugh at himself with a very good grace , but without see really at all asham of what he have do . he have no reason to wish he hair longer , to conceal any confusion of face ; no reason to wish the money unspent , to improve he spirits . he be quite as undaunted and as lively as ever ; and , after see he , thus moralise to herself :-- " I do not know whether it ought to be so , but certainly silly thing do cease to be silly if they be do by sensible people in a impudent way . Wickedness be always wickedness , but folly be not always folly .-- it depend upon the character of those who handle it . , he be _not a trifling , silly young man . if he be , he would have do this differently . he would either have glory in the achievement , or be asham of it . there would have be either the ostentation of a coxcomb , or the evasion of a mind too weak to defend its own vanity .-- no , I be perfectly sure that he be not trifl or silly . " with come the agreeable prospect of see he again , and for a longer time than hitherto ; of judging of he general manners , and by inference , of the meaning of he manners towards herself ; of guess how soon it might be necessary for she to throw coldness into she air ; and of fancying what the observation of all those might be , who be now see they together for the first time . she mean to be very happy , in spite of the scene be laid at 's ; and without be able to forget that among the failings of , even in the day of he favour , none have disturb she more than he propensity to dine with . she father 's comfort be amply secure , as well as be able to come ; and she last pleasing duty , before she leave the house , be to pay she respects to they as they sit together after dinner ; and while she father be fondly notice the beauty of she dress , to make the two lady all the amend in she power , by help they to large slice of cake and full glassis of wine , for whatever unwilling self - denial he care of they constitution might have oblige they to practise during the meal .-- she have provide a plentiful dinner for they ; she wish she could know that they have be allow to eat it . she follow another carriage to 's door ; and be pleased to see that it be 's ; for keep no horse , have little spare money and a great deal of health , activity , and independence , be too apt , in 's opinion , to get about as he could , and not use he carriage so often as become
become the owner of . she have a opportunity now of speak she approbation while warm from she heart , for he stop to hand she out . " this be come as you should do , " say she ; " like a gentleman .-- I be quite glad to see you . " he thank she , observe , " how lucky that we should arrive at the same moment ! for , if we have meet first in the draw - room , I doubt whether you would have discern I to be more of a gentleman than usual .-- you might not have distinguished how I come , by my look or manner . " " yes I should , I be sure I should . there be always a look of consciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know to be beneath they . you think you carry it off very well , I dare say , but with you it be a sort of bravado , a air of affect unconcern ; I always observe it whenever I meet you under those circumstance . now you have nothing to try for . you be not afraid of be suppose asham . you be not strive to look taller than any body else . _Now I shall really be very happy to walk into the same room with you . " " nonsensical girl ! " be he reply , but not at all in anger . have as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as with . she be receive with a cordial respect which could not but please , and give all the consequence she could wish for . when the Weston arrive , the kindest look of love , the strongest of admiration be for she , from both husband and wife ; the son approach she with a cheerful eagerness which mark she as he peculiar object , and at dinner she find he seat by she -- and , as she firmly believe , not without some dexterity on he side . the party be rather large , as it include one other family , a proper unobjectionable country family , whom the Coles have the advantage of naming among they acquaintance , and the male part of 's family , the lawyer of . the less worthy female be to come in the evening , with , , and ; but already , at dinner , they be too numerous for any subject of conversation to be general ; and , while politics and be talk over , could fairly surrender all she attention to the pleasantness of she neighbour . the first remite sound to which she feel herself oblige to attend , be the name of . . seem to be relate something of she that be expect to be very interesting . she listen , and find it well worth listen to . that very dear part of , she fancy , receive a amusing supply . . be tell that she have be call on , and as soon as she enter the room have be strike by the sight of a pianoforte -- a very elegant look instrument -- not a grand , but a large - size square pianoforte ; and the substance of the story , the end of all the dialogue which ensue of surprize , and inquiry , and congratulation on she side , and explanation on 's , be , that this pianoforte have arrive from 's the day before , to the great astonishment of both aunt and niece -- entirely unexpected ; that at first , by 's account , herself be quite at a loss , quite bewilder to think who could possibly have order it -- but now , they be both perfectly satisfied that it could be from only one quarter ; -- of course it must be from . " one can suppose nothing else , " add , " and I be only surprize that there could ever have be a doubt . but , it seem , have a letter from they very lately , and not a word be say about it . she know they way best ; but I should not consider they silence as any reason for they not meane to make the present . they might chuse to surprize she . " have many to agree with she ; every body who speak on the subject be equally convinced that it must come from , and equally rejoice that such a present have be make ; and there be enough ready to speak to allow to think she own way , and still listen to . " I declare , I do not know when I have hear any thing that have give I more satisfaction !--It always have quite hurt I that , who play so delightfully , should not have a instrument . it seem quite a shame , especially consider how many house there be where fine instrument be absolutely throw away . this be like give ourselves a slap , to be sure ! and it be but yesterday I be tell , I really be asham to look at we new grand pianoforte in the drawing - room , while I do not know one note from another , and we little girl , who be but just begin , perhaps may never make any thing of it ; and there be poor , who be mistress of music , have not any thing of the nature of a instrument , not even the pitifullest old spinet in the world , to amuse herself with .-- I be say this to but yesterday , and he quite agree with I ; only he be so particularly fond of music that he could not
not help indulge himself in the purchase , hope that some of we good neighbour might be so oblige occasionally to put it to a better use than we can ; and that really be the reason why the instrument be buy -- or else I be sure we ought to be asham of it . -- we be in great hope that may be prevail with to try it this evening . " Woodhause make the proper acquiescence ; and find that nothing more be to be entrap from any communication of 's , turn to . " why do you smile ? " say she . " Nay , why do you ? " " I !-- I suppose I smile for pleasure at 's be so rich and so liberal .-- it be a handsome present . " " very . " " I rather wonder that it be never make before . " " perhaps have never be stay here so long before . " " or that he do not give she the use of they own instrument -- which must now be shut up in , untouched by any body . " " that be a grand pianoforte , and he might think it too large for 's house . " " you may _say what you chuse -- but you countenance testify that you _thought on this subject be very much like mine . " " I do not know . I rather believe you be give I more credit for acuteness than I deserve . I smile because you smile , and shall probably suspect whatever I find you suspect ; but at present I do not see what there be to question . if be not the person , who can be ? " " what do you say to ? " " . ! very true indeed . I have not think of . she must know as well as she father , how acceptable a instrument would be ; and perhaps the mode of it , the mystery , the surprize , be more like a young woman 's scheme than a elderly man 's . it be , I dare say . I tell you that you suspicion would guide mine . " " if so , you must extend you suspicions and comprehend Dixon in they . " " .-- very well . yes , I immediately perceive that it must be the joint present of and . we be speak the other day , you know , of he be so warm a admirer of she performance . " " yes , and what you tell I on that head , confirm a idea which I have entertain before .-- I do not mean to reflect upon the good intention of either or , but I can not help suspect either that , after make he proposal to she friend , he have the misfortune to fall in love with _her , or that he become conscious of a little attachment on she side . one might guess twenty thing without guess exactly the right ; but I be sure there must be a particular cause for she chusing to come to Highbury instead of go with the Campbell to . here , she must be lead a life of privation and penance ; there it would have be all enjoyment . as to the pretence of try she native air , I look upon that as a mere excuse .-- in the summer it might have pass ; but what can any body 's native air do for they in the month of , , and ? good fir and carriage would be much more to the purpose in most case of delicate health , and I dare say in she 's . I do not require you to adopt all my suspicion , though you make so noble a profession of do it , but I honestly tell you what they be . " " and , upon my word , they have a air of great probability . 's preference of she music to she friend 's , I can answer for be very decided . " " and then , he save she life . do you ever hear of that ?-- a water party ; and by some accident she be fall overboard . he catch she . " " he do . I be there -- one of the party . " " be you really ?-- well ! --but you observ nothing of course , for it seem to be a new idea to you .--if I have be there , I think I should have make some discoveries . " " I dare say you would ; but I , simple I , see nothing but the fact , that be nearly dash from the vessel and that catch she .-- it be the work of a moment . and though the consequent shock and alarm be very great and much more durable -- indeed I believe it be half a hour before any of we be comfortable again -- yet that be too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety to be observable . I do not mean to say , however , that you might not have make discoveries . " the conversation be here interrupt . they be call on to share in the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the course , and oblige to be as formal and as orderly as the other ; but when the table be again safely cover , when every corner dish be place exactly right , and occupation and ease be generally restore , say , " the arrival of this pianoforte be decisive with I . I want to know a little more , and this tell I quite enough . Depend upon it
it , we shall soon hear that it be a present from and . " " and if the Dixon should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we must conclude it to come from the Campbell . " " no , I be sure it be not from the Campbell . know it be not from the Campbell , or they would have be guess at first . she would not have be puzzl , have she da fix on they . I may not have convince you perhaps , but I be perfectly convince myself that be a principal in the business . " " indeed you injure I if you suppose I unconvinced . you reasoning carry my judgment along with they entirely . at first , while I suppose you satisfy that be the giver , I see it only as paternal kindness , and think it the most natural thing in the world . but when you mention , I feel how much more probable that it should be the tribute of warm female friendship . and now I can see it in no other light than as a offering of love . " there be no occasion to press the matter farther . the conviction seem real ; he look as if he feel it . she say no more , other subject take they turn ; and the rest of the dinner pass away ; the dessert succeed , the child come in , and be talk to and admire amid the usual rate of conversation ; a few clever thing say , a few downright silly , but by much the larger proportion neither the one nor the other -- nothing worse than everyday remark , dull repetition , old news , and heavy joke . the lady have not be long in the drawing - room , before the other lady , in they different division , arrive . watch the entree of she own particular little friend ; and if she could not exult in she dignity and grace , she could not only love the blooming sweetness and the artless manner , but could most heartily rejoice in that light , cheerful , unsentimental disposition which allow she so many alleviation of pleasure , in the midst of the pang of disappointed affection . there she sit -- and who would have guess how many tear she have be lately shed ? to be in company , nicly dress herself and see other nicly dress , to sit and smile and look pretty , and say nothing , be enough for the happiness of the present hour . do look and move superior ; but suspect she might have be glad to change feeling with , very glad to have purchase the mortification of have love -- yes , of have love even in vain -- by the surrender of all the dangerous pleasure of know herself belove by the husband of she friend . in so large a party it be not necessary that should approach she . she do not wish to speak of the pianoforte , she feel too much in the secret herself , to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair , and therefore purposely keep at a distance ; but by the other , the subject be almost immediately introduce , and she see the blush of consciousness with which congratulation be receive , the blush of guilt which accompany the name of " my excellent friend . " , kind - hear and musical , be particularly interested by the circumstance , and could not help be amuse at she perseverance in dwelling on the subject ; and have so much to ask and to say as to tone , touch , and pedal , totally unsuspicious of that wish of say as little about it as possible , which she plainly read in the fair heroine 's countenance . they be soon join by some of the gentleman ; and the very first of the early be . in he walk , the first and the handsomest ; and after pay he compliment en passant to and she niece , make he way directly to the opposite side of the circle , where sat ; and till he could find a seat by she , would not sit at all . divine what every body present must be think . she be he object , and every body must perceive it . she introduce he to she friend , , and , at convenient moment afterwards , hear what each thought of the other . " he have never see so lovely a face , and be delighted with she naivete . " and she , " only to be sure it be pay he too great a compliment , but she do think there be some look a little like . " restrain she indignation , and only turn from she in silence . Smile of intelligence pass between she and the gentleman on first glancing towards ; but it be most prudent to avoid speech . he tell she that he have be impatient to leave the dining - room -- hate sit long -- be always the first to move when he could -- that he father , , , and , be leave very busy over parish business -- that as long as he have staid , however , it have be pleasant enough , as he have find they in general a set of gentlemanlike , sensible man ; and speak so handsomely of altogether -- think it so abundant in agreeable family -- that begin to feel she have be use to despise the place rather too much . she question he as to the society in -- the extent of the neighbourhood about , and the sort ; and could make out from he answer
answer that , as far as be concerned , there be very little go on , that they visitings be among a range of great family , none very near ; and that even when day be fix , and invitation accept , it be a even chance that be not in health and spirit for go ; that they make a point of visit no fresh person ; and that , though he have he separate engagement , it be not without difficulty , without considerable address _at_ _time , that he could get away , or introduce a acquaintance for a night . she see that could not satisfy , and that Highbury , take at its best , might reasonably please a young man who have more retirement at home than he like . he importance at be very evident . he do not boast , but it naturally betraye itself , that he have persuade he aunt where he uncle could do nothing , and on she laugh and notice it , he own that he believe ( except one or two point ) he could _with_ _time_ persuade she to any thing . one of those point on which he influence fail , he then mention . he have want very much to go abroad -- have be very eager indeed to be allow to travel -- but she would not hear of it . this have happen the year before . _Now _, he say , he be begin to have no longer the same wish . the unpersuadable point , which he do not mention , guess to be good behaviour to he father . " I have make a most wretched discovery , " say he , after a short pause .-- " I have be here a week to - morrow -- half my time . I never know day fly so fast . a week to -morrow !-- and I have hardly begin to enjoy myself . but just get acquainted with , and other !-- I hate the recollection . " " perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spend one whole day , out of so few , in have you hair cut . " " no , " say he , smile , " that be no subject of regret at all . I have no pleasure in see my friend , unless I can believe myself fit to be see . " the rest of the gentleman be now in the room , find herself oblige to turn from he for a few minute , and listen to . when have move away , and she attention could be restore as before , she see Churchill look intently across the room at , who be sit exactly opposite . " what be the matter ? " say she . he start . " thank you for rouse I , " he reply . " I believe I have be very rude ; but really have do she hair in so odd a way -- so very odd a way -- that I can not keep my eye from she . I never see any thing so outree !-- those curl !-- this must be a fancy of she own . I see nobody else look like she !-- I must go and ask she whether it be a irish fashion . shall I ?-- yes , I will -- I declare I will -- and you shall see how she take it ;-- whether she colour . " he be go immediately ; and soon see he stand before , and talk to she ; but as to its effect on the young lady , as he have improvidently place himself exactly between they , exactly in front of , she could absolutely distinguish nothing . before he could return to he chair , it be take by . " this be the luxury of a large party , " say she :-- " one can get near every body , and say every thing . my dear , I be longe to talk to you . I have be make discoveries and form plan , just like yourself , and I must tell they while the idea be fresh . do you know how and she niece come here ? " " how ?-- they be invite , be not they ? " " oh ! yes -- but how they be convey hither ?-- the manner of they come ? " " they walk , I conclude . how else could they come ? " " very true .-- well , a little while ago it occur to I how very sad it would be to have walk home again , late at night , and cold as the night be now . and as I look at she , though I never see she appear to more advantage , it strike I that she be heat , and would therefore be particularly liable to take cold . poor girl ! I could not bear the idea of it ; so , as soon as come into the room , and I could get at he , I speak to he about the carriage . you may guess how readily he come into my wish ; and have he approbation , I make my way directly to , to assure she that the carriage would be at she service before it take we home ; for I think it would be make she comfortable at once . good soul ! she be as grateful as possible , you may be sure . ' nobody be ever so fortunate as herself !' -- but with many , many thanks --' there be no occasion to trouble we , for 's carriage have bring , and be to take they home again . ' I
I be quite surprized ;-- very glad , I be sure ; but really quite surprized . such a very kind attention -- and so thoughtful a attention !-- the sort of thing that so few man would think of . and , in short , from know he usual way , I be very much inclin to think that it be for they accommodation the carriage be use at all . I do suspect he would not have have a pair of horse for himself , and that it be only as a excuse for assist they . " " very likely , " say --" nothing more likely . I know no man more likely than to do the sort of thing -- to do any thing really good - natured , useful , considerate , or benevolent . he be not a gallant man , but he be a very humane one ; and this , consider 's ill - health , would appear a case of humanity to he ; -- and for a act of unostentatious kindness , there be nobody whom I would fix on more than on . I know he have horse to - day -- for we arrive together ; and I laugh at he about it , but he say not a word that could betray . " " well , " say , smile , " you give he credit for more simple , disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do ; for while be speak , a suspicion dart into my head , and I have never be able to get it out again . the more I think of it , the more probable it appear . in short , I have make a match between and . see the consequence of keep you company !-- what do you say to it ? " " and ! " exclaim . " dear , how could you think of such a thing ?-- !-- must not marry !-- you would not have little Henry cut out from ?-- oh ! no , no , must have . I can not at all consent to 's marry ; and I be sure it be not at all likely . I be amaze that you should think of such a thing . " " my dear , I have tell you what lead I to think of it . I do not want the match -- I do not want to injure dear little Henry -- but the idea have be give I by circumstance ; and if really wish to marry , you would not have he refrain on 's account , a boy of six year old , who know nothing of the matter ? " " yes , I would . I could not bear to have Henry supplant .-- !-- no , I have never have such a idea , and I can not adopt it now . and , too , of all woman ! " " Nay , she have always be a first favourite with he , as you very well know . " " but the imprudence of such a match ! " " I be not speak of its prudence ; merely its probability . " " I see no probability in it , unless you have any better foundation than what you mention . he good - nature , he humanity , as I tell you , would be quite enough to account for the horse . he have a great regard for the Bateses , you know , independent of -- and be always glad to show they attention . my dear , do not take to match - making . you do it very ill . mistress of the !-- oh ! no , no ;--every feeling revolt . for he own sake , I would not have he do so mad a thing . " " Imprudent , if you please -- but not mad . Excepting inequality of fortune , and perhaps a little disparity of age , I can see nothing unsuitable . " " but do not want to marry . I be sure he have not the least idea of it . do not put it into he head . why should he marry ?-- he be as happy as possible by himself ; with he farm , and he sheep , and he library , and all the parish to manage ; and he be extremely fond of he brother 's child . he have no occasion to marry , either to fill up he time or he heart . " " my dear , as long as he think so , it be so ; but if he really love -- " " Nonsense ! he do not care about . in the way of love , I be sure he do not . he would do any good to she , or she family ; but -- " " well , " say , laugh , " perhaps the greatest good he could do they , would be to give such a respectable home . " " if it would be good to she , I be sure it would be evil to himself ; a very shameful and degrad connexion . how would he bear to have belong to he ?-- to have she haunt the , and thanke he all day long for he great kindness in marry ?-- ' so very kind and oblige ! -- but he always have be such a very kind neighbour ! ' and then fly off , through half a sentence , to she mother 's old petticoat . ' not that it be such a very old petticoat either -- for still it would last a great while -- and , indeed , she must thankfully say that they petticoat
petticoat be all very strong . ' " " for shame , ! do not mimic she . you divert I against my conscience . and , upon my word , I do not think would be much disturb by . little thing do not irritate he . she might talk on ; and if he want to say any thing himself , he would only talk louder , and dry she voice . but the question be not , whether it would be a bad connexion for he , but whether he wish it ; and I think he do . I have hear he speak , and so must you , so very highly of ! the interest he take in she -- he anxiety about she health -- he concern that she should have no happier prospect ! I have hear he express himself so warmly on those point !-- such a admirer of she performance on the pianoforte , and of she voice ! I have hear he say that he could listen to she for ever . oh ! and I have almost forgote one idea that occur to I -- this pianoforte that have be send here by somebody -- though we have all be so well satisfied to consider it a present from the Campbell , may it not be from ? I can not help suspect he . I think he be just the person to do it , even without be in love . " " then it can be no argument to prove that he be in love . but I do not think it be at all a likely thing for he to do . do nothing mysteriously . " " I have hear he lament she have no instrument repeatedly ; oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would , in the common course of thing , occur to he . " " very well ; and if he have intend to give she one , he would have tell she so . " " there might be scruple of delicacy , my dear Emma . I have a very strong notion that it come from he . I be sure he be particularly silent when . tell we of it at dinner . " " you take up a idea , , and run away with it ; as you have many a time reproach I with do . I see no sign of attachment -- I believe nothing of the pianoforte -- and proof only shall convince I that have any thought of marry . " they combate the point some time longer in the same way ; rather gain ground over the mind of she friend ; for be the most use of the two to ; till a little bustle in the room shew they that tea be over , and the instrument in preparation ; -- and at the same moment approach to entreat would do they the honour of try it . , of whom , in the eagerness of she conversation with , she have be see nothing , except that he have find a seat by , follow , to add he very pressing entreaty ; and as , in every respect , it suit best to lead , she give a very proper compliance . she know the limitation of she own power too well to attempt more than she could perform with credit ; she want neither taste nor spirit in the little thing which be generally acceptable , and could accompany she own voice well . one accompaniment to she song take she agreeably by surprize -- a second , slightly but correctly take by . she pardon be duly begge at the close of the song , and every thing usual follow . he be accuse of have a delightful voice , and a perfect knowledge of music ; which be properly deny ; and that he know nothing of the matter , and have no voice at all , roundly assert . they sang together once more ; and would then resign she place to , whose performance , both vocal and instrumental , she never could attempt to conceal from herself , be infinitely superior to she own . with mix feelings , she seat herself at a little distance from the number round the instrument , to listen . sang again . they have sung together once or twice , it appear , at . but the sight of among the most attentive , soon draw away half 's mind ; and she fall into a train of think on the subject of 's suspicion , to which the sweet sound of the voice give only momentary interruption . she objection to 's marrying do not in the least subside . she could see nothing but evil in it . it would be a great disappointment to ; consequently to . a real injury to the child -- a most mortifying change , and material loss to they all ;-- a very great deduction from she father 's daily comfort -- and , as to herself , she could not at all endure the idea of at . a for they all to give way to -- must never marry . Henry must remain the heir of . presently look back , and come and sit down by she . they talk at first only of the performance . he admiration be certainly very warm ; yet she think , but for , it would not have strike she . as a sort of touchstone , however , she begin to speak of he kindness in convey the aunt and niece ; and though he answer be in the spirit of cut the matter short , she believe it to indicate only he disinclination to dwell on any kindness of he own .
. " I often feel concern , " say she , " that I dare not make we carriage more useful on such occasion . it be not that I be without the wish ; but you know how impossible my father would deem it that should put -to for such a purpose . " " quite out of the question , quite out of the question , " he reply ;-- " but you must often wish it , I be sure . " and he smile with such see pleasure at the conviction , that she must proceed another step . " this present from the Campbell , " say she -- " this pianoforte be very kindly give . " " yes , " he reply , and without the smallest apparent embarrassment .-- " but they would have do better have they give she notice of it . Surprize be foolish thing . the pleasure be not enhance , and the inconvenience be often considerable . I should have expect better judgment in . " from that moment , could have take she oath that have have no concern in give the instrument . but whether he be entirely free from peculiar attachment -- whether there be no actual preference -- remain a little longer doubtful . towards the end of 's second song , she voice grow thick . " that will do , " say he , when it be finish , think aloud --" you have sung quite enough for one evening -- now be quiet . " another song , however , be soon begge for . " one more ; -- they would not fatigue on any account , and would only ask for one more . " and be hear to say , " I think you could manage this without effort ; the first part be so very trifling . the strength of the song fall on the second . " grow angry . " that fellow , " say he , indignantly , " think of nothing but shew off he own voice . this must not be . " and touch , who at that moment pass near -- " , be you mad , to let you niece s herself hoarse in this manner ? go , and interfere . they have no mercy on she . " , in she real anxiety for , could hardly stay even to be grateful , before she steep forward and put a end to all farther singing . here cease the concert part of the evening , for and be the only young lady performer ; but soon ( within five minute ) the proposal of dancing -- originate nobody exactly know where -- be so effectually promote by and . , that every thing be rapidly clear away , to give proper space . , capital in she country - dance , be seat , and begin a irresistible waltz ; and , come up with most become gallantry to , have secure she hand , and lead she up to the top . while wait till the other young people could pair themselves off , find time , in spite of the compliment she be receive on she voice and she taste , to look about , and see what become of . this would be a trial . he be no dancer in general . if he be to be very alert in engage now , it might augur something . there be no immediate appearance . no ; he be talk to . -- he be look on unconcerned ; be ask by somebody else , and he be still talk to . have no longer a alarm for ; he interest be yet safe ; and she lead off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment . not more than five couple could be muster ; but the rarity and the suddenness of it make it very delightful , and she find herself well match in a partner . they be a couple worth look at . two dance , unfortunately , be all that could be allow . it be grow late , and become anxious to get home , on she mother 's account . after some attempt , therefore , to be permit to begin again , they be oblige to thank , look sorrowful , and have do . " perhaps it be as well , " say , as he attend to she carriage . " I must have ask , and she languid dancing would not have agree with I , after yours . " do not repent she condescension in go to the Coles . the visit afford she many pleasant recollection the next day ; and all that she might be suppose to have lose on the side of dignified seclusion , must be amply repay in the splendour of popularity . she must have deligh the Coles -- worthy people , who deserv to be make happy !-- and leave a name behind she that would not soon die away . perfect happiness , even in memory , be not common ; and there be two point on which she be not quite easy . she doubt whether she have not transgress the duty of woman by woman , in betraie she suspicions of 's feeling to . it be hardly right ; but it have be so strong a idea , that it would escape she , and he submission to all that she tell , be a compliment to she penetration , which make it difficult for she to be quite certain that she ought to have hold she tongue . the other circumstance of regret related also to ; and there she have no doubt . she do unfeignedly and unequivocally regret the inferiority of she own play and singe . she
she do most heartily grieve over the idleness of she childhood -- and sit down and practise vigorously a hour and a half . she be then interrupt by 's come in ; and if 's praise could have satisfi she , she might soon have be comforte . " oh ! if I could but play as well as you and ! " " do not class we together , . my playing be no more like she 's , than a lamp be like sunshine . " " oh ! dear -- I think you play the best of the two . I think you play quite as well as she do . I be sure I have much rather hear you . every body last night say how well you play . " " those who know any thing about it , must have feel the difference . the truth be , , that my playing be just good enough to be praise , but 's be much beyond it . " " well , I always shall think that you play quite as well as she do , or that if there be any difference nobody would ever find it out . say how much taste you have ; and talk a great deal about you taste , and that he value taste much more than execution . " " ah ! but have they both , . " " be you sure ? I see she have execution , but I do not know she have any taste . nobody talk about it . and I hate italian singe .-- there be no understanding a word of it . besides , if she do play so very well , you know , it be no more than she be obliged to do , because she will have to teach . the Coxe be wonder last night whether she would get into any great family . how do you think the Cox look ? " " just as they always do -- very vulgar . " " they tell I something , " say rather hesitatingly ; " but it be nothing of any consequence . " be oblige to ask what they have tell she , though fearful of its producing . " they tell I -- that dine with they last . " " oh ! " " he come to they father upon some business , and he ask he to stay to dinner . " " oh ! " " they talk a great deal about he , especially . I do not know what she mean , but she ask I if I think I should go and stay there again next summer . " " she mean to be impertinently curious , just as such a should be . " " she say he be very agreeable the day he dine there . he sit by she at dinner . think either of the Coxe would be very glad to marry he . " " very likely .-- I think they be , without exception , the most vulgar girl in . " have business at 's .-- think it most prudent to go with she . another accidental meeting with the be possible , and in she present state , would be dangerous . , tempt by every thing and sway by half a word , be always very long at a purchase ; and while she be still hang over muslin and change she mind , go to the door for amusement .-- much could not be hope from the traffic of even the busiest part of ;-- walk hastily by , let himself in at the office - door , 's carriage - horse return from exercise , or a stray letter - boy on a obstinate mule , be the liveliest object she could presume to expect ; and when she eye fall only on the butcher with he tray , a tidy old woman travel homeward from shop with she full basket , two curs quarrell over a dirty bone , and a string of dawdling child round the baker 's little bow - window eyee the gingerbread , she know she have no reason to complain , and be amused enough ; quite enough still to stand at the door . a mind lively and at ease , can do with see nothing , and can see nothing that do not answer . she look down the road . the scene enlarge ; two person appear ; and she son - in - law ; they be walk into ; -- to of course . they be stop , however , in the first place at 's ; whose house be a little nearer Randall than 's ; and have all but knock , when catch they eye .-- immediately they cross the road and come forward to she ; and the agreeableness of yesterday 's engagement seem to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting . inform she that she be go to call on the , in order to hear the new instrument . " for my companion tell I , " say she , " that I absolutely promise last night , that I would come this morning . I be not aware of it myself . I do not know that I have fix a day , but as he say I do , I be go now . " " and while pay she visit , I may be allow , I hope , " say , " to join you party and wait for she at -- if you be go home . " be disappoint . " I think you mean to go with I . they would be very much pleased . " " I ! I should be quite in the way . but , perhaps
perhaps -- I may be equally in the way here . look as if she do not want I . my aunt always send I off when she be shopping . she say I fidget she to death ; and look as if she could almost say the same . what be I to do ? " " I be here on no business of my own , " say ; " I be only wait for my friend . she will probably have soon do , and then we shall go home . but you have better go with and hear the instrument . " " well -- if you advise it .-- but ( with a smile ) if should have employ a careless friend , and if it should prove to have a indifferent tone -- what shall I say ? I shall be no support to . she might do very well by herself . a disagreeable truth would be palatable through she lip , but I be the wretchedest be in the world at a civil falsehood . " " I do not believe any such thing , " reply .--" I be persuade that you can be as insincere as you neighbour , when it be necessary ; but there be no reason to suppose the instrument be indifferent . quite otherwise indeed , if I understand 's opinion last night . " " do come with I , " say , " if it be not very disagreeable to you . it need not detain we long . we will go to afterwards . we will follow they to . I really wish you to call with I . it will be feel so great a attention ! and I always think you mean it . " he could say no more ; and with the hope of to reward he , return with to 's door . watch they in , and then join at the interesting counter , -- try , with all the force of she own mind , to convince she that if she want plain muslin it be of no use to look at figure ; and that a blue ribbon , be it ever so beautiful , would still never match she yellow pattern . at last it be all settled , even to the destination of the parcel . " should I send it to 's , ma 'am ? " ask .-- " yes -- no -- yes , to 's . only my pattern gown be at . no , you shall send it to , if you please . but then , . will want to see it . -- and I could take the pattern gow home any day . but I shall want the ribbon directly -- so it have better go to -- at least the ribbon . you could make it into two parcel , , could not you ? " " it be not worth while , , to give . Ford the trouble of two parcel . " " no more it be . " " no trouble in the world , ma 'am , " say the oblige . " oh ! but indeed I would much rather have it only in one . then , if you please , you shall send it all to 's -- I do not know -- no , I think , , I may just as well have it send to , and take it home with I at night . what do you advise ? " " that you do not give another half - second to the subject . to , if you please , . " " aye , that will be much best , " say , quite satisfied , " I should not at all like to have it send to 's . " voice approach the shop -- or rather one voice and two lady : and meet they at the door . " my dear , " say the latter , " I be just run across to entreat the favour of you to come and sit down with we a little while , and give we you opinion of we new instrument ; you and . how do you do , ?--Very well I thank you . -- and I beg to come with I , that I might be sure of succeeding . " " I hope and be -- " " very well , I be much oblige to you . my mother be delightfully well ; and catch no cold last night . how be ?-- I be so glad to hear such a good account . tell I you be here .-- oh ! then , say I , I must run across , I be sure will allow I just to run across and entreat she to come in ; my mother will be so very happy to see she -- and now we be such a nice party , she can not refuse .--' aye , pray do , ' say , ' 's opinion of the instrument will be worth have . '-- but , say I , I shall be more sure of succeed if one of you will go with I , ' say he , ' wait half a minute , till I have finish my job ;'-- for , would you believe it , , there he be , in the most obliging manner in the world , fasten in the rivet of my mother 's spectacle .-- the rivet come out , you know , this morning .-- so very obliging !-- for my mother have no use of she spectacle -- could not put they on . and , by the bye , every body ought to have two pair of spectacle ; they should indeed . say so
so . I mean to take they over to the first thing I do , but something or other hinder I all the morning ; first one thing , then another , there be no say what , you know . at one time come to say she think the kitchen chimney want sweeping . oh , say I , do not come with you bad news to I . here be the rivet of you mistress 's spectacle out . then the baked apple come home , Wallis send they by she boy ; they be extremely civil and oblige to we , the Wallise , always -- I have hear some people say that Wallis can be uncivil and give a very rude answer , but we have never know any thing but the greatest attention from they . and it can not be for the value of we custom now , for what be we consumption of bread , you know ? only three of we .-- besides dear at present -- and she really eat nothing -- make such a shocking breakfast , you would be quite frightened if you see it . I dare not let my mother know how little she eat -- so I say one thing and then I say another , and it pass off . but about the middle of the day she get hungry , and there be nothing she like so well as these baked apple , and they be extremely wholesome , for I take the opportunity the other day of ask ; I happen to meet he in the street . not that I have any doubt before -- I have so often hear recommend a baked apple . I believe it be the only way that think the fruit thoroughly wholesome . we have apple - dumpling , however , very often . make a excellent apple - dumpling . well , , you have prevail , I hope , and these lady will oblige we . " would be " very happy to wait on , & c. , " and they do at last move out of the shop , with no farther delay from than , " how do you do , . ? I beg you pardon . I do not see you before . I hear you have a charming collection of new ribbon from town . come back delighted yesterday . thank ye , the glove do very well -- only a little too large about the wrist ; but be take they in . " " what be I talk of ? " say she , begin again when they be all in the street . wonder on what , of all the medley , she would fix . " I declare I can not recollect what I be talk of .-- oh ! my mother 's spectacle . so very obliging of ! 'Oh ! ' say he , 'I do think I can fasten the rivet ; I like a job of this kind excessively .'-- which you know shew he to be so very . . . . indeed I must say that , much as I have hear of he before and much as I have expect , he very far exceed any thing . . . . I do congratulate you , , most warmly . he seem every thing the fondest parent could . . . . 'Oh ! ' say he , 'I can fasten the rivet . I like a job of that sort excessively . ' I never shall forget he manner . and when I bring out the baked apple from the closet , and hope we friend would be so very obliging as to take some , ' oh ! ' say he directly , ' there be nothing in the way of fruit half so good , and these be the finest - look home - bake apple I ever see in my life . ' that , you know , be so very . . . . and I be sure , by he manner , it be no compliment . indeed they be very delightful apple , and do they full justice -- only we do not have they bake more than twice , and make we promise to have they do three time -- but will be so good as not to mention it . the apple themselves be the very finest sort for baking , beyond a doubt ; all from -- some of 's most liberal supply . he send we a sack every year ; and certainly there never be such a keeping apple anywhere as one of he trees -- I believe there be two of they . my mother say the orchard be always famous in she younger day . but I be really quite shocke the other day -- for call one morning , and be eat these apple , and we talk about they and say how much she enjoy they , and he ask whether we be not get to the end of we stock . 'I be sure you must be , ' say he , ' and I will send you another supply ; for I have a great many more than I can ever use . let I keep a larger quantity than usual this year . I will send you some more , before they get good for nothing . ' so I beg he would not -- for really as to ours be go , I could not absolutely say that we have a great many left -- it be but half a dozen indeed ; but they should be all keep for ; and I could not at all bear that he should be send we more , so liberal as he have be already ; and say the same
same . and when he be go , she almost quarrell with I -- no , I should not say quarrell , for we never have a quarrel in we life ; but she be quite distressed that I have own the apple be so nearly go ; she wish I have make he believe we have a great many left . oh , say I , my dear , I do say as much as I could . however , the very same evening come over with a large basket of apple , the same sort of apple , a bushel at least , and I be very much obliged , and go down and speak to and say every thing , as you may suppose . be such a old acquaintance ! I be always glad to see he . but , however , I find afterwards from , that say it be all the apple of _that sort he master have ; he have bring they all -- and now he master have not one leave to bake or boil . do not seem to mind it himself , he be so pleased to think he master have sell so many ; for , you know , think more of he master 's profit than any thing ; but Hodge , he say , be quite displease at they be all send away . she could not bear that she master should not be able to have another apple - tart this spring . he tell this , but bid she not mind it , and be sure not to say any thing to we about it , for Hodge _would be cross sometimes , and as long as so many sack be sell , it do not signify who eat the remainder . and so tell I , and I be excessively shocked indeed ! I would not have know any thing about it for the world ! he would be so very . . . . I want to keep it from 's knowledge ; but , unluckily , I have mention it before I be aware . " have just do as open the door ; and she visitor walk upstairs without have any regular narration to attend to , pursue only by the sound of she desultory good - will . " pray take care , , there be a step at the turning . pray take care , , ours be rather a dark staircase -- rather darker and narrower than one could wish . , pray take care . , I be quite concerned , I be sure you hit you foot . , the step at the turning . " the appearance of the little sitting - room as they enter , be tranquillity itself ; , deprive of she usual employment , slumber on one side of the fire , , at a table near she , most deedily occupy about she spectacle , and , stand with she back to they , intent on she pianoforte . busy as he be , however , the young man be yet able to show a most happy countenance on see again . " this be a pleasure , " say he , in rather a low voice , " come at least ten minute earlier than I have calculate . you find I try to be useful ; tell I if you think I shall succeed . " " what ! " say , " have not you finish it yet ? you would not earn a very good livelihood as a work silversmith at this rate . " " I have not be work uninterruptedly , " he reply , " I have be assist in try to make she instrument stand steadily , it be not quite firm ; a unevenness in the floor , I believe . you see we have be wedge one leg with paper . this be very kind of you to be persuade to come . I be almost afraid you would be hurry home . " he contrive that she should be seat by he ; and be sufficiently employ in look out the best baked apple for she , and try to make she help or advise he in he work , till be quite ready to sit down to the pianoforte again . that she be not immediately ready , do suspect to arise from the state of she nerve ; she have not yet possess the instrument long enough to touch it without emotion ; she must reason herself into the power of performance ; and could not but pity such feeling , whatever they origin , and could not but resolve never to expose they to she neighbour again . at last begin , and though the first bars be feebly give , the power of the instrument be gradually do full justice to . have be deligh before , and be delighte again ; join she in all she praise ; and the pianoforte , with every proper discrimination , be pronounce to be altogether of the highest promise . " whoever might employ , " say , with a smile at , " the person have not choose ill . I hear a good deal of 's taste at ; and the softness of the upper note I be sure be exactly what he and _all _that_ _party would particularly prize . I dare say , , that he either give he friend very minute direction , or write to himself . do not you think so ? " do not look round . she be not oblige to hear . have be speak to she at the same moment . " it be not fair , " say , in a whisper ; " mine be a random guess . do not distress she . "
" he shook he head with a smile , and look as if he have very little doubt and very little mercy . afterwards he begin again , " how much you friend in must be enjoy you pleasure on this occasion , . I dare say they often think of you , and wonder which will be the day , the precise day of the instrument 's come to hand . do you imagine know the business to be go forward just at this time ?-- do you imagine it to be the consequence of a immediate commission from he , or that he may have send only a general direction , a order indefinite as to time , to depend upon contingency and convenience ? " he pause . she could not but hear ; she could not avoid answering , " till I have a letter from , " say she , in a voice of force calmness , " I can imagine nothing with any confidence . it must be all conjecture . " " Conjecture -- aye , sometimes one conjecture right , and sometimes one conjecture wrong . I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make this rivet quite firm . what nonsense one talk , , when hard at work , if one talk at all ; -- you real workman , I suppose , hold they tongue ; but we gentleman labourer if we get hold of a word -- say something about conjecturing . there , it be done . I have the pleasure , madam , ( to , ) of restore you spectacle , heal for the present . " he be very warmly thanke both by mother and daughter ; to escape a little from the latter , he go to the pianoforte , and beg , who be still sit at it , to play something more . " if you be very kind , " say he , " it will be one of the waltze we dance last night ; -- let I live they over again . you do not enjoy they as I do ; you appear tire the whole time . I believe you be glad we dance no longer ; but I would have give worlds -- all the worlds one ever have to give -- for another half - hour . " she play . " what felicity it be to hear a tune again which _has_ make one happy !-- if I mistake not that be dance at . " she look up at he for a moment , colour deeply , and play something else . he take some music from a chair near the pianoforte , and turn to , say , " here be something quite new to I . do you know it ?-- .-- and here be a new set of irish melody . that , from such a quarter , one might expect . this be all send with the instrument . very thoughtful of , be not it ?-- he know could have no music here . I honour that part of the attention particularly ; it shew it to have be so thoroughly from the heart . nothing hastily do ; nothing incomplete . true affection only could have prompt it . " wish he would be less pointed , yet could not help be amuse ; and when on glance she eye towards she catch the remains of a smile , when she see that with all the deep blush of consciousness , there have be a smile of secret delight , she have less scruple in the amusement , and much less compunction with respect to she .-- this amiable , upright , perfect be apparently cherish very reprehensible feeling . he bring all the music to she , and they look it over together .-- take the opportunity of whispering , " you speak too plain . she must understand you . " " I hope she do . I would have she understand I . I be not in the least asham of my meaning . " " but really , I be half asham , and wish I have never take up the idea . " " I be very glad you do , and that you communicate it to I . I have now a key to all she odd look and way . leave shame to she . if she do wrong , she ought to feel it . " " she be not entirely without it , I think . " " I do not see much sign of it . she be play _Robin_ _Adair_ at this moment--_his favourite . " shortly afterwards , pass near the window , descry on horse - back not far off . " I declare !-- I must speak to he if possible , just to thank he . I will not open the window here ; it would give you all cold ; but I can go into my mother 's room you know . I dare say he will come in when he know who be here . quite delightful to have you all meet so !-- we little room so honoured ! " she be in the adjoining chamber while she still speak , and open the casement there , immediately call 's attention , and every syllable of they conversation be as distinctly hear by the other , as if it have pass within the same apartment . " how d' ye do ?--how 'ye do ?--Very well , I thank you . so oblige to you for the carriage last night . we be just in time ; my mother just ready for we . pray come in ; do come in . you will find some friend here . " so begin ; and seem determined to be hear
hear in he turn , for most resolutely and commandingly do he say , " how be you niece , ?-- I want to inquire after you all , but particularly you niece . how be ?-- I hope she catch no cold last night . how be she to - day ? tell I how be . " and be oblige to give a direct answer before he would hear she in any thing else . the listener be amused ; and give a look of particular meaning . but still shook she head in steady scepticism . " so oblige to you !-- so very much oblige to you for the carriage , " resume . he cut she short with , " I be go to . can I do any thing for you ? " " oh ! dear , -- be you ?-- be say the other day she want something from . " " Mrs . Cole have servant to send . can I do any thing for _you_? " " no , I thank you . but do come in . who do you think be here ?-- and ; so kind as to call to hear the new pianoforte . do put up you horse at the Crown , and come in . " " well , " say he , in a deliberating manner , " for five minute , perhaps . " " and here be and too !-- quite delightful ; so many friend ! " " no , not now , I thank you . I could not stay two minute . I must get on to as fast as I can . " " oh ! do come in . they will be so very happy to see you . " " no , no ; you room be full enough . I will call another day , and hear the pianoforte . " " well , I be so sorry !-- oh ! , what a delightful party last night ; how extremely pleasant . -- do you ever see such dancing ?-- be not it delightful ?-- and ; I never see any thing equal to it . " " oh ! very delightful indeed ; I can say nothing less , for I suppose and be hear every thing that pass . and ( raise he voice still more ) I do not see why should not be mention too . I think dance very well ; and be the very best country - dance player , without exception , in . now , if you friend have any gratitude , they will say something pretty loud about you and I in return ; but I can not stay to hear it . " " oh ! , one moment more ; something of consequence -- so shocked !-- and I be both so shocked about the apple ! " " what be the matter now ? " " to think of you send we all you store apple . you say you have a great many , and now you have not one leave . we really be so shocked ! may well be angry . mention it here . you should not have do it , indeed you should not . ah ! he be off . he never can bear to be thank . but I think he would have stay now , and it would have be a pity not to have mention . . . . well , ( return to the room , ) I have not be able to succeed . can not stop . he be go to . he ask I if he could do any thing . . . . " " yes , " say , " we hear he kind offer , we hear every thing . " " oh ! yes , my dear , I dare say you might , because you know , the door be open , and the window be open , and speak loud . you must have hear every thing to be sure . ' can I do any thing for you at ? ' say he ; so I just mention . . . . oh ! , must you be go seem but just come -- so very obliging of you . " find it really time to be at home ; the visit have already last long ; and on examining watch , so much of the morning be perceive to be gone , that and she companion take leave also , could allow themselves only to walk with the two young lady to Hartfield gate , before they set off for Randalls . it may be possible to do without dancing entirely . instance have be know of young people pass many , many month successively , without be at any ball of any description , and no material injury accrue either to body or mind ; -- but when a beginning be make -- when the felicity of rapid motion have once be , though slightly , feel -- it must be a very heavy set that do not ask for more . have dance once at , and longe to dance again ; and the last half - hour of a evening which be persuade to spend with he daughter at , be pass by the two young people in scheme on the subject . 's be the first idea ; and he the greatest zeal in pursue it ; for the lady be the best judge of the difficulty , and the most solicitous for accommodation and appearance . but still she have inclination enough for shewing people again how delightfully and Woodhouse dance -- for do that in which she need not blush to compare herself with -- and even for simple dancing itself , without any of
of the wicked aids of vanity -- to assist he first in pace out the room they be in to see what it could be make to hold -- and then in take the dimension of the other parlour , in the hope of discovering , in spite of all that could say of they exactly equal size , that it be a little the largest . he first proposition and request , that the dance begin at 's should be finish there -- that the same party should be collect , and the same musician engage , meet with the readiest acquiescence . enter into the idea with thorough enjoyment , and most willingly undertake to play as long as they could wish to dance ; and the interesting employment have follow , of reckon up exactly who there would be , and portion out the indispensable division of space to every couple . " you and , and , will be three , and the two five , " have be repeat many time over . " and there will be the two Gilbert , young , my father , and myself , besides . yes , that will be quite enough for pleasure . you and , and , will be three , and the two five ; and for five couple there will be plenty of room . " but soon it come to be on one side , " but while there be good room for five couple ?-- I really do not think there will . " on another , " and after all , five couple be not enough to make it worth while to stand up . five couple be nothing , when one think seriously about it . it will not do to _invite five couple . it can be allowable only as the thought of the moment . " somebody say that _miss_ be expect at she brother 's , and must be invite with the rest . somebody else believe _Mrs_. would have dance the other evening , if she have be ask . a word be put in for a second young Cox ; and at last , name one family of cousin who must be include , and another of very old acquaintance who could not be leave out , it become a certainty that the five couple would be at least ten , and a very interesting speculation in what possible manner they could be dispose of . the door of the two rooms be just opposite each other . " might not they use both room , and dance across the passage ? " it seem the best scheme ; and yet it be not so good but that many of they want a better . say it would be awkward ; be in distress about the supper ; and oppose it earnestly , on the score of health . it make he so very unhappy , indeed , that it could not be persever in . " oh ! no , " say he ; " it would be the extreme of imprudence . I could not bear it for !-- be not strong . she would catch a dreadful cold . so would poor little . so you would all . , you would be quite laid up ; do not let they talk of such a wild thing . pray do not let they talk of it . that young man ( speak lower ) be very thoughtless . do not tell he father , but that young man be not quite the thing . he have be open the door very often this evening , and keep they open very inconsiderately . he do not think of the dratch . I do not mean to set you against he , but indeed he be not quite the thing ! " be sorry for such a charge . she know the importance of it , and say every thing in she power to do it away . every door be now close , the passage plan give up , and the first scheme of dancing only in the room they be in resort to again ; and with such good - will on 's part , that the space which a quarter of a hour before have be deem barely sufficient for five couple , be now endeavoure to be make out quite enough for ten . " we be too magnificent , " say he . " we allow unnecessary room . ten couple may stand here very well . " demur . " it would be a crowd -- a sad crowd ; and what could be worse than dancing without space to turn in ? " " very true , " he gravely reply ; " it be very bad . " but still he go on measuring , and still he end with , " I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple . " " no , no , " say she , " you be quite unreasonable . it would be dreadful to be stand so close ! nothing can be farther from pleasure than to be dance in a crowd -- and a crowd in a little room ! " " there be no deny it , " he reply . " I agree with you exactly . a crowd in a little room -- , you have the art of give picture in a few word . exquisite , quite exquisite !-- , however , have proceed so far , one be unwilling to give the matter up . it would be a disappointment to my father -- and altogether -- I do not know that -- I be rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very well . " perceive that the nature of he gallantry be a little
little self - will , and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure of dancing with she ; but she take the compliment , and forgave the rest . have she intend ever to _marry he , it might have be worth while to pause and consider , and try to understand the value of he preference , and the character of he temper ; but for all the purpose of they acquaintance , he be quite amiable enough . before the middle of the next day , he be at ; and he enter the room with such a agreeable smile as certify the continuance of the scheme . it soon appear that he come to announce a improvement . " well , , " he almost immediately begin , " you inclination for dancing have not be quite frightene away , I hope , by the terror of my father 's little room . I bring a new proposal on the subject :-- a thought of my father 's , which wait 's only you approbation to be act upon . may I hope for the honour of you hand for the two first dance of this little project ball , to be give , not at , but at the ? " " the ! " " yes ; if you and see no objection , and I trust you can not , my father hope he friend will be so kind as to visit he there . better accommodation , he can promise they , and not a less grateful welcome than at Randalls . it be he own idea . see no objection to it , provide you be satisfied . this be what we all feel . oh ! you be perfectly right ! ten couple , in either of the Randalls room , would have be insufferable ! -- feel how right you be the whole time , but be too anxious for secur _any _thing to like to yield . be not it a good exchange ? -- you consent -- I hope you consent ? " " it appear to I a plan that nobody can object to , if and do not . I think it admirable ; and , as far as I can answer for myself , shall be most happy -- it seem the only improvement that could be . , do you not think it a excellent improvement ? " she be oblige to repeat and explain it , before it be fully comprehend ; and then , be quite new , farther representation be necessary to make it acceptable . " no ; he think it very far from a improvement -- a very bad plan --much worse than the other . a room at a be always damp and dangerous ; never properly aire , or fit to be inhabit . if they must dance , they have better dance at Randalls . he have never be in the room at the in he life -- do not know the people who keep it by sight .-- oh ! no -- a very bad plan . they would catch worse cold at the than anywhere . " " I be go to observe , sir , " say , " that one of the great recommendation of this change would be the very little danger of any body 's catch cold -- so much less danger at the than at Randalls ! might have reason to regret the alteration , but nobody else could . " " , " say , rather warmly , " you be very much mistaken if you suppose to be that sort of character . be extremely concerned when any of we be ill . but I do not understand how the room at the can be safer for you than you father 's house . " " from the very circumstance of its be larger , sir . we shall have no occasion to open the window at all -- not once the whole evening ; and it be that dreadful habit of open the window , let in cold air upon heat body , which ( as you well know , sir ) do the mischief . " " open the window !-- but surly , , nobody would think of open the window at Randalls . nobody could be so imprudent ! I never hear of such a thing . Danc with open window !-- I be sure , neither you father nor ( poor that be ) would suffer it . " " ah ! sir -- but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behind a window - curtain , and throw up a sash , without its be suspect . I have often know it do myself . " " have you indeed , sir ?-- bless I ! I never could have suppose it . but I live out of the world , and be often astonished at what I hear . however , this do make a difference ; and , perhaps , when we come to talk it over -- but these sort of thing require a good deal of consideration . one can not resolve upon they in a hurry . if and will be so oblige as to call here one morning , we may talk it over , and see what can be do . " " but , unfortunately , sir , my time be so limited -- " " oh ! " interrupt , " there will be plenty of time for talk every thing over . there be no hurry at all . if it can be contrive to be at the , papa , it will be very convenient for the horse . they will be so near they own stable . " " so they will , my dear . that
that be a great thing . not that ever complain ; but it be right to spare we horse when we can . if I could be sure of the room be thoroughly aire -- but be to be trust ? I doubt it . I do not know she , even by sight . " " I can answer for every thing of that nature , sir , because it will be under 's care . undertake to direct the whole . " " there , papa !-- now you must be satisfied -- we own dear , who be carefulness itself . do not you remember what say , so many year ago , when I have the measle ? ' if _Miss_ _Taylor_ undertake to wrap up , you need not have any fear , sir . ' how often have I hear you speak of it as such a compliment to she ! " " aye , very true . do say so . I shall never forget it . poor little ! you be very bad with the measle ; that be , you would have be very bad , but for 's great attention . he come four time a day for a week . he say , from the first , it be a very good sort -- which be we great comfort ; but the measle be a dreadful complaint . I hope whenever poor 's little one have the measle , she will send for . " " my father and be at the at this moment , " say , " examine the capability of the house . I leave they there and come on to , impatient for you opinion , and hope you might be persuade to join they and give you advice on the spot . I be desire to say so from both . it would be the greatest pleasure to they , if you could allow I to attend you there . they can do nothing satisfactorily without you . " be most happy to be call to such a council ; and she father , engage to think it all over while she be go , the two young people set off together without delay for the Crown . there be and ; delighted to see she and receive she approbation , very busy and very happy in they different way ; she , in some little distress ; and he , finde every thing perfect . " , " say she , " this paper be worse than I expect . look ! in place you see it be dreadfully dirty ; and the wainscot be more yellow and forlorn than any thing I could have imagine . " " my dear , you be too particular , " say she husband . " what do all that signify ? you will see nothing of it by candlelight . it will be as clean as Randalls by candlelight . we never see any thing of it on we club -night . " the lady here probably exchange look which mean , " never know when thing be dirty or not ; " and the gentleman perhaps think each to himself , " woman will have they little nonsense and needless car . " one perplexity , however , arise , which the gentleman do not disdain . it regard a supper - room . at the time of the ballroom 's be build , supper have not be in question ; and a small card - room adjoining , be the only addition . what be to be do ? this card - room would be want as a card - room now ; or , if card be conveniently vote unnecessary by they four self , still be it not too small for any comfortable supper ? another room of much better size might be secure for the purpose ; but it be at the other end of the house , and a long awkward passage must be go through to get at it . this make a difficulty . be afraid of draught for the young people in that passage ; and neither nor the gentleman could tolerate the prospect of be miserably crow at supper . propose have no regular supper ; merely sandwich , & c. , set out in the little room ; but that be scoute as a wretch suggestion . a private dance , without sit down to , be pronounce a infamous fraud upon the rights of man and woman ; and must not speak of it again . she then take another line of expediency , and look into the doubtful room , observe , " I do not think it _is_ so very small . we shall not be many , you know . " and at the same time , walk briskly with long step through the passage , be call out , " you talk a great deal of the length of this passage , my dear . it be a mere nothing after all ; and not the least dratch from the stair . " " I wish , " say , " one could know which arrangement we guest in general would like best . to do what would be most generally pleasing must be we object -- if one could but tell what that would be . " " yes , very true , " cry , " very true . you want you neighbour 's opinion . I do not wonder at you . if one could ascertain what the chief of they -- the Coles , for instance . they be not far off . shall I call upon they ? or ? she be still nearer .-- and I do not know whether be not as likely to understand the inclination of the rest of the
the people as any body . I think we do want a larger council . suppose I go and invite to join we ? " " well -- if you please , " say rather hesitat , " if you think she will be of any use . " " you will get nothing to the purpose from , " say . " she will be all delight and gratitude , but she will tell you nothing . she will not even listen to you question . I see no advantage in consult . " " but she be so amusing , so extremely amusing ! I be very fond of hear talk . and I need not bring the whole family , you know . " here join they , and on hear what be propose , give it he decide approbation . " aye , do , . -- go and fetch , and let we end the matter at once . she will enjoy the scheme , I be sure ; and I do not know a properer person for shew we how to do away difficulty . . we be grow a little too nice . she be a standing lesson of how to be happy . but fetch they both . invite they both . " " both sir ! can the old lady ? " . . . " the old lady ! no , the young lady , to be sure . I shall think you a great blockhead , , if you bring the aunt without the niece . " " oh ! I beg you pardon , sir . I do not immediately recollect . undoubtedly if you wish it , I will endeaavor to persuade they both . " and away he run . long before he reappear , attend the short , neat , brisk - move aunt , and she elegant niece ,-- . , like a sweet - tempered woman and a good wife , have examine the passage again , and find the evils of it much less than she have suppose before -- indeed very trifling ; and here end the difficulty of decision . all the rest , in speculation at least , be perfectly smooth . all the minor arrangement of table and chair , light and music , tea and supper , make themselves ; or be left as mere trifle to be settle at any time between and .-- every body invite , be certainly to come ; have already write to to propose stay a few day beyond he fortnight , which could not possibly be refuse . and a delightful dance it be to be . most cordially , when arrive , do she agree that it must . as a counsellor she be not want ; but as a approver , ( a much safer character , ) she be truly welcome . she approbation , at once general and minute , warm and incessant , could not but please ; and for another half - hour they be all walk to and fro , between the different room , some suggest , some attending , and all in happy enjoyment of the future . the party do not break up without 's be positively secure for the two first dance by the hero of the evening , nor without she overhear whisper to he wife , " he have ask she , my dear . that be right . I know he would ! " one thing only be want to make the prospect of the ball completely satisfactory to -- its be fix for a day within the granted term of 's stay in ; for , in spite of 's confidence , she could not think it so very impossible that the Churchill might not allow they nephew to remain a day beyond he fortnight . but this be not judge feasible . the preparation must take they time , nothing could be properly ready till the third week be enter on , and for a few day they must be plan , proceed and hope in uncertainty -- at the risk -- in she opinion , the great risk , of its be all in vain . Enscombe however be gracious , gracious in fact , if not in word . he wish of stay longer evidently do not please ; but it be not oppose . all be safe and prosperous ; and as the removal of one solicitude generally make way for another , , be now certain of she ball , begin to adopt as the next vexation 's provoke indifference about it . either because he do not dance himself , or because the plan have be form without he be consult , he seem resolve that it should not interest he , determine against its exciting any present curiosity , or afforde he any future amusement . to she voluntary communications could get no more approving reply , than , " very well . if the Westons think it worth while to be at all this trouble for a few hour of noisy entertainment , I have nothing to say against it , but that they shall not chuse pleasur for I .-- oh ! yes , I must be there ; I could not refuse ; and I will keep as much awake as I can ; but I would rather be at home , look over 's week 's account ; much rather , I confess .-- pleasure in see dancing !-- not I , indeed -- I never look at it -- I do not know who do . -- dancing , I believe , like virtue , must be its own reward . those who be stand by be usually think of something very different . " this felt be aim at she ; and it
it make she quite angry . it be not in compliment to however that he be so indifferent , or so indignant ; he be not guide by _her_ feeling in reprobat the ball , for _she_ enjoy the thought of it to a extraordinary degree . it make she animated -- open hear -- she voluntarily say ;-- " oh ! , I hope nothing may happen to prevent the ball . what a disappointment it would be ! I do look forward to it , I own , with _very great pleasure . " it be not to oblige therefore that he would have prefer the society of . no !--she be more and more convince that be quite mistaken in that surmise . there be a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachment on he side -- but no love . ! there be soon no leisure for quarrell with . two day of joyful security be immediately follow by the over -throw of every thing . a letter arrive from to urge he nephew 's instant return . be unwell -- far too unwell to do without he ; she have be in a very suffering state ( so say she husband ) when write to she nephew two day before , though from she usual unwillingness to give pain , and constant habit of never think of herself , she have not mention it ; but now she be too ill to trifle , and must entreat he to set off for without delay . the substance of this letter be forward to , in a note from , instantly . as to he go , it be inevitable . he must be go within a few hour , though without feel any real alarm for he aunt , to lessen he repugnance . he know she illness ; they never occur but for she own convenience . add , " that he could only allow himself time to hurry to , after breakfast , and take leave of the few friend there whom he could suppose to feel any interest in he ; and that he might be expect at very soon . " this wretched note be the finale of 's breakfast . when once it have be read , there be no do any thing , but lament and exclaim . the loss of the ball -- the loss of the young man -- and all that the young man might be feel !-- it be too wretched !-- such a delightful evening as it would have be !-- every body so happy ! and she and she partner the happiest !--" I say it would be so , " be the only consolation . she father 's feeling be quite distinct . he think principally of 's illness , and want to know how she be treat ; and as for the ball , it be shocke to have dear disappoint ; but they would all be safer at home . be ready for she visitor some time before he appear ; but if this reflect at all upon he impatience , he sorrowful look and total want of spirit when he do come might redeem he . he feel the go away almost too much to speak of it . he dejection be most evident . he sit really lost in thought for the first few minute ; and when rouse himself , it be only to say , " of all horrid thing , leave - take be the worst . " " but you will come again , " say . " this will not be you only visit to Randalls . " " ah !--( shak he head ) -- the uncertainty of when I may be able to return !-- I shall try for it with a zeal !-- it will be the object of all my thought and car !-- and if my uncle and aunt go to tow this spring -- but I be afraid -- they do not stir last spring -- I be afraid it be a custom gone for ever . " " we poor ball must be quite give up . " " ah ! that ball !-- why do we wait for any thing ?-- why not seize the pleasure at once ?-- how often be happiness destroy by preparation , foolish preparation !-- you tell we it would be so .-- oh ! , why be you always so right ? " " indeed , I be very sorry to be right in this instance . I would much rather have be merry than wise . " " if I can come again , we be still to have we ball . my father depend on it . do not forget you engagement . " look graciously . " such a fortnight as it have be ! " he continue ; " every day more precious and more delightful than the day before !-- every day make I less fit to bear any other place . happy those , who can remain at ! " " as you do we such ample justice now , " say , laugh , " I will venture to ask , whether you do not come a little doubtfully at first ? do not we rather surpass you expectation ? I be sure we do . I be sure you do not much expect to like we . you would not have be so long in come , if you have have a pleasant idea of . " he laugh rather consciously ; and though deny the sentiment , be convinced that it have be so . " and you must be off this very morning ? " " yes ; my father be to join I here : we shall walk back together , and I must be off immediately .
. I be almost afraid that every moment will bring he . " " not five minute to spare even for you friend and ? how unlucky ! 's powerful , argumentative mind might have strengthen yours . " " yes -- I _have_ call there ; pass the door , I think it better . it be a right thing to do . I go in for three minute , and be detain by 's be absent . she be out ; and I feel it impossible not to wait till she come in . she be a woman that one may , that one _must_ laugh at ; but that one would not wish to slight . it be better to pay my visit , then " -- he hesitate , get up , walk to a window . " in short , " say he , " perhaps , -- I think you can hardly be quite without suspicion " -- he look at she , as if want to read she thought . she hardly know what to say . it seem like the forerunner of something absolutely serious , which she do not wish . Force herself to speak , therefore , in the hope of put it by , she calmly say , " you be quite in the right ; it be most natural to pay you visit , then " -- he be silent . she believe he be look at she ; probably reflec on what she have say , and try to understand the manner . she hear he sigh . it be natural for he to feel that he have _cause to sigh . he could not believe she to be encourage he . a few awkward moments pass , and he sit down again ; and in a more determined manner say , " it be something to feel that all the rest of my time might be give to . my regard for be most warm " -- he stopt again , rise again , and see quite embarrassed .-- he be more in love with she than have suppose ; and who can say how it might have end , if he father have not make he appearance ? soon follow ; and the necessity of exertion make he compose . a very few minute more , however , complete the present trial . , always aler when business be to be do , and as incapable of procrastinat any evil that be inevitable , as of foresee any that be doubtful , say , " it be time to go ; " and the young man , though he might and do sigh , could not but agree , to take leave . " I shall hear about you all , " say he ; " that be my chief consolation . I shall hear of every thing that be go on among you . I have engage to correspond with I . she have be so kind as to promise it . oh ! the blessing of a female correspondent , when one be really interested in the absent !-- she will tell I every thing . in she letter I shall be at dear again . " a very friendly shake of the hand , a very earnest " good - bye , " close the speech , and the door have soon shut out . short have be the notice -- short they meeting ; he be go ; and feel so sorry to part , and foresee so great a loss to they little society from he absence as to begin to be afraid of be too sorry , and feel it too much . it be a sad change . they have be meet almost every day since he arrival . certainly he be at Randalls have give great spirit to the last two week -- indescribable spirit ; the idea , the expectation of see he which every morning have bring , the assurance of he attention , he liveliness , he manners ! it have be a very happy fortnight , and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common course of day . to complete every other recommendation , he have _almost_ tell she that he love she . what strength , or what constancy of affection he might be subject to , be another point ; but at present she could not doubt he have a decidedly warm admiration , a conscious preference of herself ; and this persuasion , join to all the rest , make she think that she _must be a little in love with he , in spite of every previous determination against it . " I certainly must , " say she . " this sensation of listlessness , weariness , stupidity , this disinclination to sit down and employ myself , this feeling of every thing 's be dull and insipid about the house !-- I must be in love ; I should be the oddest creature in the world if I be not -- for a few week at least . well ! evil to some be always good to other . I shall have many fellow - mourner for the ball , if not for ; but will be happy . he may spend the evening with he dear now if he like . " , however , shew no triumphant happiness . he could not say that he be sorry on he own account ; he very cheerful look would have contradict he if he have ; but he say , and very steadily , that he be sorry for the disappointment of the other , and with considerable kindness add , " you , , who have so few opportunity of dancing , you be really out of luck ; you be very much out
out of luck ! " it be some day before she see , to judge of she honest regret in this woeful change ; but when they do meet , she composure be odious . she have be particularly unwell , however , suffer from headache to a degree , which make she aunt declare , that have the ball take place , she do not think could have attend it ; and it be charity to impute some of she unbecoming indifference to the languor of ill - health . continue to entertain no doubt of she be in love . she idea only vari as to the how much . at first , she think it be a good deal ; and afterwards , but little . she have great pleasure in hearing talk of ; and , for he sake , greater pleasure than ever in see and ; she be very often think of he , and quite impatient for a letter , that she might know how he be , how be he spirit , how be he aunt , and what be the chance of he come to again this spring . but , on the other hand , she could not admit herself to be unhappy , nor , after the first morning , to be less dispose for employment than usual ; she be still busy and cheerful ; and , pleasing as he be , she could yet imagine he to have fault ; and farther , though think of he so much , and , as she sit draw or work , form a thousand amusing scheme for the progress and close of they attachment , fancie interesting dialogue , and invent elegant letter ; the conclusion of every imaginary declaration on he side be that she _refuse _him_. they affection be always to subside into friendship . every thing tender and charming be to mark they parting ; but still they be to part . when she become sensible of this , it strike she that she could not be very much in love ; for in spite of she previous and fix determination never to quit she father , never to marry , a strong attachment certainly must produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in she own feeling . " I do not find myself make any use of the word _sacrifice , " say she .-- " in not one of all my clever reply , my delicate negative , be there any allusion to make a sacrifice . I do suspect that he be not really necessary to my happiness . so much the better . I certainly will not persuade myself to feel more than I do . I be quite enough in love . I should be sorry to be more . " upon the whole , she be equally contente with she view of he feeling . " _he_ be undoubtedly very much in love -- every thing denote it -- very much in love indeed !-- and when he come again , if he affection continue , I must be on my guard not to encourage it .-- it would be most inexcusable to do otherwise , as my own mind be quite make up . not that I imagine he can think I have be encourage he hithertoo . no , if he have believe I at all to share he feeling , he would not have be so wretched . could he have think himself encourage , he look and language at parting would have be different .-- still , however , I must be on my guard . this be in the supposition of he attachment continue what it now be ; but I do not know that I expect it will ; I do not look upon he to be quite the sort of man -- I do not altogether build upon he steadiness or constancy .-- he feeling be warm , but I can imagine they rather changeable .-- every consideration of the subject , in short , make I thankful that my happiness be not more deeply involved .-- I shall do very well again after a little while -- and then , it will be a good thing over ; for they say every body be in love once in they life , and I shall have be let off easily . " when he letter to arrive , have the perusal of it ; and she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which make she at first shake she head over she own sensation , and think she have undervalue they strength . it be a long , well - write letter , give the particular of he journey and of he feeling , express all the affection , gratitude , and respect which be natural and honourable , and describe every thing exterior and local that could be suppose attractive , with spirit and precision . no suspicious flourish now of apology or concern ; it be the language of real feeling towards ; and the transition from to , the contrast between the place in some of the first blessing of social life be just enough touche on to show how keenly it be feel , and how much more might have be say but for the restraint of propriety .-- the charm of she own name be not want . _Miss_ appear more than once , and never without a something of pleasing connexion , either a compliment to she taste , or a remembrance of what she have say ; and in the very last time of its meet she eye , unadorned as it be by any such broad wreath of gallantry , she yet could discern the effect of she influence and acknowledge the greatest compliment perhaps of all convey . Compress into
into the very lowest vacant corner be these word --" I have not a spare moment on , as you know , for 's beautiful little friend . pray make my excuse and adieus to she . " this , could not doubt , be all for herself . be remembe only from be _her friend . he information and prospect as to be neither worse nor better than have be anticipate ; be recover , and he da not yet , even in he own imagination , fix a time for come to again . Gratifying , however , and stimulative as be the letter in the material part , its sentiment , she yet find , when it be fold up and return to , that it have not add any last warmth , that she could still do without the writer , and that he must learn to do without she . she intentions be unchanged . she resolution of refusal only grow more interesting by the addition of a scheme for he subsequent consolation and happiness . he recollection of , and the word which clothed it , the " beautiful little friend , " suggest to she the idea of 's succeed she in he affections . be it impossible ?-- no .--Harriet undoubtedly be greatly he inferior in understanding ; but he have be very much struck with the loveliness of she face and the warm simplicity of she manner ; and all the probabilitie of circumstance and connexion be in she favour .-- for , it would be advantageous and delightful indeed . " I must not dwell upon it , " say she .--" I must not think of it . I know the danger of indulge such speculation . but stranger thing have happen ; and when we cease to care for each other as we do now , it will be the means of confirm we in that sort of true disinterested friendship which I can already look forward to with pleasure . " it be well to have a comfort in store on 's behalf , though it might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom ; for evil in that quarter be at hand . as 's arrival have succeed 's engagement in the conversation of , as the latest interest have entirely borne down the first , so now upon 's disappearance , 's concern be assume the most irresistible form . -- he wedding - day be name . he would soon be among they again ; and he bride . there be hardly time to talk over the first letter from before " and he bride " be in every body 's mouth , and be forgote . grow sick at the sound . she have have three week of happy exemption from ; and 's mind , she have be willing to hope , have be lately gain strength . with 's ball in view at least , there have be a great deal of insensibility to other thing ; but it be now too evident that she have not attaine such a state of composure as could stand against the actual approach -- new carriage , bell - ring , and all . poor Harriet be in a flutter of spirit which require all the reasoning and soothing and attention of every kind that could give . feel that she could not do too much for she , that have a right to all she ingenuity and all she patience ; but it be heavy work to be for ever convincing without produce any effect , for ever agree to , without be able to make they opinion the same . listen submissively , and say " it be very true -- it be just as describe -- it be not worth while to think about they -- and she would not think about they any longer " but no change of subject could avail , and the next half - hour see she as anxious and restless about the as before . at last attack she on another ground . " you allow yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about 's marrying , , be the strongest reproach you can make _me_. you could not give I a greater reproof for the mistake I fall into . it be all my do , I know . I have not forget it , I assure you .-- Deceive myself , I do very miserably deceive you -- and it will be a painful reflection to I for ever . do not imagine I in danger of forget it . " feel this too much to utter more than a few word of eager exclamation . continue , " I have not say , exert yourself for my sake ; think less , talk less of for my sake ; because for you own sake rather , I would wish it to be do , for the sake of what be more important than my comfort , a habit of self - command in you , a consideration of what be you duty , a attention to propriety , a endeavour to avoid the suspicions of other , to save you health and credit , and restore you tranquillity . these be the motive which I have be press on you . they be very important -- and sorry I be that you can not feel they sufficiently to act upon they . my be save from pain be a very secondary consideration . I want you to save yourself from greater pain . perhaps I may sometimes have feel that would not forget what be due -- or rather what would be kind by I . " this appeal to she affections do more than all the rest . the idea of want gratitude and consideration for , whom she
she really love extremely , make she wretch for a while , and when the violence of grief be comfort away , still remain powerful enough to prompt to what be right and support she in it very tolerably . " you , who have be the best friend I ever have in my life -- want gratitude to you !-- nobody be equal to you !-- I care for nobody as I do for you !-- oh ! , how ungrateful I have be ! " such expressions , assist as they be by every thing that look and manner could do , make feel that she have never love so well , nor value she affection so highly before . " there be no charm equal to tenderness of heart , " say she afterwards to herself . " there be nothing to be compare to it . warmth and tenderness of heart , with a affectionate , open manner , will beat all the clearness of head in the world , for attraction , I be sure it will . it be tenderness of heart which make my dear father so generally belove -- which give all she popularity .-- I have it not -- but I know how to prize and respect it .-- be my superior in all the charm and all the felicity it give . dear Harriet !-- I would not change you for the clearest - head , longest - sighted , best - judge female breathing . oh ! the coldness of a !-- be worth a hundred such -- and for a wife -- a sensible man 's wife -- it be invaluable . I mention no name ; but happy the man who change for ! " be first see at church : but though devotion might be interrupt , curiosity could not be satisfy by a bride in a pew , and it must be leave for the visit in form which be then to be pay , to settle whether she be very pretty indeed , or only rather pretty , or not pretty at all . have feeling , less of curiosity than of pride or propriety , to make she resolve on not be the last to pay she respects ; and she make a point of 's go with she , that the worst of the business might be go through as soon as possible . she could not enter the house again , could not be in the same room to which she have with such vain artifice retreate three month ago , to lace up she boot , without _recollect _. a thousand vexatious thought would recur . compliment , charade , and horrible blunder ; and it be not to be suppose that poor Harriet should not be recollect too ; but she behave very well , and be only rather pale and silent . the visit be of course short ; and there be so much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it , that would not allow herself entirely to form a opinion of the lady , and on no account to give one , beyond the nothing - mean term of be " elegantly dress , and very pleasing . " she do not really like she . she would not be in a hurry to find fault , but she suspect that there be no elegance ;-- ease , but not elegance .-- she be almost sure that for a young woman , a stranger , a bride , there be too much ease . she person be rather good ; she face not unpretty ; but neither feature , nor air , nor voice , nor manner , be elegant . think at least it would turn out so . as for , he manners do not appear -- but no , she would not permit a hasty or a witty word from herself about he manners . it be a awkward ceremony at any time to be receive wedding visit , and a man have need be all to acquit himself well through it . the woman be better off ; she might have the assistance of fine clothes , and the privilege of bashfulness , but the man have only he own good sense to depend on ; and when she consider how peculiarly unlucky poor be in being in the same room at once with the woman he have just married , the woman he have want to marry , and the woman whom he have be expect to marry , she must allow he to have the right to look as little wise , and to be as much affectedly , and as little really easy as could be . " well , , " say , when they have quit the house , and after wait in vain for she friend to begin ; " well , , ( with a gentle sigh , ) what do you think of she ?-- be not she very charme ? " there be a little hesitation in 's answer . " oh ! yes -- very -- a very pleasing young woman . " " I think she beautiful , quite beautiful . " " very nicly dress , indeed ; a remarkably elegant gown . " " I be not at all surprize that he should have fall in love . " " oh ! no --there be nothing to surprize one at all .-- a pretty fortune ; and she come in he way . " " I dare say , " return , sigh again , " I dare say she be very much attach to he . " " perhaps she might ; but it be not every man 's fate to marry the woman who love he best . perhaps want a home , and think this the
the best offer she be likely to have . " " yes , " say earnestly , " and well she might , nobody could ever have a better . well , I wish they happy with all my heart . and now , , I do not think I shall mind see they again . he be just as superior as ever ; -- but be marry , you know , it be quite a different thing . no , indeed , , you need not be afraid ; I can sit and admire he now without any great misery . to know that he have not throw himself away , be such a comfort !-- she do seem a charme young woman , just what he deserve . happy creature ! he call she ' . ' how delightful ! " when the visit be return , make up she mind . she could then see more and judge better . from 's happen not to be at , and she father 's be present to engage , she have a quarter of a hour of the lady 's conversation to herself , and could composedly attend to she ; and the quarter of a hour quite convince she that . be a vain woman , extremly well satisfied with herself , and think much of she own importance ; that she mean to shine and be very superior , but with manners which have be form in a bad school , pert and familiar ; that all she notion be draw from one set of people , and one style of living ; that if not foolish she be ignorant , and that she society would certainly do no good . would have be a better match . if not wise or refin herself , she would have connect he with those who be ; but , it might be fairly suppose from she easy conceit , have be the best of she own set . the rich brother - in - law near be the pride of the alliance , and he place and he carriage be the pride of he . the very first subject after be seat be , " my brother 's seat ;" -- a comparison of to . the grounds of be small , but neat and pretty ; and the house be modern and well - build . seem most favourably impress by the size of the room , the entrance , and all that she could see or imagine . " very like indeed !-- she be quite struck by the likeness ! -- that room be the very shape and size of the morning - room at ; she sister 's favourite room . " -- be appeal to .--" be not it astonishingly like ?-- she could really almost fancy herself at . " " and the staircase -- you know , as I come in , I observe how very like the staircase be ; place exactly in the same part of the house . I really could not help exclaim ! I assure you , , it be very delightful to I , to be remind of a place I be so extremely partial to as . I have spend so many happy month there ! ( with a little sigh of sentiment ) . a charming place , undoubtedly . every body who see it be strike by its beauty ; but to I , it have be quite a home . whenever you be transplant , like I , , you will understand how very delightful it be to meet with any thing at all like what one have leave behind . I always say this be quite one of the evils of matrimony . " make as slight a reply as she could ; but it be fully sufficient for , who only want to be talk herself . " so extremely like ! and it be not merely the house -- the grounds , I assure you , as far as I could observe , be strikingly like . the laurels at be in the same profusion as here , and stand very much in the same way -- just across the lawn ; and I have a glimpse of a fine large tree , with a bench round it , which put I so exactly in mind ! my brother and sister will be enchant with this place . people who have extensive grounds themselves be always pleased with any thing in the same style . " doubt the truth of this sentiment . she have a great idea that people who have extensive grounds themselves car very little for the extensive grounds of any body else ; but it be not worth while to attack a error so double - dyed , and therefore only say in reply , " when you have see more of this country , I be afraid you will think you have overrate . be full of beauty . " " oh ! yes , I be quite aware of that . it be the garden of , you know . be the garden of . " " yes ; but we must not rest we claim on that distinction . many county , I believe , be call the garden of , as well as . " " no , I fancy not , " reply , with a most satisfied smile . " I never hear any county but call so . " be silenced . " my brother and sister have promise we a visit in the spring , or summer at farthest , " continue ; " and that will be we time for exploring . while they be with we , we shall explore a great deal , I dare say . they will have they barouche - landau ,
, of course , which hold four perfectly ; and therefore , without say any thing of _our_ carriage , we should be able to explore the different beautie extremely well . they would hardly come in they chaise , I think , at that season of the year . indeed , when the time draw on , I shall decidedly recommend they bring the barouche - landau ; it will be so very much preferable . when people come into a beautiful country of this sort , you know , Woodhouse , one naturally wish they to see as much as possible ; and be extremely fond of exploring . we explore to 's - twice last summer , in that way , most delightfully , just after they first have the barouche - landau . you have many party of that kind here , I suppose , Woodhouse , every summer ? " " no ; not immediatly here . we be rather out of distance of the very striking beautie which attract the sort of party you speak of ; and we be a very quiet set of people , I believe ; more disposed to stay at home than engage in scheme of pleasure . " " ah ! there be nothing like stay at home for real comfort . nobody can be more devote to home than I be . I be quite a proverb for it at . many a time have say , when she have be go to , ' I really can not get this girl to move from the house . I absolutely must go in by myself , though I hate be stick up in the barouche - landau without a companion ; but , I believe , with she own good - will , would never stir beyond the park pal . ' many a time have she say so ; and yet I be no advocate for entire seclusion . I think , on the contrary , when people shut themselves up entirely from society , it be a very bad thing ; and that it be much more advisable to mix in the world in a proper degree , without live in it either too much or too little . I perfectly understand you situation , however , miss Woodhouse --( look towards ) , you father 's state of health must be a great drawback . why do not he try he should . let I recommend to you . I assure you I have no doubt of its do good . " " my father try it more than once , formerly ; but without receive any benefit ; and , whose name , I dare say , be not unknown to you , do not conceive it would be at all more likely to be useful now . " " ah ! that be a great pity ; for I assure you , , where the water do agree , it be quite wonderful the relief they give . in my bath life , I have see such instance of it ! and it be so cheerful a place , that it could not fail of be of use to 's spirit , which , I understand , be sometimes much depressed . and as to its recommendation to _you_, I fancy I need not take much pain to dwell on they . the advantage of to the young be pretty generally understood . it would be a charming introduction for you , who have liv so seclude a life ; and I could immediately secure you some of the best society in the place . a line from I would bring you a little host of acquaintance ; and my particular friend , , the lady I have always reside with when in , would be most happy to show you any attention , and would be the very person for you to go into public with . " it be as much as could bear , without be impolite . the idea of she be indebt to for what be call a _introduction _-- of she go into public under the auspices of a friend of 's -- probably some vulgar , dash widow , who , with the help of a boarder , just make a shift to live !-- the dignity of , of , be sink indeed ! she restrain herself , however , from any of the reproof she could have give , and only thank coolly ; " but they go to be quite out of the question ; and she be not perfectly convince that the place might suit she better than she father . " and then , to prevent farther outrage and indignation , change the subject directly . " I do not ask whether you be musical , . upon these occasion , a lady 's character generally precede she ; and have long know that you be a superior performer . " " oh ! no , indeed ; I must protest against any such idea . a superior performer !--very far from it , I assure you . consider from how partial a quarter you information come . I be doatingly fond of music --passionately fond ; -- and my friend say I be not entirely devoid of taste ; but as to any thing else , upon my honour my performance be _mediocre to the last degree . you , , I well know , play delightfully . I assure you it have be the greatest satisfaction , comfort , and delight to I , to hear what a musical society I be get into . I absolutely can not do without music . it be a necessary of life to I ; and have always be use to a very musical society , both at and in , it
it would have be a most serious sacrifice . I honestly say as much to when he be speak of my future home , and express he fear lest the retirement of it should be disagreeable ; and the inferiority of the house too --know what I have be accustom to -- of course he be not wholly without apprehension . when he be speak of it in that way , I honestly say that _the_ _world I could give up -- party , ball , play -- for I have no fear of retirement . bless with so many resource within myself , the world be not necessary to _me _. I could do very well without it . to those who have no resource it be a different thing ; but my resource make I quite independent . and as to smaller - size rooms than I have be use to , I really could not give it a thought . I hope I be perfectly equal to any sacrifice of that description . certainly I have be accustom to every luxury at ; but I do assure he that two carriage be not necessary to my happiness , nor be spacious apartment . ' but , ' say I , 'too be quite honest , I do not think I can live without something of a musical society . I condition for nothing else ; but without music , life would be a blank to I . ' " " we can not suppose , " say , smile , " that would hesitate to assure you of there be a _very musical society in ; and I hope you will not find he have outstep the truth more than may be pardon , in consideration of the motive . " " no , indeed , I have no doubt at all on that head . I be delighted to find myself in such a circle . I hope we shall have many sweet little concert together . I think , , you and I must establish a musical club , and have regular weekly meeting at you house , or ours . will not it be a good plan ? if _we_ exert ourselves , I think we shall not be long in want of ally . something of that nature would be particularly desirable for _me_ , as a inducement to keep I in practice ; for married woman , you know -- there be a sad story against they , in general . they be but too apt to give up music . " " but you , who be so extremely fond of it -- there can be no danger , surely ? " " I should hope not ; but really when I look around among my acquaintance , I tremble . have entirely give up music -- never touch the instrument -- though she play sweetly . and the same may be say of -- , that be -- and of the two , now and ; and of more than I can enumerate . upon my word it be enough to put one in a fright . I use to be quite angry with ; but really I begin now to comprehend that a married woman have many thing to call she attention . I believe I be half a hour this morning shut up with my housekeeper . " " but every thing of that kind , " say , " will soon be in so regular a train -- " " well , " say , laugh , " we shall see . " , find she so determine upon neglect she music , have nothing more to say ; and , after a moment 's pause , choose another subject . " we have be call at , " say she , " and find they both at home ; and very pleasant people they seem to be . I like they extremely . seem a excellent creature -- quite a first - rate favourite with I already , I assure you . and _she_ appear so truly good -- there be something so motherly and kind - hear about she , that it win upon one directly . she be you governess , I think ? " be almost too much astonished to answer ; but . hardly wait for the affirmative before she go on . " have understood as much , I be rather astonished to find she so very lady - like ! but she be really quite the gentlewoman . " " . 's manners , " say , " be always particularly good . they propriety , simplicity , and elegance , would make they the safest model for any young woman . " " and who do you think come in while we be there ? " be quite at a loss . the tone imply some old acquaintance -- and how could she possibly guess ? " ! " continue ; " Knightley himself !-- be not it lucky ?-- for , not be within when he call the other day , I have never see he before ; and of course , as so particular a friend of . 's , I have a great curiosity . ' my friend ' have be so often mention , that I be really impatient to see he ; and I must do my caro sposo the justice to say that he need not be asham of he friend . be quite the gentleman . I like he very much . Decidedly , I think , a very gentleman - like man . " happily , it be now time to be gone . they be off ; and could breathe . " Insufferable woman ! " be she immediate exclamation . " worse than I have suppose . absolutely insufferable !
! !-- I could not have believe it . !-- never see he in she life before , and call he !-- and discover that he be a gentleman ! a little upstart , vulgar be , with she , and she _caro_ _sposo_ , and she resource , and all she air of pert pretension and underbreed finery . actually to discover that be a gentleman ! I doubt whether he will return the compliment , and discover she to be a lady . I could not have believe it ! and to propose that she and I should unite to form a musical club ! one would fancy we be bosom friend ! and !-- astonish that the person who have bring I up should be a gentlewoman ! worse and worse . I never meet with she equal . much beyond my hope . be disgrace by any comparison . oh ! what would say to she , if he be here ? how angry and how divert he would be ! ah ! there I be -- think of he directly . always the first person to be think of ! how I catch myself out ! come as regularly into my mind ! " -- all this ran so glibly through she thought , that by the time she father have arrange himself , after the bustle of the 's departure , and be ready to speak , she be very tolerably capable of attend . " well , my dear , " he deliberately begin , " consider we never see she before , she seem a very pretty sort of young lady ; and I dare say she be very much pleased with you . she speak a little too quick . a little quickness of voice there be which rather hurt the ear . but I believe I be nice ; I do not like strange voice ; and nobody speak like you and poor . however , she seem a very obliging , pretty - behave young lady , and no doubt will make he a very good wife . though I think he have better not have marry . I make the best excuse I could for not have be able to wait on he and . on this happy occasion ; I say that I hope I _should in the course of the summer . but I ought to have go before . not to wait upon a bride be very remiss . ah ! it shew what a sad invalid I be ! but I do not like the corner into . " " I dare say you apology be accept , sir . know you . " " yes : but a young lady -- a bride -- I ought to have pay my respects to she if possible . it be be very deficient . " " but , my dear papa , you be no friend to matrimony ; and therefore why should you be so anxious to pay you respects to a _bride_ ? it ought to be no recommendation to _you_. it be encourage people to marry if you make so much of they . " " no , my dear , I never encourage any body to marry , but I would always wish to pay every proper attention to a lady -- and a bride , especially , be never to be neglect . more be avowedly due to _her _. a bride , you know , my dear , be always the first in company , let the other be who they may . " " well , papa , if this be not encouragement to marry , I do not know what be . and I should never have expect you to be lend you sanction to such vanity - bait for poor young lady . " " my dear , you do not understand I . this be a matter of mere common politeness and good - breeding , and have nothing to do with any encouragement to people to marry . " have do . she father be grow nervous , and could not understand _her . she mind return to 's offence , and long , very long , do they occupy she . be not require , by any subsequent discovery , to retract she ill opinion of . she observation have be pretty correct . such as . appear to she on this second interview , such she appear whenever they meet again , -- self - important , presum , familiar , ignorant , and ill - breed . she have a little beauty and a little accomplishment , but so little judgment that she think herself come with superior knowledge of the world , to enlive and improve a country neighbourhood ; and conceive to have held such a place in society as 's consequence only could surpass . there be no reason to suppose think at all differently from he wife . he seem not merely happy with she , but proud . he have the air of congratulating himself on have bring such a woman to , as not even could equal ; and the greater part of she new acquaintance , dispose to commend , or not in the habit of judging , follow the lead of 's good - will , or take it for grant that the bride must be as clever and as agreeable as she profess herself , be very well satisfied ; so that 's praise pass from one mouth to another as it ought to do , unimped by , who readily continue she first contribution and talk with a good grace of she be " very pleasant and very elegantly dress . " in one respect . grow even worse than she have appear at first . she feeling alter towards .-- offend
offend , probably , by the little encouragement which she proposal of intimacy meet with , she draw back in she turn and gradually become much more cold and distant ; and though the effect be agreeable , the ill - will which produce it be necessarily increase 's dislike . she manners , too -- and 's , be unpleasant towards . they be sneer and negligent . hope it must rapidly work 's cure ; but the sensation which could prompt such behaviour sink they both very much .-- it be not to be doubt that poor 's attachment have be a offering to conjugal unreserve , and she own share in the story , under a colouring the least favourable to she and the most soothing to he , have in all likelihood be give also . she be , of course , the object of they jous not dislike .-- when they have nothing else to say , it must be always easy to begin abuse ; and the enmity which they da not show in open disrespect to she , find a broader vent in contemptuous treatment of . take a great fancy to ; and from the first . not merely when a state of warfare with one young lady might be suppose to recommend the other , but from the very first ; and she be not satisfied with express a natural and reasonable admiration -- but without solicitation , or plea , or privilege , she must be want to assist and befriend she .-- before have forfeit she confidence , and about the third time of they meeting , she hear all 's knight - errantry on the subject .-- " be absolutely charming , .-- I quite rave about .-- a sweet , interesting creature . so mild and ladylike -- and with such talents !-- I assure you I think she have very extraordinary talents . I do not scruple to say that she play extremely well . I know enough of music to speak decidedly on that point . oh ! she be absolutely charming ! you will laugh at my warmth -- but , upon my word , I talk of nothing but .-- and she situation be so calculate to affect one !-- miss Woodhouse , we must exert ourselves and endeavou to do something for she . we must bring she forward . such talent as hers must not be suffer to remain unknown .-- I dare say you have hear those charme line of the poet , ' full many a flower be bear to blush unseen , ' and waste its fragrance on the desert air . ' we must not allow they to be verify in sweet . " " I can not think there be any danger of it , " be 's calm answer -- " and when you be better acquaint with 's situation and understand what she home have be , with and Campbell , I have no idea that you will suppose she talents can be unknown . " " oh ! but dear , she be now in such retirement , such obscurity , so throw away .-- whatever advantage she may have enjoy with the Campbell be so palpably at a end ! and I think she feel it . I be sure she do . she be very timid and silent . one can see that she feel the want of encouragement . I like she the better for it . I must confess it be a recommendation to I . I be a great advocate for timidity -- and I be sure one do not often meet with it . -- but in those who be at all inferior , it be extremely prepossessing . oh ! I assure you , be a very delightful character , and interest I more than I can express . " " you appear to feel a great deal -- but I be not aware how you or any of 's acquaintance here , any of those who have know she longer than yourself , can show she any other attention than " -- " my dear , a vast deal may be do by those who dare to act . you and I need not be afraid . if _we_ set the example , many will follow it as far as they can ; though all have not ou situation . we have carriage to fetch and convey she home , and _we_ live in a style which could not make the addition of , at any time , the least inconvenient .-- I should be extremely displease if be to send we up such a dinner , as could make I regret have ask _more_ than to partake of it . I have no idea of that sort of thing . it be not likely that I _should , consider what I have be use to . my greatest danger , perhaps , in housekeeping , may be quite the other way , in do too much , and be too careless of expense . maple will probably be my model more than it ought to be -- for we do not at all affect to equal my brother , , in income .-- however , my resolution be take as to notice .-- I shall certainly have she very often at my house , shall introduce she wherever I can , shall have musical party to draw out she talents , and shall be constantly on the watch for a eligible situation . my acquaintance be so very extensive , that I have little doubt of hearing of something to suit she shortly .-- I shall introduce she , of course , very particularly to my brother and sister when they come to we . I be sure they will like she extremely ; and
and when she get 's a little acquainted with they , she fear will completely wear off , for there really be nothing in the manners of either but what be highly conciliat .-- I shall have she very often indeed while they be with I , and I dare say we shall sometimes find a seat for she in the barouche - landau in some of we exploring party . " " poor ! " --thotch .-- " you have not deserve this . you may have do wrong with regard to , but this be a punishment beyond what you can have merit !-- the kindness and protection of !--' and . ' Heavens ! let I not suppose that she dare go about , Woodhouse - e I !-- but upon my honour , there seem no limit to the licentiousness of that woman 's tongue ! " have not to listen to such parading again -- to any so exclusively address to herself -- so disgustingly decorate with a " dear . " the change on 's side soon afterwards appear , and she be leave in peace -- neither force to be the very particular friend of , nor , under 's guidance , the very active patroness of , and only share with other in a general way , in know what be feel , what be meditate , what be done . she look on with some amusement .-- 's gratitude for 's attention to be in the first style of guileless simplicity and warmth . she be quite one of she worthy -- the most amiable , affable , delightful woman -- just as accomplish and condescende as mean to be consider . 's only surprize be that should accept those attention and tolerate as she seem to do . she hear of she walk with the , sit with the , spend a day with the ! this be astonish !-- she could not have believe it possible that the taste or the pride of could endure such society and friendship as the Vicarage have to offer . " she be a riddle , quite a riddle ! " say she .-- " to chuse to remain here month after month , under privation of every sort ! and now to chuse the mortification of 's notice and the penury of she conversation , rather than return to the superior companion who have always love she with such real , generous affection . " have come to Highbury professedly for three month ; the Campbell be go to for three month ; but now the have promise they daughter to stay at least till , and fresh invitation have arrive for she to join they there . accord to -- it all come from she -- . have write most pressingly . would but go , meand be to be find , servants send , friend contrive -- no travelling difficulty allow to exist ; but still she have decline it ! " she must have some motive , more powerful than appear , for refuse this invitation , " be 's conclusion . " she must be under some sort of penance , inflict either by the Campbell or herself . there be great fear , great caution , great resolution somewhere .-- she be _not to be with the . the decree be issue by somebody . but why must she consent to be with the ? -- here be quite a separate puzzle . " upon she speak she wonder aloud on that part of the subject , before the few who know she opinion of , venture this apology for . " we can not suppose that she have any great enjoyment at the Vicarage , my dear Emma -- but it be better than be always at home . she aunt be a good creature , but , as a constant companion , must be very tiresome . we must consider what quit , before we condemn she taste for what she go to . " " you be right , , " say warmly , " be as capable as any of we of form a just opinion of . could she have choose with whom to associate , she would not have choose she . but ( with a reproachful smile at ) she receive attention from , which nobody else pay she . " feel that be give she a momentary glance ; and she be herself strike by he warmth . with a faint blush , she presently reply , " such attention as 's , I should have imagine , would rather disgust than gratify . 's invitation I should have imagine any thing but invite . " " I should not wonder , " say , " if be to have be draw on beyond she own inclination , by she aunt 's eagerness in accept 's civility for she . poor miss Bates may very likely have commit she niece and hurrie she into a greater appearance of intimacy than she own good sense would have dictate , in spite of the very natural wish of a little change . " both felt rather anxious to hear he speak again ; and after a few minute silence , he say , " another thing must be take into consideration too -- . do not talk _to_ as she speak _of_ she . we all know the difference between the pronoun he or she and thou , the plainest speak amongst we ; we all feel the influence of a something beyond common civility in we personal intercourse with each other -- a something more early implanted . we can not give any body the disagreeable hint that we may have be very full of the hour before . we feel thing differently . and besides the operation of this ,
, as a general principle , you may be sure that awe . by she superiority both of mind and manner ; and that , face to face , treat she with all the respect which she have a claim to . such a woman as probably never fall in 's way before -- and no degree of vanity can prevent she acknowledge she own comparative littleness in action , if not in consciousness . " " I know how highly you think of , " say . be in she thought , and a mixture of alarm and delicacy make she irresolute what else to say . " yes , " he reply , " any body may know how highly I think of she . " " and yet , " say , begin hastily and with a arch look , but soon stop -- it be better , however , to know the worst at once -- she hurrie on -- " and yet , perhaps , you may hardly be aware yourself how highly it be . the extent of you admiration may take you by surprize some day or other . " be hard at work upon the lower buttons of he thick leather gaiter , and either the exertion of get they together , or some other cause , bring the colour into he face , as he answer , " oh ! be you there ? -- but you be miserably behindhand . give I a hint of it six week ago . " he stop feel she foot presse by , and do not herself know what to think . in a moment he go on -- " that will never be , however , I can assure you . , I dare say , would not have I if I be to ask she -- and I be very sure I shall never ask she . " return she friend 's pressure with interest ; and be pleased enough to exclaim , " you be not vain , . I will say that for you . " he seem hardly to hear she ; he be thoughtful -- and in a manner which shew he not pleas , soon afterwards say , " so you have be settle that I should marry ? " " no indeed I have not . you have scolde I too much for match - make , for I to presume to take such a liberty with you . what I say just now , mean nothing . one say those sort of thing , of course , without any idea of a serious meaning . oh ! no , upon my word I have not the smallest wish for you marrying or any body . you would not come in and sit with we in this comfortable way , if you be marry . " be thoughtful again . the result of he reverie be , " no , Emma , I do not think the extent of my admiration for she will ever take I by surprize .-- I never have a thought of she in that way , I assure you . " and soon afterwards , " be a very charming young woman -- but not even be perfect . she have a fault . she have not the open temper which a man would wish for in a wife . " could not but rejoice to hear that she have a fault . " well , " say she , " and you soon silence , I suppose ? " " yes , very soon . he give I a quiet hint ; I tell he he be mistake ; he ask my pardon and say no more . do not want to be wiser or wittier than he neighbour . " " in that respect how unlike dear , who want to be wiser and wittier than all the world ! I wonder how she speak of the Coles -- what she call they ! how can she find any appellation for they , deep enough in familiar vulgarity ? she call you , -- what can she do for ? and so I be not to be surprize that accept she civility and consent to be with she . , you argument weigh most with I . I can much more readily enter into the temptation of get away from , than I can believe in the triumph of 's mind over . I have no faith in 's acknowledging herself the inferior in thought , word , or deed ; or in she be under any restraint beyond she own scanty rule of good - breeding . I can not imagine that she will not be continually insult she visitor with praise , encouragement , and offer of service ; that she will not be continually detaile she magnificent intention , from the procure she a permanent situation to the include she in those delightful exploring party which be to take place in the barouche - landau . " " have feel , " say -- " I do not accuse she of want of feeling . she sensibility , I suspect , be strong -- and she temper excellent in its power of forbearance , patience , self - control ; but it want openness . she be reserve , more reserve , I think , than she use to be -- and I love a open temper . no -- till allude to my suppose attachment , it have never enter my head . I see and converse with she , with admiration and pleasure always -- but with no thought beyond . " " well , , " say triumphantly when he leave they , " what do you say now to 's marry ? " " why , really , dear , I say that
that he be so very much occupy by the idea of _not_ be in love with she , that I should not wonder if it be to end in he be so at last . do not beat I . " every body in and about who have ever visit , be dispose to pay he attention on he marriage . dinner - party and evening - party be make for he and he lady ; and invitation flow in so fast that she have soon the pleasure of apprehending they be never to have a disengaged day . " I see how it be , " say she . " I see what a life I be to lead among you . upon my word we shall be absolutely dissipate . we really seem quite the fashion . if this be live in the country , it be nothing very formidable . from next to , I assure you we have not a disengaged day !-- a woman with fewer resource than I have , need not have be at a loss . " no invitation come amiss to she . she bath habits make evening - party perfectly natural to she , and have give she a taste for dinner . she be a little shocked at the want of two draw rooms , at the poor attempt at rout - cake , and there be no ice in the card - party . , , and other , be a good deal behind - hand in knowledge of the world , but she would soon show they how every thing ink to be arrange . in the course of the spring she must return they civility by one very superior party -- in which she card - table should be set out with they separate candle and unbroken pack in the true style -- and more waiter engage for the evening than they own establishment could furnish , to carry round the refreshment at exactly the proper hour , and in the proper order . , in the meanwhile , could not be satisfy without a dinner at for the . they must not do less than other , or she should be expose to odious suspicion , and imagine capable of pitiful resentment . a dinner there must be . after have talk about it for ten minute , feel no unwillingness , and only make the usual stipulation of not sit at the bottom of the table himself , with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who should do it for he . the person to be invite , require little thought . besides the , it must be the and ; so far it be all of course -- and it be hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must be ask to make the eighth :-- but this invitation be not give with equal satisfaction , and on many account be particularly pleased by 's beg to be allow to decline it . " she would rather not be in he company more than she could help . she be not yet quite able to see he and he charme happy wife together , without feel uncomfortable . if would not be displease , she would rather stay at home . " it be precisely what would have wish , have she deem it possible enough for wishing . she be delighted with the fortitude of she little friend -- for fortitude she know it be in she to give up be in company and stay at home ; and she could now invite the very person whom she really want to make the eighth , .-- since she last conversation with and , she be more conscience - stricken about than she have often be .-- 's word dwelt with she . he have say that receive attention from which nobody else pay she . " this be very true , " say she , " at least as far as relate to I , which be all that be mean -- and it be very shameful .-- of the same age -- and always know she -- I ought to have be more she friend .-- she will never like I now . I have neglect she too long . but I will show she greater attention than I have do . " every invitation be successful . they be all disengage and all happy .-- the preparatory interest of this dinner , however , be not yet over . a circumstance rather unlucky occur . the two eldest little Knightleys be engage to pay they grandpapa and aunt a visit of some week in the spring , and they papa now propose bring they , and stay one whole day at -- which one day would be the very day of this party . t--His professional engagement do not allow of he be put off , but both father and daughter be disturb by its happen so . consider eight person at dinner together as the utmost that he nerve could bear -- and here would be a ninth -- and apprehend that it would be a ninth very much out of humwe at not be able to come even to for forty - eight hour without fall in with a dinner - party . she comforte she father better than she could comfort herself , by represent that though he certainly would make they nine , yet he always say so little , that the increase of noise would be very immaterial . she think it in reality a sad exchange for herself , to have he with he grave look and reluctant conversation oppose to she instead of he brother . the event be more favourable to than to . come ; but be unexpectedly summon to town and must be absent on the very day . he might
might be able to join they in the evening , but certainly not to dinner . be quite at ease ; and the see he so , with the arrival of the little boy and the philosophic composure of she brother on hear he fate , remove the chief of even 's vexation . the day come , the party be punctually assemble , and see early to devote himself to the business of be agreeable . instead of draw he brother off to a window while they wait for dinner , he be talk to . , as elegant as lace and pearl could make she , he look at in silence -- want only to observe enough for 's information -- but be a old acquaintance and a quiet girl , and he could talk to she . he have meet she before breakfast as he be return from a walk with he little boy , when it have be just begin to rain . it be natural to have some civil hope on the subject , and he say , " I hope you do not venture far , , this morning , or I be sure you must have be wet .-- we scarcely get home in time . I hope you turn directly . " " I go only to the post-office , " say she , " and reach home before the rain be much . it be my daily errand . I always fetch the letter when I be here . it save trouble , and be a something to get I out . a walk before breakfast do I good . " " not a walk in the rain , I should imagine . " " no , but it do not absolutely rain when I set out . " smile , and reply , " that be to say , you choose to have you walk , for you be not six yard from you own door when I have the pleasure of meet you ; and and have see more drop than they could count long before . the post-office have a great charm at one period of we life . when you have live to my age , you will begin to think letter be never worth go through the rain for . " there be a little blush , and then this answer , " I must not hope to be ever situate as you be , in the midst of every dearest connexion , and therefore I can not expect that simply grow older should make I indifferent about letter . " " indifferent ! oh ! no -- I never conceive you could become indifferent . letter be no matter of indifference ; they be generally a very positive curse . " " you be speak of letter of business ; mine be letter of friendship . " " I have often think they the worst of the two , " reply he coolly . " business , you know , may bring money , but friendship hardly ever do . " " ah ! you be not serious now . I know too well -- I be very sure he understand the value of friendship as well as any body . I can easily believe that letter be very little to you , much less than to I , but it be not you be ten year older than myself which make the difference , it be not age , but situation . you have every body dearest to you always at hand , I , probably , never shall again ; and therefore till I have outlive all my affections , a post-office , I think , must always have power to draw I out , in worse weather than to - day . " " when I talk of you be alte by time , by the progress of year , " say , " I mean to imply the change of situation which time usually bring . I consider one as include the other . time will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not within the daily circle -- but that be not the change I have in view for you . as a old friend , you will allow I to hope , , that ten year hence you may have as many concentrate object as I have . " it be kindly say , and very far from give offence . a pleasant " thank you " see mean to laugh it off , but a blush , a quivering lip , a tear in the eye , shew that it be feel beyond a laugh . she attention be now claim by Woodhouse , who be , accord to he custom on such occasion , make the circle of he guest , and pay he particular compliment to the ladie , be end with she -- and with all he mildest urbanity , say , " I be very sorry to hear , , of you be out this morning in the rain . young lady should take care of themselves .-- young lady be delicate plant . they should take care of they health and they complexion . my dear , do you change you stocking ? " " yes , sir , I do indeed ; and I be very much oblige by you kind solicitude about I . " " my dear , young lady be very sure to be care for .-- I hope you good grand - mama and aunt be well . they be some of my very old friend . I wish my health allow I to be a better neighbour . you do we a great deal of honou to - day , I be sure . my daughter and I be both highly sensible of you goodness , and have
have the greatest satisfaction in see you at . " the kind - hear , polite old man might then sit down and feel that he have do he duty , and make every fair lady welcome and easy . by this time , the walk in the rain have reach , and she remonstrance now open upon . " my dear , what be this I hear ?-- go to the post-office in the rain !-- this must not be , I assure you . -- you sad girl , how could you do such a thing ?--It be a sign I be not there to take care of you . " very patiently assure she that she have not catch any cold . " oh ! do not tell _me_. you really be a very sad girl , and do not know how to take care of yourself .-- to the post-office indeed ! , do you ever hear the like ? you and I must positively exer we authority . " " my advice , " say kindly and persuasively , " I certainly do feel temp to give . , you must not run such risk .-- Liable as you have be to severe cold , indeed you ought to be particularly careful , especially at this time of year . the spring I always think require more than common care . better wait a hour or two , or even half a day for you letter , than run the risk of bring on you cough again . now do not you feel that you have ? yes , I be sure you be much too reasonable . you look as if you would not do such a thing again . " " oh ! she _shall _not do such a thing again , " eagerly rejoin . " we will not allow she to do such a thing again :" -- and nodd significantly -- " there must be some arrangement make , there must indeed . I shall speak to . the man who fetch we letter every morning ( one of we man , I forget he name ) shall inquire for yours too and bring they to you . that will obviate all difficulty you know ; and from _us_ I really think , my dear , you can have no scruple to accept such a accommodation . " " you be extremely kind , " say ; " but I can not give up my early walk . I be advise to be out of door as much as I can , I must walk somewhere , and the post-office be a object ; and upon my word , I have scarcely ever have a bad morning before . " " my dear , say no more about it . the thing be determine , that be ( laugh affectedly ) as far as I can presume to determine any thing without the concurrence of my lord and master . you know , , you and I must be cautious how we express ourselves . but I do flatter myself , my dear , that my influence be not entirely wear out . if I meet with no insuperable difficulty therefore , consider that point as settled . " " excuse I , " say earnestly , " I can not by any means consent to such a arrangement , so needlessly troublesome to you servant . if the errand be not a pleasure to I , it could be do , as it always be when I be not here , by my grandmama 's . " " oh ! my dear ; but so much as have to do !-- and it be a kindness to employ we man . " look as if she do not mean to be conquer ; but instead of answering , she begin speak again to . " the post-office be a wonderful establishment ! " say she .-- " the regularity and despatch of it ! if one think of all that it have to do , and all that it do so well , it be really astonishing ! " " it be certainly very well regulate . " " so seldom that any negligence or blunder appear ! so seldom that a letter , among the thousand that be constantly pass about the kingdom , be even carry wrong -- and not one in a million , I suppose , actually lose ! and when one consider the variety of hand , and of bad hand too , that be to be decipher , it increase the wonder . " " the clerk grow expert from habit .-- they must begin with some quickness of sight and hand , and exercise improve they . if you want any farther explanation , " continue he , smile , " they be pay for it . that be the key to a great deal of capacity . the public pay and must be serve well . " the varietie of handwriting be farther talk of , and the usual observation make . " I have hear it assert , " say , " that the same sort of handwriting often prevail in a family ; and where the same master teach , it be natural enough . but for that reason , I should imagine the likeness must be chiefly confin to the females , for boy have very little teaching after a early age , and scramble into any hand they can get . and , I think , do write very much alike . I have not always know they writing apart . " " yes , " say he brother hesitatingly , " there be a likeness . I know what you mean -- but 's hand be the strongest . " " and both write beautifully , "
" say ; " and always do . and so do poor " -- with half a sigh and half a smile at she . " I never see any gentleman 's handwriting " -- begin , look also at ; but stop , on perceiving that be attend to some one else -- and the pause give she time to reflect , " now , how be I go to introduce he ?-- be I unequal to speak he name at once before all these people ? be it necessary for I to use any roundabout phrase ?-- you friend -- you correspondent in ; -- that would be the way , I suppose , if I be very bad .-- no , I can pronounce he name without the smallest distress . I certainly get better and better .-- now for it . " be disengage and begin again -- " write one of the best gentleman 's hand I ever see . " " I do not admire it , " say . " it be too small -- want strength . it be like a woman have write . " this be not submit to by either lady . they vindicate he against the base aspersion . " no , it by no means want strength -- it be not a large hand , but very clear and certainly strong . have not any letter about she to produce ? " no , she have hear from he very lately , but have answer the letter , have put it away . " if we be in the other room , " say , " if I have my writing - desk , I be sure I could produce a specimen . I have a note of he .-- do not you remember , , employ he to write for you one day ? " " he choose to say he be employ " -- " well , well , I have that note ; and can show it after dinner to convince . " " oh ! when a gallant young man , like , " say dryly , " write to a fair lady like , he will , of course , put forth he best . " dinner be on table .-- , before she could be speak to , be ready ; and before have reach she with he request to be allow to hand she into the dining - parlour , be say -- " must I go first ? I really be asham of always lead the way . " 's solicitude about fetch she own letter have not escape . she have hear and see it all ; and feel some curiosity to know whether the wet walk of this morning have produce any . she suspect that it _have ; that it would not have be so resolutely encounter but in full expectation of hearing from some one very dear , and that it have not be in vain . she think there be a air of greater happiness than usual -- a glow both of complexion and spirit . she could have make a inquiry or two , as to the expedition and the expense of the irish mail ; -- it be at she tongue 's end -- but she abstain . she be quite determined not to utter a word that should hurt 's feeling ; and they follow the other lady out of the room , arm in arm , with a appearance of good - will highly become to the beauty and grace of each . when the lady return to the drawing - room after dinner , find it hardly possible to prevent they make two distinct party ;--with so much perseverance in judging and behave ill do engross and slight herself . she and be oblige to be almost always either talk together or silent together . leave they no choice . if repress she for a little time , she soon begin again ; and though much that pass between they be in a half - whisper , especially on 's side , there be no avoid a knowledge of they principal subject : the post-office -- catch cold -- fetch letter -- and friendship , be long under discussion ; and to they succeed one , which must be at least equally unpleasant to -- inquiry whether she have yet hear of any situation likely to suit she , and profession of 's meditate activity . " here be come ! " say she , " I get quite anxious about you . will soon be here . " " but I have never fix on or any other month -- merely look forward to the summer in general . " " but have you really hear of nothing ? " " I have not even make any inquiry ; I do not wish to make any yet . " " oh ! my dear , we can not begin too early ; you be not aware of the difficulty of procure exactly the desirable thing . " " I not aware ! " say , shak she head ; " dear , who can have think of it as I have do ? " " but you have not see so much of the world as I have . you do not know how many candidate there always be for the _first_ situation . I see a vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round . a cousin of , , have such a infinity of application ; every body be anxious to be in she family , for she move in the first circle . - candle in the schoolroom ! you may imagine how desirable ! of all house in the kingdom 's be the one I would most wish to see you in . " "
" and be to be in town again by midsummer , " say . " I must spend some time with they ; I be sure they will want it ;-- afterwards I may probably be glad to dispose off myself . but I would not wish you to take the trouble of make any inquirie at present . " " trouble ! aye , I know you scruple . you be afraid of give I trouble ; but I assure you , my dear , the Campbell can hardly be more interested about you than I be . I shall write to in a day or two , and shall give she a strict charge to be on the look - out for any thing eligible . " " thank you , but I would rather you do not mention the subject to she ; till the time draw nearer , I do not wish to be give any body trouble . " " but , my dear child , the time be draw near ; here be , and , or say even , be very near , with such business to accomplish before we . you inexperience really amuse I ! a situation such as you deserve , and you friend would require for you , be no every day occurrence , be not obtain at a moment 's notice ; indeed , indeed , we must begin inquire directly . " " excuse I , ma 'am , but this be by no means my intention ; I make no inquiry myself , and should be sorry to have any make by my friend . when I be quite determined as to the time , I be not at all afraid of be long unemployed . there be place in town , office , where inquiry would soon produce something -- for the sale -- not quite of human flesh -- but of human intellect . " " oh ! my dear , human flesh ! you quite shock I ; if you mean a fling at the slave - trade , I assure you be always rather a friend to the abolition . " " I do not mean , I be not think of the slave - trade , " reply ; " governess - trade , I assure you , be all that I have in view ; widly different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on ; but as to the greater misery of the victim , I do not know where it lie . but I only mean to say that there be advertising office , and that by apply to they I should have no doubt of very soon meet with something that would do . " " something that would do ! " repeat . " aye , _that may suit you humble idea of yourself ; -- I know what a modest creature you be ; but it will not satisfy you friend to have you take up with any thing that may offer , any inferior , commonplace situation , in a family not move in a certain circle , or able to command the elegancy of life . " " you be very obliging ; but as to all that , I be very indifferent ; it would be no object to I to be with the rich ; my mortification , I think , would only be the greater ; I should suffer more from comparison . a gentleman 's family be all that I should condition for . " " I know you , I know you ; you would take up with any thing ; but I shall be a little more nice , and I be sure the good Campbell will be quite on my side ; with you superior talents , you have a right to move in the first circle . you musical knowledge alone would entitle you to name you own term , have as many room as you like , and mix in the family as much as you choose ; -- that be -- I do not know -- if you know the harp , you might do all that , I be very sure ; but you s as well as play ; -- yes , I really believe you might , even without the harp , stipulate for what you choose ; -- and you must and shall be delightfully , honourably and comfortably settle before the Campbells or I have any rest . " " you may well class the delight , the honour , and the comfort of such a situation together , " say , " they be pretty sure to be equal ; however , I be very serious in not wish any thing to be attempt at present for I . I be exceedingly oblige to you , . , I be oblige to any body who feel for I , but I be quite serious in wish nothing to be do till the summer . for two or three month longer I shall remain where I be , and as I be . " " and I be quite serious too , I assure you , " reply gaily , " in resolve to be always on the watch , and employ my friend to watch also , that nothing really unexceptionable may pass we . " in this style she run on ; never thoroughly stop by any thing till come into the room ; she vanity have then a change of object , and hear she say in the same half - whisper to , " here come this dear old beau of mine , I protest !-- only think of he gallantry in come away before the other man !-- what a dear creature he be ;-- I assure you I like he
he excessively . I admire all that quaint , old - fashioned politeness ; it be much more to my taste than modern ease ; modern ease often disgust I . but this good old , I wish you have hear he gallant speech to I at dinner . oh ! I assure you I begin to think my caro sposo would be absolutely jealous . I fancy I be rather a favourite ; he take notice of my gown . how do you like it ? -- 's choice -- handsome , I think , but I do not know whether it be not over-trim ; I have the greatest dislike to the idea of be over-trim -- quite a horror of finery . I must put on a few ornament now , because it be expect of I . a bride , you know , must appear like a bride , but my natural taste be all for simplicity ; a simple style of dress be so infinitely preferable to finery . but I be quite in the minority , I believe ; few people seem to value simplicity of dress , -- show and finery be every thing . I have some notion of put such a trimming as this to my white and silver poplin . do you think it will look well ? " the whole party be but just reassemble in the drawing - room when make he appearance among they . he have return to a late dinner , and walk to as soon as it be over . he have be too much expect by the best judge , for surprize -- but there be great joy . be almost as glad to see he now , as he would have be sorry to see he before . only be in mute astonishment .-- that a man who might have spend he evening quietly at home after a day of business in , should set off again , and walk half a mile to another man 's house , for the sake of be in mix company till bed - time , of finish he day in the effort of civility and the noise of number , be a circumstance to strike he deeply . a man who have be in motion since eight o'clock in the morning , and might now have be still , who have be long talk , and might have be silent , who have be in more than one crowd , and might have be alone ! -- such a man , to quit the tranquillity and independence of he own fireside , and on the evening of a cold sleety day rush out again into the world !-- could he by a touch of he finger have instantly take back he wife , there would have be a motive ; but he come would probably prolong rather than break up the party . look at he with amazement , then shrug he shoulders , and say , " I could not have believe it even of _him _. " meanwhile , perfectly unsuspicious of the indignation he be exciting , happy and cheerful as usual , and with all the right of be principal talker , which a day spend anywhere from home confer , be make himself agreeable among the rest ; and have satisfy the inquirie of he wife as to he dinner , convince she that none of all she careful direction to the servants have be forget , and spread abroad what public news he have hear , be proceed to a family communication , which , though principally address to , he have not the smallest doubt of be highly interesting to every body in the room . he give she a letter , it be from , and to herself ; he have meet with it in he way , and have take the liberty of open it . " read it , read it , " say he , " it will give you pleasure ; only a few line -- will not take you long ; read it to . " the two lady look over it together ; and he sit smile and talk to they the whole time , in a voice a little subdued , but very audible to every body . " well , he be come , you see ; good news , I think . well , what do you say to it ?-- I always tell you he would be here again soon , do not I ?-- , my dear , do not I always tell you so , and you would not believe I ?-- in town next week , you see -- at the latest , I dare say ; for _she_ be as impatient as the black gentleman when any thing be to be do ; most likely they will be there to - morrow or . as to she illness , all nothing of course . but it be a excellent thing to have among we again , so near as town . they will stay a good while when they do come , and he will be half he time with we . this be precisely what I want . well , pretty good news , be not it ? have you finish it ? have read it all ? put it up , put it up ; we will have a good talk about it some other time , but it will not do now . I shall only just mention the circumstance to the other in a common way . " be most comfortably pleased on the occasion . she look and word have nothing to restrain they . she be happy , she know she be happy , and know she ought to be happy . she congratulation be warm and open
open ; but could not speak so fluently . She_ be a little occupy in weighing she own feeling , and try to understand the degree of she agitation , which she rather thought be considerable . , however , too eager to be very observant , too communicative to want other to talk , be very well satisfied with what she do say , and soon move away to make the rest of he friend happy by a partial communication of what the whole room must have overheard already . it be well that he take every body 's joy for grant , or he might not have think either or particularly delighte . they be the first entitle , after and , to be make happy ; -- from they he would have proceed to , but she be so deep in conversation with , that it would have be too positive a interruption ; and find himself close to , and she attention disengage , he necessarily begin on the subject with she . " I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introduce my son to you , " say . , very willing to suppose a particular compliment intend she by such a hope , smile most graciously . " you have hear of a certain , I presume , " he continue -- " and know he to be my son , though he do not bear my name . " " oh ! yes , and I shall be very happy in he acquaintance . I be sure will lose no time in call on he ; and we shall both have great pleasure in see he at the Vicarage . " " you be very obliging .-- will be extremely happy , I be sure .-- he be to be in town next week , if not sooner . we have notice of it in a letter to - day . I meet the letter in my way this morning , and see my son 's hand , presume to open it -- though it be not direct to I -- it be to . she be he principal correspondent , I assure you . I hardly ever get a letter . " " and so you absolutely open what be direct to she ! oh ! --( laugh affectedly ) I must protest against that .-- a most dangerous precedent indeed !-- I beg you will not let you neighbour follow you example .-- Upon my word , if this be what I be to expect , we marry woman must begin to exert ourselves !-- oh ! , I could not have believe it of you ! " " aye , we man be sad fellow . you must take care of yourself , . .-- this letter tell we -- it be a short letter -- write in a hurry , merely to give we notice -- it tell we that they be all come up to town directly , on 's account -- she have not be well the whole winter , and think too cold for she -- so they be all to move southward without loss of time . " " indeed !-- from , I think . be in ? " " yes , they be about one hundred and ninety mile from . a considerable journey . " " yes , upon my word , very considerable . sixty - five mile farther than from to . but what be distance , , to people of large fortune ?-- you would be amaze to hear how my brother , , sometimes fly about . you will hardly believe I -- but twice in one week he and go to and back again with four horse . " " the evil of the distance from , " say , " be , that , _as _we_ _understand , have not be able to leave the sofa for a week together . in 's last letter she complain , he say , of be too weak to get into she conservatory without have both he arm and he uncle 's ! this , you know , speak a great degree of weakness -- but now she be so impatient to be in town , that she mean to sleep only two night on the road .-- so write word . certainly , delicate lady have very extraordinary constitution , . you must grant I that . " " no , indeed , I shall grant you nothing . I always take the part of my own sex . I do indeed . I give you notice -- you will find I a formidable antagonist on that point . I always stand up for woman -- and I assure you , if you know how feel with respect to slee at a inn , you would not wonder at 's make incredible exertion to avoid it . say it be quite horror to she -- and I believe I have catch a little of she nicety . she always travel with she own sheet ; a excellent precaution . do do the same ? " " Depend upon it , . do every thing that any other fine lady ever do . will not be second to any lady in the land for " -- . eagerly interpose with , " oh ! , do not mistake I . be no fine lady , I assure you . do not run away with such a idea . " " be not she ? then she be no rule for , who be as thorough a fine lady as any body ever beheld . " begin to think she have be wrong in disclaim so warmly . it be by no mean she object to have it believe that she sister be _not a fine lady ; perhaps
perhaps there be want of spirit in the pretence of it ; -- and she be consider in what way she have best retract , when go on . " . be not much in my good graces , as you may suspect -- but this be quite between ourselves . she be very fond of , and therefore I would not speak ill of she . besides , she be out of health now ; but _that indeed , by she own account , she have always be . I would not say so to every body , , but I have not much faith in 's illness . " " if she be really ill , why not go to , ?-- to , or to ? " " she have take it into she head that be too cold for she . the fact be , I suppose , that she be tired of . she have now be a longer time stationary there , than she ever be before , and she begin to want change . it be a retired place . a fine place , but very retired . " " aye -- like , I dare say . nothing can stand more retired from the road than Maple Grove . such a immense plantation all round it ! you seem shut out from every thing -- in the most complete retirement .-- and probably have not health or spirit like to enjoy that sort of seclusion . or , perhaps she may not have resource enough in herself to be qualified for a country life . I always say a woman can not have too many resource -- and I feel very thankful that I have so many myself as to be quite independent of society . " " be here in for a fortnight . " " so I remember to have hear . he will find a _addition_ to the society of Highbury when he come again ; that be , if I may presume to call myself a addition . but perhaps he may never have hear of there be such a creature in the world . " this be too loud a call for a compliment to be pass by , and , with a very good grace , immediately exclaim , " my dear madam ! nobody but yourself could imagine such a thing possible . not hear of you !-- I believe 's letter lately have be full of very little else than . " he have do he duty and could return to he son . " when leave we , " continue he , " it be quite uncertain when we might see he again , which make this day 's news doubly welcome . it have be completely unexpected . that be , _I_ always have a strong persuasion he would be here again soon , I be sure something favourable would turn up -- but nobody believe I . he and be both dreadfully despond . ' how could he contrive to come ? and how could it be suppose that he uncle and aunt would spare he again ? ' and so forth -- I always feel that something would happen in we favour ; and so it have , you see . I have observ , , in the course of my life , that if thing be go untowardly one month , they be sure to mmend the next . " " very true , , perfectly true . it be just what I use to say to a certain gentleman in company in the day of courtship , when , because thing do not go quite right , do not proceed with all the rapidity which suit he feeling , he be apt to be in despair , and exclaim that he be sure at this rate it would be before 's saffron robe would be put on for we . oh ! the pain I have be at to dispel those gloomy idea and give he cheerfuller view ! the carriage -- we have disappointment about the carriage ; -- one morning , I remember , he come to I quite in despair . " she be stop by a slight fit of coughing , and instantly seize the opportunity of go on . " you be mention . be the very month which be order , or have order herself , to spend in some warmer place than -- in short , to spend in ; so that we have the agreeable prospect of frequent visit from the whole spring -- precisely the season of the year which one should have choose for it : day almost at the longest ; weather genial and pleasant , always invite one out , and never too hot for exercise . when he be here before , we make the best of it ; but there be a good deal of wet , damp , cheerless weather ; there always be in , you know , and we could not do half that we intend . now will be the time . this will be complete enjoyment ; and I do not know , , whether the uncertainty of we meeting , the sort of constant expectation there will be of he come in to - day or to - morrow , and at any hour , may not be more friendly to happiness than have he actually in the house . I think it be so . I think it be the state of mind which give most spirit and delight . I hope you will be pleased with my son ; but you must not expect a prodigy . he be generally think a fine young man , but do not expect a prodigy . 's partiality for he be very great , and , as you may suppose
suppose , most gratify to I . she think nobody equal to he . " " and I assure you , , I have very little doubt that my opinion will be decidedly in he favour . I have hear so much in praise of .-- at the same time it be fair to observe , that I be one of those who always judge for themselves , and be by no means implicitly guide by other . I give you notice that as I find you son , so I shall judge of he .-- I be no flatterer . " be muse . " I hope , " say he presently , " I have not be severe upon poor . if she be ill I should be sorry to do she injustice ; but there be some trait in she character which make it difficult for I to speak of she with the forbearance I could wish . you can not be ignorant , , of my connexion with the family , nor of the treatment I have meet with ; and , between ourselves , the whole blame of it be to be laid to she . she be the instigator . 's mother would never have be slighte as she be but for she . have pride ; but he pride be nothing to he wife 's : he be a quiet , indolent , gentlemanlike sort of pride that would harm nobody , and only make himself a little helpless and tiresome ; but she pride be arrogance and insolence ! and what incline one less to bear , she have no fair pretence of family or blood . she be nobody when he marry she , barely the daughter of a gentleman ; but ever since she be turn into a she have out - ' they all in high and mighty claim : but in herself , I assure you , she be a upstart . " " only think ! well , that must be infinitely provoke ! I have quite a horror of upstart . Maple have give I a thorough disgust to people of that sort ; for there be a family in that neighbourhood who be such a annoyance to my brother and sister from the air they give themselves ! you description of make I think of they directly . people of the name of , very lately settle there , and encumber with many low connexion , but give themselves immense air , and expect to be on a footing with the old establish family . a year and a half be the very utmost that they can have live at ; and how they get they fortune nobody know . they come from , which be not a place to promise much , you know , . one have not great hope from . I always say there be something direful in the sound : but nothing more be positively know of the , through a good many thing I assure you be suspect ; and yet by they manners they evidently think themselves equal even to my brother , , who happen to be one of they nearest neighbour . it be infinitely too bad . , who have be eleven year a resident at , and whose father have it before he -- I believe , at least -- I be almost sure that old have complete the purchase before he death . " they be interrupt . be carry round , and , have say all that he want , soon take the opportunity of walk away . after tea , and , and sit down with Woodhouse to card . the remaining five be leave to they own power , and doubt they get on very well ; for seem little dispose for conversation ; be want notice , which nobody have inclination to pay , and she be herself in a worry of spirit which would have make she prefer be silent . prove more talkative than he brother . he be to leave they early the next day ; and he soon begin with -- " well , , I do not believe I have any thing more to say about the boy ; but you have you sister 's letter , and every thing be down at full length there we may be sure . my charge would be much more concise than she 's , and probably not much in the same spirit ; all that I have to recommend be comprise in , do not spoil they , and do not physic they . " " I rather hope to satisfy you both , " say , " for I shall do all in my power to make they happy , which will be enough for ; and happiness must preclude false indulgence and physic . " " and if you find they troublesome , you must send they home again . " " that be very likely . you think so , do not you ? " " I hope I be aware that they may be too noisy for you father -- or even may be some encumbrance to you , if you visit engagement continue to increase as much as they have do lately . " " increase ! " " certainly ; you must be sensible that the last half - year have make a great difference in you way of life . " " difference ! no indeed I be not . " " there can be no doubt of you be much more engage with company than you use to be . witness this very time . here be I come down for only one day , and you be engage with a dinner - party !-- when do it happen before , or any thing like it ? you neighbourhood
neighbourhood be increase , and you mix more with it . a little while ago , every letter to bring a account of fresh gaiety ; dinner at 's , or ball at the Crown . the difference which Randalls , Randalls alone make in you goings - on , be very great . " " yes , " say he brother quickly , " it be Randalls that do it all . " " very well -- and as Randalls , I suppose , be not likely to have less influence than heretofore , it strike I as a possible thing , , that and may be sometimes in the way . and if they be , I only beg you to send they home . " " no , " cry , " that need not be the consequence . let they be send to . I shall certainly be at leisure . " " upon my word , " exclaim , " you amuse I ! I should like to know how many of all my numerous engagement take place without you be of the party ; and why I be to be suppose in danger of want leisure to attend to the little boy . these amazing engagement of mine -- what have they be ? dine once with the Coles -- and have a ball talk of , which never take place . I can understand you --( nodd at ) -- you good fortune in meet with so many of you friend at once here , delight you too much to pass unnoticed . but you , ( turn to , ) who know how very , very seldom I be ever two hour from , why you should foresee such a series of dissipation for I , I can not imagine . and as to my dear little boy , I must say , that if have not time for they , I do not think they would fare much better with uncle , who be absent from home about five hour where she be absent one -- and who , when he be at home , be either read to himself or settle he account . " seem to be try not to smile ; and succeed without difficulty , upon have begin to talk to he . I a very little quiet reflection be enough to satisfy as to the nature of she agitation on hear this news of . she be soon convince that it be not for herself she be feel at all apprehensive or embarrassed ; it be for he . she own attachment have really subside into a mere nothing ; it be not worth think of ; -- but if he , who have undoubtedly be always so much the most in love of the two , be to be return with the same warmth of sentiment which he have take away , it would be very distressing . if a separation of two month should not have coole he , there be dangers and evils before she :-- caution for he and for herself would be necessary . she do not mean to have she own affections entangle again , and it would be incumbent on she to avoid any encouragement of he . she wish she might be able to keep he from a absolute declaration . that would be so very painful a conclusion of they present acquaintance ! and yet , she could not help rather anticipat something decisive . she feel as if the spring would not pass without bring a crisis , a event , a something to alter she present compose and tranquil state . it be not very long , though rather longer than have foreseen , before she have the power of form some opinion of 's feeling . the family be not in town quite so soon as have be imagine , but he be at very soon afterwards . he ride down for a couple of hour ; he could not yet do more ; but as he come from immediately to , she could then exercise all she quick observation , and speedily determine how he be influence , and how she must act . they meet with the utmost friendliness . there could be no doubt of he great pleasure in see she . but she have a almost instant doubt of he caring for she as he have do , of he feel the same tenderness in the same degree . she watch he well . it be a clear thing he be less in love than he have be . absence , with the conviction probably of she indifference , have produce this very natural and very desirable effect . he be in high spirit ; as ready to talk and laugh as ever , and seem delighted to speak of he former visit , and recur to old story : and he be not without agitation . it be not in he calmness that she read he comparative difference . he be not calm ; he spirit be evidently flutter ; there be restlessness about he . Lively as he be , it seem a liveliness that do not satisfy himself ; but what decide she belief on the subject , be he stay only a quarter of a hour , and hurrie away to make other call in . " he have see a group of old acquaintance in the street as he pass -- he have not stop , he would not stop for more than a word -- but he have the vanity to think they would be disappointed if he do not call , and much as he wish to stay longer at , he must hurry off . " she have no doubt as to he be less in love -- but neither he agitated spirit
spirit , nor he hurrying away , seem like a perfect cure ; and she be rather inclin to think it imply a dread of she return power , and a discreet resolution of not trust himself with she long . this be the only visit from in the course of ten day . he be often hope , intend to come -- but be always prevent . he aunt could not bear to have he leave she . be he own account at 's . if he be quite sincere , if he really try to come , it be to be infer that . 's removal to have be of no service to the wilful or nervous part of she disorder . that she be really ill be very certain ; he have declare himself convince of it , at Randalls . though much might be fancy , he could not doubt , when he look back , that she be in a weaker state of health than she have be half a year ago . he do not believe it to proceed from any thing that care and medicine might not remove , or at least that she might not have many year of existence before she ; but he could not be prevail on , by all he father 's doubt , to say that she complaint be merely imaginary , or that she be as strong as ever . it soon appear that be not the place for she . she could not endure it be noise . she nerf be under continual irritation and suffer ; and by the ten day ' end , she nephew 's letter to communicate a change of plan . they be go to remove immediately to . have be recommend to the medical skill of a eminent person there , and have otherwise a fancy for the place . a ready - furnish house in a favourite spot be engage , and much benefit expect from the change . hear that write in the highest spirit of this arrangement , and seem most fully to appreciate the blessing of have two month before he of such near neighbourhood to many dear friend -- for the house be take for and . she be tell that now he write with the greatest confidence of be often with they , almost as often as he could even wish . see how understand these joyous prospect . he be consider she as the source of all the happiness they offer . she hope it be not so . two month must bring it to the proof . 's own happiness be indisputable . he be quite delighted . it be the very circumstance he could have wish for . now , it would be really have in they neighbourhood . what be nine miles to a young man ?-- a hour 's ride . he would be always come over . the difference in that respect of and be enough to make the whole difference of see he always and see he never . sixteen miles -- nay , eighteen -- it must be full eighteen to - --be a serious obstacle . be he ever able to get away , the day would be spend in come and return . there be no comfort in have he in ; he might as well be at ; but be the very distance for easy intercourse . better than nearer ! one good thing be immediately bring to a certainty by this removal , -- the ball at the Crown . it have not be forget before , but it have be soon acknowledge vain to attempt to fix a day . now , however , it be absolutely to be ; every preparation be resum , and very soon after the Churchill have remove to , a few line from , to say that he aunt feel already much better for the change , and that he have no doubt of be able to join they for twenty - four hour at any give time , induce they to name as early a day as possible . 's ball be to be a real thing . a very few to - morrow stood between the young people of Highbury and happiness . Woodhouse be resign . the time of year lighten the evil to he . be better for every thing than . be engage to spend the evening at , have due notice , and he sanguinely hope that neither dear little Henry nor dear little would have any thing the matter with they , while dear be gone . chapter ii no misfortune occur , again to prevent the ball . the day approach , the day arrive ; and after a morning of some anxious watch , , in all the certainty of he own self , reach Randall before dinner , and every thing be safe . no second meeting have there yet be between he and . the room at the be to witness it ; -- but it would be better than a common meeting in a crowd . have be so very earnest in he entreaty for she arrive there as soon as possible after themselves , for the purpose of take she opinion as to the propriety and comfort of the room before any other person come , that she could not refuse he , and must therefore spend some quiet interval in the young man 's company . she be to convey , and they drive to the in good time , the party just sufficiently before they . seem to have be on the watch ; and though he do not say much , he eye declare that he mean to have a delightful evening . they all walk about together , to see that every thing be as it should be
be ; and within a few minute be join by the contents of another carriage , which could not hear the sound of at first , without great surprize . " so unreasonably early ! " she be go to exclaim ; but she presently find that it be a family of old friend , who be come , like herself , by particular desire , to help 's judgment ; and they be so very closely follow by another carriage of cousin , who have be entreate to come early with the same distinguishing earnestness , on the same errand , that it see as if half the company might soon be collect together for the purpose of preparatory inspection . perceive that she taste be not the only taste on which depend , and feel , that to be the favourite and intimate of a man who have so many intimate and confidante , be not the very first distinction in the scale of vanity . she like he open manners , but a little less of open - heartedness would have make he a higher character .--General benevolence , but not general friendship , make a man what he ought to be .-- she could fancy such a man . the whole party walk about , and look , and praise again ; and then , have nothing else to do , form a sort of half - circle round the fire , to observe in they various modes , till other subject be start , that , though , a fire in the evening be still very pleasant . find that it be not 's fault that the number of privy councillor be not yet larger . they have stop at . 's door to offer the use of they carriage , but the aunt and niece be to be bring by the . be stand by she , but not steadily ; there be a restlessness , which shew a mind not at ease . he be look about , he be go to the door , he be watch for the sound of other carriage , -- impatient to begin , or afraid of be always near she . be speak of . " I think she must be here soon , " say he . " I have a great curiosity to see , I have hear so much of she . it can not be long , I think , before she come . " a carriage be hear . he be on the move immediately ; but come back , say , " I be forgett that I be not acquaint with she . I have never see either or . I have no business to put myself forward . " and appear ; and all the smile and the propriety pass . " but and ! " say , look about . " we think you be to bring they . " the mistake have be slight . the carriage be send for they now . longe to know what 's first opinion of . might be ; how he be affect by the study elegance of she dress , and she smile of graciousness . he be immediately qualifye himself to form a opinion , by give she very proper attention , after the introduction have pass . in a few minute the carriage return .-- somebody talk of rain .-- " I will see that there be umbrella , sir , " say to he father : " must not be forget : " and away he go . be follow ; but detain he , to gratify he by she opinion of he son ; and so briskly do she begin , that the young man himself , though by no means move slowly , could hardly be out of hearing . " a very fine young man indeed , . you know I candidly tell you I should form my own opinion ; and I be happy to say that I be extremely pleased with he .-- you may believe I . I never compliment . I think he a very handsome young man , and he manners be precisely what I like and approve -- so truly the gentleman , without the least conceit or puppyism . you must know I have a vast dislike to puppy -- quite a horror of they . they be never tolerat at . neither nor I have ever any patience with they ; and we use sometimes to say very cutting thing ! , who be mild almost to a fault , bear with they much better . " while she talk of he son , 's attention be chain ; but when she get to , he could recollect that there be ladie just arrive to be attend to , and with happy smile must hurry away . turn to . " I have no doubt of its be we carriage with and . we coachman and horse be so extremely expeditious !-- I believe we drive faster than any body .-- what a pleasure it be to send one 's carriage for a friend !-- I understand you be so kind as to offer , but another time it will be quite unnecessary . you may be very sure I shall always take care of _they _. " and , escort by the two gentleman , walk into the room ; and seem to think it as much she duty as 's to receive they . she gesture and movement might be understand by any one who look on like ; but she word , every body 's word , be soon lose under the incessant flow of , who come in talking , and have not finish she speech under many minute after she be admit into the circle at the fire . as the door
door open she be hear , " so very obliging of you !-- no rain at all . nothing to signify . I do not care for myself . quite thick shoe . and declare -- well !--( as soon as she be within the door ) well ! this be brilliant indeed !-- this be admirable !-- excellently contrive , upon my word . nothing want . could not have imagine it .-- so well light up !-- , , look !--did you ever see any thing ? oh ! , you must really have have 's lamp . would not know she own room again . I see she as I come in ; she be stand in the entrance . 'Oh ! , ' say I -- but I have not time for more . " she be now meet by .-- " very well , I thank you , ma 'am . I hope you be quite well . very happy to hear it . so afraid you might have a headache !-- see you pass by so often , and know how much trouble you must have . delighte to hear it indeed . ah ! dear Mrs . , so oblige to you for the carriage !--excellent time . and I quite ready . do not keep the horse a moment . most comfortable carriage .-- oh ! and I be sure we thanks be due to you , , on that score . have most kindly send a note , or we should have be .-- but two such offer in one day ! -- never be such neighbour . I say to my mother , ' upon my word , ma 'am --. ' thank you , my mother be remarkably well . go to 's . I make she take she shawl -- for the evening be not warm -- she large new shawl -- 's wedding -present .-- so kind of she to think of my mother ! buy at , you know -- 's choice . there be three other , say , which they hesitat about some time . rather prefer a olive . my dear , be you sure you do not wet you foot ?-- it be but a drop or two , but I be so afraid :-- but be so extremely -- and there be a mat to step upon -- I shall never forget he extreme politeness .-- oh ! , I must tell you my mother 's spectacle have never be in fault since ; the rivet never come out again . my mother often talk of you good - nature . do not she , ?-- do not we often talk of ?-- ah ! here be .-- dear miss Woodhouse , how do you do ?-- very well I thank you , quite well . this be meet quite in fairy - land !-- such a transformation ! -- must not compliment , I know ( eye most complacently ) -- that would be rude -- but upon my word , Woodhouse , you do look -- how do you like 's hair ?-- you be a judge .-- she do it all herself . quite wonderful how she do she hair !-- no hairdresser from I think could .-- ah ! Hugh I declare -- and . must go and speak to and . for a moment .-- how do you do ? how do you do ?-- very well , I thank you . this be delightful , be not it ?-- where 's dear ?-- oh ! there he be . do not disturb he . much better employ talk to the young lady . how do you do , ?-- I see you the other day as you ride through the town -- . Otway , I protest !-- and good , and and .-- such a host of friend !-- and and !-- how do you do ? how do you all do ?-- quite well , I be much oblige to you . never better .-- do not I hear another carriage ?-- who can this be ?--very likely the worthy Coles .-- Upon my word , this be charme to be stand about among such friend ! and such a noble fire !-- I be quite roast . no coffee , I thank you , for I -- never take coffee .-- a little tea if you please , sir , by and bye , -- no hurry -- oh ! here it come . every thing so good ! " return to he station by ; and as soon as be quiet , she find herself necessarily overhear the discourse of and , who be stand a little way behind she .-- he be thoughtful . whether he be overhear too , she could not determine . after a good many compliment to on she dress and look , compliment very quietly and properly take , . be evidently want to be compliment herself -- and it be , " how do you like my gown ?-- how do you like my trimming ?-- how have Wright do my hair ? " --with many other relative question , all answer with patient politeness . then say , " nobody can think less of dress in general than I do -- but upon such a occasion as this , when every body 's eye be so much upon I , and in compliment to the Weston -- who I have no doubt be give this ball chiefly to do I honour -- I would not wish to be inferior to other . and I see very few pearl in the room except mine .-- so be a capital dancer , I understand .-- we shall see if we style suit .-- a fine young man certainly be . I like he very well .
. " at this moment begin talk so vigorously , that could not but imagine he have overhear he own praise , and do not want to hear more ; -- and the voice of the ladie be drown for a while , till another suspension bring 's tone again distinctly forward .-- have just join they , and he wife be exclaim , " oh ! you have find we out at last , have you , in we seclusion ?-- I be this moment tell , I think you would begin to be impatient for tiding of we . " " ! " --repeate , with a look of surprize and displeasure .-- " that be easy -- but do not disapprove it , I suppose . " " how do you like ? " say in a whisper . " not at all . " " you be ungrateful . " " Ungrateful ! -- what do you mean ? " then change from a frown to a smile -- " no , do not tell I -- I do not want to know what you mean .-- where be my father ?-- when be we to begin dancing ? " could hardly understand he ; he see in a odd humour . he walk off to find he father , but be quickly back again with both and . he have meet with they in a little perplexity , which must be laid before . it have just occur to that . must be ask to begin the ball ; that she would expect it ; which interfere with all they wish of give that distinction .-- hear the sad truth with fortitude . " and what be we to do for a proper partner for she ? " say . " she will think ought to ask she . " turn instantly to , to claim she former promise ; and boast himself a engage man , which he father look he most perfect approbation of -- and it then appear that be want _him_ to dance with himself , and that they business be to help to persuade he into it , which be do pretty soon .-- and lead the way , and follow . must submit to stand second to , though she have always consider the ball as peculiarly for she . it be almost enough to make she think of marry . have undoubtedly the advantage , at this time , in vanity completely gratify ; for though she have intend to begin with , she could not lose by the change . might be he son 's superior .-- in spite of this little rub , however , be smile with enjoyment , delighte to see the respectable length of the set as it be form , and to feel that she have so many hour of unusual festivity before she .-- she be more disturbed by be not dance than by any thing else .-- there he be , among the stander - by , where he ought not to be ; he ought to be dance , -- not class himself with the husband , and fathers , and whist - player , who be pretend to feel a interest in the dance till they rubber be make up , -- so young as he look !-- he could not have appear to greater advantage perhaps anywhere , than where he have place himself . he tall , firm , upright figure , among the bulky form and stoop shoulders of the elderly man , be such as must draw every body 's eye ; and , except she own partner , there be not one among the whole row of young man who could be compare with he .-- he move a few step nearer , and those few step be enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner , with what natural grace , he must have dance , would he but take the trouble .-- whenever she catch he eye , she force he to smile ; but in general he be look grave . she wish he could love a ballroom better , and could like better .-- he seem often observe she . she must not flatter herself that he think of she dancing , but if he be criticise she behaviour , she do not feel afraid . there be nothing like flirtation between she and she partner . they seem more like cheerful , easy friend , than lover . that think less of she than he have do , be indubitable . the ball proceed pleasantly . the anxious care , the incessant attention of , be not throw away . every body seem happy ; and the praise of be a delightful ball , which be seldom bestow till after a ball have cease to be , be repeatedly give in the very beginning of the existence of this . of very important , very recordable event , it be not more productive than such meeting usually be . there be one , however , which think something of .-- the two last dance before supper be begin , and have no partner ; -- the only young lady sit down ; -- and so equal have be hitherto the number of dancer , that how there could be any one disengage be the wonder !-- but 's wonder lessen soon afterwards , on see saunter about . he would not ask to dance if it be possible to be avoid : she be sure he would not -- and she be expect he every moment to escape into the card - room . escape , however , be not he plan . he come to the part of the room where the sitter - by be collect , speak to some , and walk about in front of
of they , as if to show he liberty , and he resolution of maintain it . he do not omit be sometimes directly before , or speak to those who be close to she .-- see it . she be not yet dance ; she be work she way up from the bottom , and have therefore leisure to look around , and by only turn she head a little she see it all . when she be half - way up the set , the whole group be exactly behind she , and she would no longer allow she eye to watch ; but be so near , that she hear every syllable of a dialogue which just then take place between he and ; and she perceive that he wife , who be stand immediately above she , be not only listen also , but even encourage he by significant glance .-- the kind - hear , gentle have leave she seat to join he and say , " do not you dance , ? " to which he prompt reply be , " most readily , , if you will dance with I . " " I !-- oh ! no --i would get you a better partner than myself . I be no dancer . " " if wish to dance , " say he , " I shall have great pleasure , I be sure -- for , though begin to feel myself rather a old married man , and that my dancing day be over , it would give I very great pleasure at any time to stand up with a old friend like . " " . do not mean to dance , but there be a young lady disengage whom I should be very glad to see dancing -- . " " !-- oh !-- I have not observe .-- you be extremely oblige -- and if I be not a old married man . -- but my dancing day be over , . you will excuse I . any thing else I should be most happy to do , at you command -- but my dancing day be over . " say no more ; and could imagine with what surprize and mortification she must be return to she seat . this be ! the amiable , obliging , gentle .-- she look round for a moment ; he have join at a little distance , and be arrange himself for settled conversation , while smile of high glee pass between he and he wife . she would not look again . she heart be in a glow , and she fear she face might be as hot . in another moment a happier sight catch she ;-- lead to the set !-- never have she be more surprized , seldom more delighted , than at that instant . she be all pleasure and gratitude , both for and herself , and longe to be thanke he ; and though too distant for speech , she countenance say much , as soon as she could catch he eye again . he dancing prove to be just what she have believe it , extremely good ; and would have see almost too lucky , if it have not be for the cruel state of thing before , and for the very complete enjoyment and very high sense of the distinction which she happy feature announce . it be not throw away on she , she bounde higher than ever , fly farther down the middle , and be in a continual course of smile . have retreat into the card - room , look ( trust ) very foolish . she do not think he be quite so hardened as he wife , though grow very like she ;--_she_ speak some of she feeling , by observe audibly to she partner , " have take pity on poor little !-- very goodnatured , I declare . " be announce . the move begin ; and might be hear from that moment , without interruption , till she be seat at table and take up she spoon . " , , my dear , where be you ?-- here be you tippet . beg you to put on you tippet . she say she be afraid there will be draught in the passage , though every thing have be do -- one door nail up -- Quantitie of matting -- my dear , indeed you must . , oh ! you be too obliging ! how well you put it on !-- so gratify ! excellent dancing indeed !-- yes , my dear , I run home , as I say I should , to help grandmama to bed , and get back again , and nobody miss I .-- I set off without say a word , just as I tell you . be quite well , have a charming evening with , a vast deal of chat , and backgammon .-- tea be make downstair , biscuit and baked apple and wine before she come away : amazing luck in some of she throws : and she inquire a great deal about you , how you be amused , and who be you partner . 'Oh ! ' say I , 'I shall not forestall ; I leave she dancing with ; she will love to tell you all about it herself to - morrow : she first partner be , I do not know who will ask she next , perhaps ' my dear sir , you be too obliging .-- be there nobody you would not rather ?-- I be not helpless . , you be most kind . upon my word , on one arm , and I on the other !-- stop , stop , let we stand a little back , be go ; dear ,
, how elegant she look !-- beautiful lace !-- now we all follow in she train . quite the queen of the evening !-- well , here we be at the passage . two step , , take care of the two step . oh ! no , there be but one . well , I be persuade there be two . how very odd ! I be convince there be two , and there be but one . I never see any thing equal to the comfort and style -- Candle everywhere .-- I be tell you of you grandmama , ,-- there be a little disappointment .-- the baked apple and biscuit , excellent in they way , you know ; but there be a delicate fricassee of sweetbread and some asparagus bring in at first , and good Woodhouse , not think the asparagus quite boil enough , send it all out again . now there be nothing grandmama love better than sweetbread and asparagus -- so she be rather disappointed , but we agree we would not speak of it to any body , for fear of its get round to dear , who would be so very much concerned !-- well , this be brilliant ! I be all amazement ! could not have suppose any thing ! -- such elegance and profusion !-- I have see nothing like it since -- well , where shall we sit ? where shall we sit ? anywhere , so that be not in a dratch . where _I_ sit be of no consequence . oh ! do you recommend this side ?-- well , I be sure , -- only it seem too good -- but just as you please . what you direct in this house can not be wrong . dear , how shall we ever recollect half the dish for grandmama ? too ! bless I ! I should not be help so soon , but it smell most excellent , and I can not help beginn . " have no opportunity of speak to till after supper ; but , when they be all in the ballroom again , she eye invite he irresistibly to come to she and be thank . he be warm in he reprobation of 's conduct ; it have be unpardonable rudeness ; and 's look also receive the due share of censure . " they aim at wounding more than , " say he . " , why be it that they be you enemy ? " he look with smiling penetration ; and , on receive no answer , add , " she ought not to be angry with you , I suspect , whatever he may be .-- to that surmise , you say nothing , of course ; but confess , , that you do want he to marry . " " I do , " reply , " and they can not forgive I . " he shook he head ; but there be a smile of indulgence with it , and he only say , " I shall not scold you . I leave you to you own reflection . " " can you trust I with such flatterer ?-- do my vain spirit ever tell I I be wrong ? " " not you vain spirit , but you serious spirit .-- if one lead you wrong , I be sure the other tell you of it . " " I do own myself to have be completely mistaken in . there be a littleness about he which you discover , and which I do not : and I be fully convinced of he be in love with . it be through a series of strange blunder ! " " and , in return for you acknowledging so much , I will do you the justice to say , that you would have choose for he better than he have choose for himself .-- have some first - rate quality , which be totally without . a unpretending , single - minded , artless girl -- infinitely to be prefer by any man of sense and taste to such a woman as . I find more conversable than I expect . " be extremely gratify .-- they be interrupt by the bustle of call on every body to begin dancing again . " come , , , what be you all do ?-- , set you companion the example . every body be lazy ! every body be asleep ! " " I be ready , " say , " whenever I be want . " " whom be you go to dance with ? " ask . she hesitate a moment , and then reply , " with you , if you will ask I . " " will you ? " say he , offer he hand . " indeed I will . you have shewn that you can dance , and you know we be not really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper . " " brother and sister ! no , indeed . " chapter iii this little explanation with give considerable pleasure . it be one of the agreeable recollection of the ball , which she walk about the lawn the next morning to enjoy .-- she be extremely glad that they have come to so good a understanding respect the Eltons , and that they opinion of both husband and wife be so much alike ; and he praise of , he concession in she favour , be peculiarly gratify . the impertinence of the , which for a few minute have threaten to ruin the rest of she evening , have be the occasion of some of its highest satisfaction ; and she look forward to another happy result -- the cure of 's infatuation .-- from 's manner
manner of speaking of the circumstance before they quit the ballroom , she have strong hope . it seem as if she eye be suddenly open , and she be enable to see that be not the superior creature she have believe he . the fever be over , and could harbour little fear of the pulse be quicken again by injuriious courtesy . she depend on the evil feeling of the for supply all the discipline of point neglect that could be farther requisite .-- Harriet rational , not too much in love , and not want to quarrel with she , how very happy a summer must be before she ! she be not to see this morning . he have tell she that he could not allow himself the pleasure of stop at , as he be to be at home by the middle of the day . she do not regret it . have arrange all these matters , look they through , and put they all to rights , she be just turn to the house with spirit freshen up for the demand of the two little boy , as well as of they grandpapa , when the great iron sweep - gate open , and two person enter whom she have never less expect to see together -- , with lean on he arm --actually !-- a moment suffice to convince she that something extraordinary have happen . look white and frightened , and he be try to cheer she .-- the iron gate and the front - door be not twenty yard asunder ; -- they be all three soon in the hall , and immediately sinke into a chair faint away . a young lady who faint , must be recover ; question must be answer , and surprize be explai . such event be very interesting , but the suspense of they can not last long . a few minute make acquaint with the whole . , and , another parlour boarder at 's , who have be also at the ball , have walk out together , and take a road , the road , which , though apparently public enough for safety , have lead they into alarm .-- about half a mile beyond , make a sudden turn , and deeply shade by elm on each side , it become for a considerable stretch very retired ; and when the young lady have advance some way into it , they have suddenly perceive at a small distance before they , on a broader patch of greensward by the side , a party of gipsy . a child on the watch , come towards they to beg ; and , excessively frightene , give a great scream , and call on to follow she , run up a steep bank , clear a slight hedge at the top , and make the best of she way by a short cut back to . but poor could not follow . she have suffer very much from cramp after dancing , and she first attempt to mount the bank bring on such a return of it as make she absolutely powerless -- and in this state , and exceedingly terrified , she have be obliged to remain . how the tramper might have behave , have the young lady be more courageous , must be doubtful ; but such a invitation for attack could not be resist ; and be soon assail by half a dozen child , head by a stout woman and a great boy , all clamorous , and impertinent in look , though not absolutely in word .-- more and more frightened , she immediately promise they money , and take out she purse , give they a shilling , and beg they not to want more , or to use she ill .-- she be then able to walk , though but slowly , and be move away -- but she terror and she purse be too tempting , and she be follow , or rather surround , by the whole gang , demand more . in this state have find she , she trembl and condition , they loud and insolent . by a most fortunate chance he leave have be delay so as to bring he to she assistance at this critical moment . the pleasantness of the morning have induce he to walk forward , and leave he horse to meet he by another road , a mile or two beyond -- and happen to have borrowed a pair of scissors the night before of , and to have forget to restore they , he have be oblige to stop at she door , and go in for a few minute : he be therefore later than he have intend ; and be on foot , be unseen by the whole party till almost close to they . the terror which the woman and boy have be create in be then they own portion . he have leave they completely frightene ; and eagerly cling to he , and hardly able to speak , have just strength enough to reach , before she spirit be quite overcome . it be he idea to bring she to Hartfield : he have think of no other place . this be the amount of the whole story , -- of he communication and of 's as soon as she have recover she sense and speech .-- he da not stay longer than to see she well ; these several delay leave he not another minute to lose ; and engage to give assurance of she safety to , and notice of there be such a set of people in the neighbourhood to , he set off , with all the grateful blessing that she could utter for she friend and herself . such a adventure as this
this , -- a fine young man and a lovely young woman throw together in such a way , could hardly fail of suggest certain idea to the coldest heart and the steadiest brain . so think , at least . could a linguist , could a grammarian , could even a mathematician have see what she do , have witness they appearance together , and hear they history of it , without feel that circumstance have be at work to make they peculiarly interes to each other ?--How much more must a imaginist , like herself , be on fire with speculation and foresight !--especially with such a groundwork of anticipation as she mind have already make . it be a very extraordinary thing ! nothing of the sort have ever occur before to any young lady in the place , within she memory ; no rencontre , no alarm of the kind ; -- and now it have happene to the very person , and at the very hour , when the other very person be chance to pass by to rescue she !-- it certainly be very extraordinary ! -- and know , as she do , the favourable state of mind of each at this period , it strike she the more . he be wish to get the better of he attachment to herself , she just recover from she mania for . it seem as if every thing unit to promise the most interesting consequence . it be not possible that the occurrence should not be strongly recommend each to the other . in the few minute ' conversation which she have yet have with he , while have be partially insensible , he have speak of she terror , she naivete , she fervour as she seize and cling to he arm , with a sensibility amuse and delight ; and just at last , after 's own account have be give , he have express he indignation at the abominable folly of in the warmest term . every thing be to take its natural course , however , neither impell nor assist . she would not stir a step , nor drop a hint . no , she have have enough of interference . there could be no harm in a scheme , a mere passive scheme . it be no more than a wish . beyond it she would on no account proceed . 's first resolution be to keep she father from the knowledge of what have pass , -- aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion : but she soon feel that concealment must be impossible . within half a hour it be know all over . it be the very event to engage those who talk most , the young and the low ; and all the youth and servants in the place be soon in the happiness of frightful news . the last night 's ball seem lose in the gipsy . poor tremble as he sit , and , as have foreseen , would scarcely be satisfied without they promising never to go beyond the shrubbery again . it be some comfort to he that many inquirie after himself and ( for he neighbour know that he love to be inquire after ) , as well as , be come in during the rest of the day ; and he have the pleasure of returning for answer , that they be all very indifferent -- which , though not exactly true , for she be perfectly well , and not much otherwise , would not interfere with . she have a unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a man , for she hardly know what indisposition be ; and if he do not invent illness for she , she could make no figure in a message . the gipsy do not wait for the operation of justice ; they take themselves off in a hurry . the young lady of might have walk again in safety before they panic begin , and the whole history dwindle soon into a matter of little importance but to and she nephew :-- in she imagination it maintain its ground , and and be still ask every day for the story of and the gipsy , and still tenaciously set she right if she vari in the slightest particular from the original recital . chapter iv a very few day have pass after this adventure , when come one morning to with a small parcel in she hand , and after sit down and hesitat , thus begin : " -- if you be at leisure -- I have something that I should like to tell you -- a sort of confession to make -- and then , you know , it will be over . " be a good deal surprize ; but beg she to speak . there be a seriousness in 's manner which prepare she , quite as much as she word , for something more than ordinary . " it be my duty , and I be sure it be my wish , " she continue , " to have no reserve with you on this subject . as I be happily quite a alter creature in _one_ _respect _, it be very fit that you should have the satisfaction of know it . I do not want to say more than be necessary -- I be too much asham of have give way as I have do , and I dare say you understand I . " " yes , " say , " I hope I do . " " how I could so long a time be fancie myself ! . . . " cry , warmly . " it seem like madness ! I can see nothing at all extraordinary in he now .-- I
I do not care whether I meet he or not -- except that of the two I have rather not see he -- and indeed I would go any distance round to avoid he -- but I do not envy he wife in the least ; I neither admire she nor envy she , as I have do : she be very charming , I dare say , and all that , but I think she very ill - tempered and disagreeable -- I shall never forget she look the other night !-- however , I assure you , , I wish she no evil .-- no , let they be ever so happy together , it will not give I another moment 's pang : and to convince you that I have be speak truth , I be now go to destroy -- what I ought to have destroy long ago -- what I ought never to have keep -- I know that very well ( blush as she speak ) .--However , now I will destroy it all -- and it be my particular wish to do it in you presence , that you may see how rational I be grow . can not you guess what this parcel hold ? " say she , with a conscious look . " not the least in the world . -- do he ever give you any thing ? " " no -- I can not call they gift ; but they be thing that I have value very much . " she hold the parcel towards she , and read the word _Most_ _precious _treasure on the top . she curiosity be greatly excited . unfold the parcel , and she look on with impatience . within abundance of silver paper be a pretty little Tunbridge - ware box , which open : it be well line with the softest cotton ; but , except the cotton , see only a small piece of court-plaister . " now , " say , " you _must recollect . " " no , indeed I do not . " " dear I ! I should not have think it possible you could forget what pass in this very room about court -plaister , one of the very last time we ever meet in it !-- it be but a very few day before I have my sore throat -- just before and come -- I think the very evening .-- do not you remember he cut he finger with you new penknife , and you recommend court -plaister ?-- but , as you have none about you , and know I have , you desire I to supply he ; and so I take mine out and cut he a piece ; but it be a great deal too large , and he cut it smaller , and keep play some time with what be leave , before he give it back to I . and so then , in my nonsense , I could not help make a treasure of it -- so I put it by never to be use , and look at it now and then as a great treat . " " my dearest Harriet ! " cry , put she hand before she face , and jump up , " you make I more asham of myself than I can bear . remember it ? aye , I remember it all now ; all , except you save this relic -- I know nothing of that till this moment -- but the cut the finger , and my recommend court - plaister , and say I have none about I !-- oh ! my sins , my sins ! -- and I have plenty all the while in my pocket !-- one of my senseless trick !-- I deserve to be under a continual blush all the rest of my life .-- well --( sit down again ) -- go on -- what else ? " " and have you really some at hand yourself ? I be sure I never suspect it , you do it so naturally . " " and so you actually put this piece of court - plaister by for he sake ! " say , recover from she state of shame and feeling divide between wonder and amusement . and secretely she add to herself , " bless I ! when should I ever have think of put by in cotton a piece of court - plaister that have be pull about ! I never be equal to this . " " here , " resume , turn to she box again , " here be something still more valuable , I mean that _have _been_ more valuable , because this be what do really once belong to he , which the court - plaister never do . " be quite eager to see this superior treasure . it be the end of a old pencil , -- the part without any lead . " this be really he , " say .--" do not you remember one morning ?-- no , I dare say you do not . but one morning -- I forget exactly the day -- but perhaps it be the or before _that_ _even _, he want to make a memorandum in he pocket - book ; it be about spruce - beer . have be tell he something about brew spruce - beer , and he want to put it down ; but when he take out he pencil , there be so little lead that he soon cut it all away , and it would not do , so you lent he another , and this be leave upon the table as good for nothing . but I keep my eye on it ; and , as soon as I da , catch it
it up , and never part with it again from that moment . " " I do remember it , " cry ; " I perfectly remember it .-- talk about spruce - beer .-- oh ! yes -- . and I both say we like it , and 's seem resolved to learn to like it too . I perfectly remember it .-- stop ; be stand just here , be not he ? I have a idea he be stand just here . " " ah ! I do not know . I can not recollect .-- it be very odd , but I can not recollect .-- be sit here , I remember , much about where I be now ." -- " well , go on . " " oh ! that be all . I have nothing more to show you , or to say -- except that I be now go to throw they both behind the fire , and I wish you to see I do it . " " my poor dear Harriet ! and have you actually find happiness in treasur up these thing ? " " yes , simpleton as I be !-- but I be quite asham of it now , and wish I could forget as easily as I can burn they . it be very wrong of I , you know , to keep any remembrance , after he be married . I know it be -- but have not resolution enough to part with they . " " but , , be it necessary to burn the court-plaister ?-- I have not a word to say for the bit of old pencil , but the court - plaister might be useful . " " I shall be happier to burn it , " reply . " it have a disagreeable look to I . I must get rid of every thing .-- there it go , and there be a end , thank ! of . " " and when , " think , " will there be a beginning of ? " she have soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning be already make , and could not but hope that the gipsy , though she have _told no fortune , might be prove to have make 's . -- about a fortnight after the alarm , they come to a sufficient explanation , and quite undesignedly . be not think of it at the moment , which make the information she receive more valuable . she merely say , in the course of some trivial chat , " well , , whenever you marry I would advise you to do so and so " -- and think no more of it , till after a minute 's silence she hear say in a very serious tone , " I shall never marry . " then look up , and immediately see how it be ; and after a moment 's debate , as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not , reply , " never marry !-- this be a new resolution . " " it be one that I shall never change , however . " after another short hesitation , " I hope it do not proceed from -- I hope it be not in compliment to ? " " indeed ! " cry indignantly .--" oh ! no " -- and could just catch the word , " so superior to ! " she then take a longer time for consideration . should she proceed no farther ?-- should she let it pass , and seem to suspect nothing ?-- perhaps might think she cold or angry if she do ; or perhaps if she be totally silent , it might only drive into ask she to hear too much ; and against any thing like such a unreserve as have be , such a open and frequent discussion of hope and chance , she be perfectly resolve .-- she believe it would be wiser for she to say and know at once , all that she mean to say and know . plain dealing be always best . she have previously determine how far she would proceed , on any application of the sort ; and it would be safer for both , to have the judicious law of she own brain lay down with speed .-- she be decide , and thus speak -- " Harriet , I will not affect to be in doubt of you meaning . you resolution , or rather you expectation of never marry , result from a idea that the person whom you might prefer , would be too greatly you superior in situation to think of you . be not it so ? " " oh ! , believe I I have not the presumption to suppose -- indeed I be not so mad . -- but it be a pleasure to I to admire he at a distance -- and to think of he infinite superiority to all the rest of the world , with the gratitude , wonder , and veneration , which be so proper , in I especially . " " I be not at all surprize at you , . the service he render you be enough to warm you heart . " " service ! oh ! it be such a inexpressible obligation !-- the very recollection of it , and all that I feel at the time -- when I see he come -- he noble look -- and my wretchedness before . such a change ! in one moment such a change ! from perfect misery to perfect happiness ! " " it be very natural . it be natural , and it be honourable .-- yes , honourable , I think , to chuse so well and so gratefully .-- but that
that it will be a fortunate preference be more that I can promise . I do not advise you to give way to it , . I do not by any means engage for its be return . consider what you be about . perhaps it will be wisest in you to check you feeling while you can : at any rate do not let they carry you far , unless you be persuade of he like you . be observant of he . let he behaviour be the guide of you sensation . I give you this caution now , because I shall never speak to you again on the subject . I be determine against all interference . Henceforward I know nothing of the matter . let no name ever pass we lip . we be very wrong before ; we will be cautious now .-- he be you superior , no doubt , and there do seem objection and obstacle of a very serious nature ; but yet , , more wonderful thing have take place , there have be match of greater disparity . but take care of yourself . I would not have you too sanguine ; though , however it may end , be assure you raise you thought to _him , be a mark of good taste which I shall always know how to value . " kiss she hand in silent and submissive gratitude . be very decided in think such a attachment no bad thing for she friend . it be tendency would be to raise and refine she mind -- and it must be save she from the danger of degradation . in this state of scheme , and hope , and connivance , open upon . to Highbury in general it bring no material change . the be still talk of a visit from the , and of the use to be make of they barouche - landau ; and be still at she grandmother 's ; and as the return of the Campbell from be again delay , and , instead of , fix for it , she be likely to remain there full two month longer , provide at least she be able to defeat 's activity in she service , and save herself from be hurrie into a delightful situation against she will . , who , for some reason best know to himself , have certainly take a early dislike to , be only grow to dislike he more . he begin to suspect he of some double deal in he pursuit of . that be he object appear indisputable . every thing declare it ; he own attention , he father 's hint , he mother - in - law 's guard silence ; it be all in unison ; word , conduct , discretion , and indiscretion , tell the same story . but while so many be devote he to , and herself make he over to , begin to suspect he of some inclination to trifle with . he could not understand it ; but there be symptom of intelligence between they -- he think so at least -- symptom of admiration on he side , which , have once observe , he could not persuade himself to think entirely void of meaning , however he might wish to escape any of 's error of imagination . she_ be not present when the suspicion first arise . he be dine with the family , and , at the ' ; and he have see a look , more than a single look , at , which , from the admirer of , see somewhat out of place . when he be again in they company , he could not help remembere what he have see ; nor could he avoid observation which , unless it be like and he fire at twilight , " Myself create what I see , " bring he yet stronger suspicion of there be a something of private liking , of private understanding even , between and . he have walk up one day after dinner , as he very often do , to spend he evening at . and be go to walk ; he join they ; and , on return , they fall in with a larger party , who , like themselves , judge it wisest to take they exercise early , as the weather threaten rain ; and and they son , and she niece , who have accidentally meet . they all united ; and , on reach gate , , who know it be exactly the sort of visit that would be welcome to she father , press they all to go in and drink tea with he . the party agree to it immediately ; and after a pretty long speech from , which few person listen to , she also find it possible to accept dear 's most obliging invitation . as they be turn into the grounds , pass by on horseback . the gentleman spoke of he horse . " by the bye , " say to presently , " what become of 's plan of setting up he carriage ? " look surprized , and say , " I do not know that he ever have any such plan . " " Nay , I have it from you . you write I word of it three month ago . " " I ! impossible ! " " indeed you do . I remember it perfectly . you mention it as what be certainly to be very soon . have tell somebody , and be extremely happy about it . it be owe to _her_ persuasion , as she think he be out in bad weather do he a great deal of harm . you must remember it now ? " " upon my word
word I never hear of it till this moment . " " never ! really , never !--Bless I ! how could it be ?-- then I must have dreamt it -- but I be completely persuade -- , you walk as if you be tired . you will not be sorry to find yourself at home . " " what be this ?-- what be this ? " cry , " about and a carriage ? be go to set up he carriage , ? I be glad he can afford it . you have it from himself , have you ? " " no , sir , " reply he son , laughing , " I seem to have have it from nobody .-- very odd !-- I really be persuade of 's have mention it in one of she letter to , many week ago , with all these particular -- but as she declare she never hear a syllable of it before , of course it must have be a dream . I be a great dreamer . I dream of every body at when I be away -- and when I have go through my particular friend , then I begin dream of and . " " it be odd though , " observ he father , " that you should have have such a regular connect dream about people whom it be not very likely you should be think of at . 's set up he carriage ! and he wife 's persuade he to it , out of care for he health -- just what will happen , I have no doubt , some time or other ; only a little premature . what a air of probability sometimes run through a dream ! and at other , what a heap of absurdity it be ! well , , you dream certainly shew that be in you thought when you be absent . Emma , you be a great dreamer , I think ? " be out of hearing . she have hurry on before she guest to prepare she father for they appearance , and be beyond the reach of 's hint . " why , to own the truth , " cry , who have be try in vain to be hear the last two minute , " if I must speak on this subject , there be no denying that might have -- I do not mean to say that he do not dream it -- I be sure I have sometimes the oddest dream in the world -- but if I be question about it , I must acknowledge that there be such a idea last spring ; for herself mention it to my mother , and the knew of it as well as ourselves -- but it be quite a secret , know to nobody else , and only think of about three day . be very anxious that he should have a carriage , and come to my mother in great spirit one morning because she think she have prevail . , do not you remember 's tell we of it when we get home ? I forget where we have be walk to -- very likely to ; yes , I think it be to Randall . be always particularly fond of my mother -- indeed I do not know who be not -- and she have mention it to she in confidence ; she have no objection to she tell we , of course , but it be not to go beyond : and , from that day to this , I never mention it to a soul that I know of . at the same time , I will not positively answer for my have never dropt a hint , because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing before I be aware . I be a talker , you know ; I be rather a talker ; and now and then I have let a thing escape I which I should not . I be not like ; I wish I be . I will answer for it _she_ never betraye the least thing in the world . where be she ?-- oh ! just behind . perfectly remember 's come .-- extraordinary dream , indeed ! " they be enter the hall . 's eye have proceed 's in a glance at . from 's face , where he think he see confusion suppress or laugh away , he have involuntarily turn to hers ; but she be indeed behind , and too busy with she shawl . have walk in . the two other gentleman wait at the door to let she pass . suspect in the determination of catch she eye -- he seem watch she intently -- in vain , however , if it be so -- pass between they into the hall , and look at neither . there be no time for farther remark or explanation . the dream must be borne with , and must take he seat with the rest round the large modern circular table which have introduce at , and which none but could have have power to place there and persuade she father to use , instead of the small - size , on which two of he daily meal have , for forty year be crowd . pass pleasantly , and nobody see in a hurry to move . " , " say , after examine a table behind he , which he could reach as he sit , " have you nephew take away they alphabet -- they box of letter ? it use to stand here . where be it ? this be a sort of dull - look evening , that ought to be treat rather as winter than summer . we have great amusement with those letter
letter one morning . I want to puzzle you again . " be pleased with the thought ; and produce the box , the table be quickly scatter over with alphabet , which no one seem so much dispose to employ as they two self . they be rapidly form word for each other , or for any body else who would be puzzl . the quietness of the game make it particularly eligible for , who have often be distress by the more animated sort , which have occasionally introduce , and who now sit happily occupy in lamenting , with tender melancholy , over the departure of the " poor little boy , " or in fondly point out , as he take up any stray letter near he , how beautifully have write it . place a word before . she give a slight glance round the table , and apply herself to it . be next to , opposite to they -- and so place as to see they all ; and it be he object to see as much as he could , with as little apparent observation . the word be discover , and with a faint smile push away . if mean to be immediately mix with the other , and bury from sight , she should have look on the table instead of look just across , for it be not mix ; and , eager after every fresh word , and find out none , directly take it up , and fall to work . she be sit by , and turn to he for help . the word be _blunder ; and as exultingly proclaim it , there be a blush on 's cheek which give it a meaning not otherwise ostensible . connect it with the dream ; but how it could all be , be beyond he comprehension . how the delicacy , the discretion of he favourite could have be so lain asleep ! he fear there must be some decide involvement . Disingenuousness and double dealing seem to meet he at every turn . these letter be but the vehicle for gallantry and trick . it be a child 's play , choose to conceal a deeper game on 's part . with great indignation do he continue to observe he ; with great alarm and distrust , to observe also he two blinded companion . he see a short word prepare for , and give to she with a look sly and demure . he see that have soon make it out , and find it highly entertaine , though it be something which she judge it proper to appear to censure ; for she say , " Nonsense ! for shame ! " he hear next say , with a glance towards , " I will give it to she -- shall I ? " -- and as clearly hear oppose it with eager laughing warmth . " no , no , you must not ; you shall not , indeed . " it be done however . this gallant young man , who seem to love without feeling , and to recommend himself without complaisance , directly hand over the word to , and with a particular degree of sedate civility entreate she to study it . 's excessive curiosity to know what this word might be , make he seize every possible moment for dart he eye towards it , and it be not long before he see it to be _. 's perception seem to accompany he ; she comprehension be certainly more equal to the covert mean , the superior intelligence , of those five letter so arran . she be evidently displease ; look up , and see herself watch , blush more deeply than he have ever perceive she , and say only , " I do not know that proper name be allow , " push away the letter with even a angry spirit , and look resolve to be engage by no other word that could be offer . she face be avert from those who have make the attack , and turn towards she aunt . " aye , very true , my dear , " cry the latter , though have not speak a word --" I be just go to say the same thing . it be time for we to be go indeed . the evening be close in , and grandmama will be look for we . my dear sir , you be too obliging . we really must wish you good night . " 's alertness in move , prove she as ready as she aunt have preconceive . she be immediately up , and want to quit the table ; but so many be also move , that she could not get away ; and think he see another collection of letter anxiously push towards she , and resolutely sweep away by she unexamined . she be afterwards look for she shawl -- be look also -- it be grow dusk , and the room be in confusion ; and how they part , could not tell . he remain at after all the rest , he thought 's full of what he have see ; so full , that when the candle come to assist he observation , he must -- yes , he certainly must , as a friend -- a anxious friend -- give some hint , ask she some question . he could not see she in a situation of such danger , without try to preserve she . it be he duty . " pray , , " say he , " may I ask in what lay the great amusement , the poignant sting of the last word give to you and ? I see the word , and be curiious to know how
how it could be so very entertaining to the one , and so very distressing to the other . " be extremely confused . she could not endure to give he the true explanation ; for though she suspicion be by no means remove , she be really asham of have ever impart they . " oh ! " she cry in evident embarrassment , " it all mean nothing ; a mere joke among ourselves . " " the joke , " he reply gravely , " seem confin to you and . " he have hope she would speak again , but she do not . she would rather busy herself about any thing than speak . he sit a little while in doubt . a variety of evil cross he mind . --fruitless interference . 's confusion , and the acknowledge intimacy , seem to declare she affection engage . yet he would speak . he owed it to she , to risk any thing that might be involved in a unwelcome interference , rather than she welfare ; to encounter any thing , rather than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause . " my dear , " say he at last , with earnest kindness , " do you think you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between the gentleman and lady we have be speak of ? " " and ? oh ! yes , perfectly .-- why do you make a doubt of it ? " " have you never at any time have reason to think that he admire she , or that she admire he ? " " never , never ! " she cry with a most open eagerness -- " never , for the twentieth part of a moment , do such a idea occur to I . and how could it possibly come into you head ? " " I have lately imagine that I see symptom of attachment between they -- certain expressive look , which I do not believe mean to be public . " " oh ! you amuse I excessively . I be delighted to find that you can vouchsafe to let you imagination wander -- but it will not do -- very sorry to check you in you first essay -- but indeed it will not do . there be no admiration between they , I do assure you ; and the appearance which have catch you , have arisen from some peculiar circumstance -- feeling rather of a totally different nature -- it be impossible exactly to explain :-- there be a good deal of nonsense in it -- but the part which be capable of be communicate , which be sense , be , that they be as far from any attachment or admiration for one another , as any two being in the world can be . that be , I _presume_ it to be so on she side , and I can _answer for its be so on he . I will answer for the gentleman 's indifference . " she speak with a confidence which stagger , with a satisfaction which silence , . she be in gay spirit , and would have prolonge the conversation , want to hear the particular of he suspicion , every look describe , and all the where and how of a circumstance which highly entertaine she : but he gaiety do not meet hers . he find he could not be useful , and he feeling be too much irritate for talk . that he might not be irritate into a absolute fever , by the fire which 's tender habits require almost every evening throughout the year , he soon afterwards take a hasty leave , and walk home to the coolness and solitude of . after be long feed with hope of a speedy visit from and , the Highbury world be oblige to endure the mortification of hear that they could not possibly come till the autumn . no such importation of novelty could enrich they intellectual store at present . in the daily interchange of news , they must be again restrict to the other topic with which for a while the 's come have be united , such as the last account of , whose health see every day to supply a different report , and the situation of , whose happiness it be to be hope might eventually be as much increase by the arrival of a child , as that of all she neighbour be by the approach of it . be very much disappointed . it be the delay of a great deal of pleasure and parade . she introduction and recommendation must all wait , and every project party be still only talk of . so she think at first ; -- but a little consideration convince she that every thing need not be put off . why should not they explore to though the do not come ? they could go there again with they in the autumn . it be settle that they should go to . that there be to be such a party have be long generally know : it have even give the idea of another . have never be to ; she wish to see what every body find so well worth see , and she and have agree to chuse some fine morning and drive thither . two or three more of the chosen only be to be admit to join they , and it be to be do in a quiet , unpretending , elegant way , infinitely superior to the bustle and preparation , the regular eating and drink , and picnic parade of the and the Suckling . this be so very well understand between they , that could not but feel some surprise , and a little displeasure , on hearing
hearing from that he have be propose to , as she brother and sister have fail she , that the two party should unite , and go together ; and that as have very readily acceded to it , so it be to be , if she have no objection . now , as she objection be nothing but she very great dislike of , of which must already be perfectly aware , it be not worth bring forward again :-- it could not be do without a reproof to he , which would be give pain to he wife ; and she find herself therefore oblige to consent to a arrangement which she would have do a great deal to avoid ; a arrangement which would probably expose she even to the degradation of be say to be of 's party ! every feeling be offend ; and the forbearance of she outward submission leave a heavy arrear due of secret severity in she reflection on the unmanageable goodwill of 's temper . " I be glad you approve of what I have do , " say he very comfortably . " but I think you would . such scheme as these be nothing without number . one can not have too large a party . a large party secure its own amusement . and she be a good - natured woman after all . one could not leave she out . " deny none of it aloud , and agree to none of it in private . it be now the middle of , and the weather fine ; and be grow impatient to name the day , and settle with as to pigeon - pie and cold lamb , when a lame carriage - horse throw every thing into sad uncertainty . it might be week , it might be only a few day , before the horse be useable ; but no preparation could be venture on , and it be all melancholy stagnation . 's resource be inadequate to such a attack . " be not this most vexatious , ? " she cry .-- " and such weather for exploring !-- these delay and disappointment be quite odious . what be we to do ?-- the year will wear away at this rate , and nothing do . before this time last year I assure you we have have a delightful exploring party from to . " " you have better explore to , " reply . " that may be do without horse . come , and eat my strawberry . they be ripen fast . " if do not begin seriously , he be oblige to proceed so , for he proposal be catch at with delight ; and the " oh ! I should like it of all thing , " be not plainer in word than manner . be famous for its strawberry - bed , which seem a plea for the invitation : but no plea be necessary ; cabbage - bed would have be enough to tempt the lady , who only want to be go somewhere . she promise he again and again to come -- much oftener than he doubt -- and be extremely gratify by such a proof of intimacy , such a distinguishing compliment as she choose to consider it . " you may depend upon I , " say she . " I certainly will come . name you day , and I will come . you will allow I to bring ? " " I can not name a day , " say he , " till I have speak to some other whom I would wish to meet you . " " oh ! leave all that to I . only give I a carte - blanche .-- I be Patroness , you know . it be my party . I will bring friend with I . " " I hope you will bring , " say he : " but I will not trouble you to give any other invitation . " " oh ! now you be look very sly . but consider -- you need not be afraid of delegat power to _me _. I be no young lady on she preferment . married woman , you know , may be safely authorise . it be my party . leave it all to I . I will invite you guest . " " no , " -- he calmly reply , -- " there be but one marry woman in the world whom I can ever allow to invite what guest she please to , and that one be -- " " -- . , I suppose , " interrupt , rather mortified . " no -- . ; -- and till she be in being , I will manage such matters myself . " " ah ! you be a odd creature ! " she cry , satisfy to have no one prefer to herself .-- " you be a humourist , and may say what you like . quite a humourist . well , I shall bring with I -- and she aunt .-- the rest I leave to you . I have no objection at all to meet the family . do not scruple . I know you be attach to they . " " you certainly will meet they if I can prevail ; and I shall call on in my way home . " " that be quite unnecessary ; I see every day :-- but as you like . it be to be a morning scheme , you know , ; quite a simple thing . I shall wear a large bonnet , and bring one of my little basket hang on my arm . here , --probably this basket with pink ribbon . nothing can be more simple , you see .
. and will have such another . there be to be no form or parade -- a sort of gipsy party . we be to walk about you garden , and gather the strawberry ourselves , and sit under tree ; -- and whatever else you may like to provide , it be to be all out of door -- a table spread in the shade , you know . every thing as natural and simple as possible . be not that you idea ? " " not quite . my idea of the simple and the natural will be to have the table spread in the dining - room . the nature and the simplicity of gentleman and lady , with they servant and furniture , I think be best observe by meal within door . when you be tired of eat strawberry in the garden , there shall be cold meat in the house . " " well -- as you please ; only do not have a great set out . and , by the bye , can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with we opinion ?-- pray be sincere , . if you wish I to talk to , or to inspect anything -- " " I have not the least wish for it , I thank you . " " well -- but if any difficulty should arise , my housekeeper be extremely clever . " " I will answer for it , that mine think herself full as clever , and would spurn any body 's assistance . " " I wish we have a donkey . the thing would be for we all to come on donkey , , , and I -- and my caro sposo walk by . I really must talk to he about purchase a donkey . in a country life I conceive it to be a sort of necessary ; for , let a woman have ever so many resource , it be not possible for she to be always shut up at home ; -- and very long walk , you know -- in summer there be dust , and in winter there be dirt . " " you will not find either , between and . be never dusty , and now it be perfectly dry . come on a donkey , however , if you prefer it . you can borrow 's . I would wish every thing to be as much to you taste as possible . " " that I be sure you would . indeed I do you justice , my good friend . under that peculiar sort of dry , blunt manner , I know you have the warmest heart . as I tell , you be a thorough humourist .-- yes , believe I , , I be fully sensible of you attention to I in the whole of this scheme . you have hit upon the very thing to please I . " have another reason for avoid a table in the shade . he wish to persuade , as well as , to join the party ; and he know that to have any of they sit down out of door to eat would inevitably make he ill . must not , under the specious pretence of a morning drive , and a hour or two spend at , be temp away to he misery . he be invite on good faith . no lurking horror be to upbraid he for he easy credulity . he do consent . he have not be at for two year . " some very fine morning , he , and , and , could go very well ; and he could sit still with , while the dear girl walk about the garden . he do not suppose they could be damp now , in the middle of the day . he should like to see the old house again exceedingly , and should be very happy to meet and , and any other of he neighbour .-- he could not see any objection at all to he , and 's , and be go there some very fine morning . he think it very well do of to invite they -- very kind and sensible -- much cleverer than dine out . -- he be not fond of dine out . " be fortunate in every body 's most ready concurrence . the invitation be everywhere so well receive , that it see as if , like , they be all take the scheme as a particular compliment to themselves .-- and profess very high expectation of pleasure from it ; and , unasked , promise to get over to join they , if possible ; a proof of approbation and gratitude which could have be dispense with .-- be then oblige to say that he should be glad to see he ; and engage to lose no time in writing , and spare no argument to induce he to come . in the meanwhile the lame horse recover so fast , that the party to be again under happy consideration ; and at last be settle for one day , and box for the next , -- the weather appear exactly right . under a bright mid-day sun , at almost , be safely convey in he carriage , with one window down , to partake of this al - fresco party ; and in one of the most comfortable room in the , especially prepare for he by a fire all the morning , he be happily place , quite at he ease , ready to talk with pleasure of what have be achieve , and advise every body to come and sit down , and not to heat themselves .-- , who seem to have walk there on purpose to be tired ,
, and sit all the time with he , remain , when all the other be invite or persuade out , he patient listener and sympathiser . it be so long since have be at the , that as soon as she be satisfied of she father 's comfort , she be glad to leave he , and look around she ; eager to refresh and correct she memory with more particular observation , more exact understanding of a house and grounds which must ever be so interesting to she and all she family . she feel all the honest pride and complacency which she alliance with the present and future proprietor could fairly warrant , as she view the respectable size and style of the building , its suitable , become , characteristic situation , low and shelter -- its ample garden stretch down to meadow wash by a stream , of which the , with all the old neglect of prospect , have scarcely a sight -- and its abundance of timber in row and avenue , which neither fashion nor extravagance have root up .-- the house be larger than , and totally unlike it , cover a good deal of ground , rambling and irregular , with many comfortable , and one or two handsome room .-- it be just what it ought to be , and it look what it be -- and feel a increase respect for it , as the residence of a family of such true gentility , untainted in blood and understanding . -- some fault of temper have ; but have connect herself unexceptionably . she have give they neither man , nor name , nor place , that could raise a blush . these be pleasant feeling , and she walk about and indulge they till it be necessary to do as the other do , and collect round the strawberry - bed .-- the whole party be assemble , except , who be expect every moment from ; and , in all she apparatus of happiness , she large bonnet and she basket , be very ready to lead the way in gather , accept , or talk -- strawberry , and only strawberry , could now be think or speak of .--" the best fruit in -- every body 's favourite -- always wholesome .-- these the finest bed and finest sort .-- delightful to gather for one 's self -- the only way of really enjoy they .-- Mor decidedly the best time -- never tired -- every sort good -- hautboy infinitely superior -- no comparison -- the other hardly eatable -- hautboys very scarce -- Chili prefer -- white wood finest flavour of all -- price of strawberry in about -- --cultivation -- bed when to be renew -- gardener think exactly different -- no general rule -- gardener never to be put out of they way -- delicious fruit -- only too rich to be eat much of -- inferior to cherry -- currant more refresh -- only objection to gather strawberry the stooping -- glar sun -- tired to death -- could bear it no longer -- must go and sit in the shade . " such , for half a hour , be the conversation --interrupt only once by , who come out , in she solicitude after she son - in - law , to inquire if he be come -- and she be a little uneasy .-- she have some fear of he horse . seat tolerably in the shade be find ; and now be obliged to overhear what and be talk of .-- a situation , a most desirable situation , be in question . have receive notice of it that morning , and be in rapture . it be not with , it be not with . , but in felicity and splendour it fall short only of they : it be with a cousin of , a acquaintance of , a lady know at . delightful , charming , superior , first circle , sphere , line , rank , every thing -- and be wild to have the offer close with immediately . -- on she side , all be warmth , energy , and triumph -- and she positively refuse to take she friend 's negative , though continue to assure she that she would not at present engage in any thing , repeat the same motive which she have be hear to urge before .-- insist on be authorise to write a acquiescence by the morrow 's post .-- how Jane could bear it at all , be astonish to .-- she do look vex , she do speak pointedly -- and at last , with a decision of action unusual to she , propose a removal .-- " should not they walk ? would not show they the garden -- all the garden ?-- she wish to see the whole extent . " -- the pertinacity of she friend seem more than she could bear . it be hot ; and after walk some time over the garden in a scattered , disperse way , scarcely any three together , they insensibly follow one another to the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of lime , which stretch beyond the garden at a equal distance from the river , see the finish of the pleasure grounds .-- it lead to nothing ; nothing but a view at the end over a low stone wall with high pillars , which seem intend , in they erection , to give the appearance of a approach to the house , which never have be there . Disputable , however , as might be the taste of such a termination , it be in itself a charme walk , and the view which close it extremely pretty .-- the considerable slope , at nearly the
the foot of which the stood , gradually acquire a steeper form beyond its grounds ; and at half a mile distant be a bank of considerable abruptness and grandeur , well clothed with wood ; -- and at the bottom of this bank , favourably place and shelte , rise the , with meadow in front , and the river make a close and handsome curve around it . it be a sweet view -- sweet to the eye and the mind . English verdure , culture , comfort , see under a sun bright , without be oppressive . in this walk and find all the other assemble ; and towards this view she immediately perceive and distinct from the rest , quietly lead the way . and !-- it be a odd tete - a - tete ; but she be glad to see it .-- there have be a time when he would have scorn she as a companion , and turn from she with little ceremony . now they seem in pleasant conversation . there have be a time also when would have be sorry to see in a spot so favourable for the ; but now she fear it not . it might be safely viewed with all its appendage of prosperity and beauty , its rich pasture , spread flock , orchard in blossom , and light column of smoke ascend .-- she join they at the wall , and find they more engage in talk than in look around . he be give Harriet information as to mode of agriculture , etc. and receive a smile which seem to say , " these be my own concern . I have a right to talk on such subject , without be suspect of introducing . " -- she do not suspect he . it be too old a story .-- have probably cease to think of .-- they take a few turn together along the walk .-- the shade be most refresh , and find it the pleasantest part of the day . the next remove be to the house ; they must all go in and eat ; -- and they be all seate and busy , and still do not come . look , and look in vain . he father would not own himself uneasy , and laugh at she fear ; but she could not be cure of wishing that he would part with he black mare . he have express himself as to come , with more than common certainty . " he aunt be so much better , that he have not a doubt of get over to they . " -- 's state , however , as many be ready to remind she , be liable to such sudden variation as might disappoint she nephew in the most reasonable dependence -- and be at last persuade to believe , or to say , that it must be by some attack of . Churchill that he be prevent come .-- look at while the point be under consideration ; she behave very well , and betraye no emotion . the cold repast be over , and the party be to go out once more to see what have not yet be see , the old fish - ponds ; perhaps get as far as the clover , which be to be begin cut on the morrow , or , at any rate , have the pleasure of be hot , and grow cool again .-- , who have already take he little round in the highest part of the garden , where no damp from the river be imagine even by he , stir no more ; and he daughter resolve to remain with he , that might be persuade away by she husband to the exercise and variety which she spirit seem to need . have do all in he power for 's entertainment . book of engraving , drawer of medal , cameo , coral , shell , and every other family collection within he cabinet , have be prepare for he old friend , to while away the morning ; and the kindness have perfectly answer . have be exceedingly well amuse . have be shew they all to he , and now he would show they all to ;-- fortunate in have no other resemblance to a child , than in a total want of taste for what he see , for he be slow , constant , and methodical .-- before this second looking over be begin , however , walk into the hall for the sake of a few moment ' free observation of the entrance and ground - plot of the house -- and be hardly there , when appear , come quickly in from the garden , and with a look of escape .-- expect to meet so soon , there be a start at first ; but miss Woodhouse be the very person she be in quest of . " will you be so kind , " say she , " when I be miss , as to say that I be go home ?-- I be go this moment .-- my aunt be not aware how late it be , nor how long we have be absent -- but I be sure we shall be want , and I be determined to go directly .-- I have say nothing about it to any body . it would only be give trouble and distress . some be go to the ponds , and some to the lime walk . till they all come in I shall not be miss ; and when they do , will you have the goodness to say that I be go ? " " certainly , if you wish it ; -- but you be not go to walk to alone ? " "
" yes -- what should hurt I ?-- I walk fast . I shall be at home in twenty minute . " " but it be too far , indeed it be , to be walk quite alone . let my father 's servant go with you .-- let I order the carriage . it can be round in five minute . " " thank you , thank you -- but on no account .-- I would rather walk .-- and for _me_ to be afraid of walk alone !-- I , who may so soon have to guard other ! " she speak with great agitation ; and very feelingly replie , " that can be no reason for you be expose to danger now . I must order the carriage . the heat even would be danger .-- you be fatigue already . " " I be , " -- she answer -- " I be fatigue ; but it be not the sort of fatigue -- quick walking will refresh I .-- , we all know at time what it be to be weary in spirits . , I confess , be exhaust . the greatest kindness you can show I , will be to let I have my own way , and only say that I be go when it be necessary . " have not another word to oppose . she see it all ; and enter into she feeling , promote she quit the house immediately , and watch she safely off with the zeal of a friend . she parting look be grateful -- and she part word , " oh ! , the comfort of be sometimes alone ! " -- seem to burst from a overcharged heart , and to describe somewhat of the continual endurance to be practise by she , even towards some of those who love she best . " such a home , indeed ! such a aunt ! " say , as she turn back into the hall again . " I do pity you . and the more sensibility you betray of they just horrors , the more I shall like you . " have not be go a quarter of a hour , and they have only accomplish some view of 's , , when enter the room . have not be think of he , she have forget to think of he -- but she be very glad to see he . would be at ease . the black mare be blameless ; _they be right who have name as the cause . he have be detain by a temporary increase of illness in she ; a nervous seizure , which have last some hour -- and he have quite give up every thought of come , till very late ; -- and have he know how hot a ride he should have , and how late , with all he hurry , he must be , he believe he should not have come at all . the heat be excessive ; he have never suffer any thing like it -- almost wish he have stay at home -- nothing kill he like heat -- he could bear any degree of cold , etc. , but heat be intolerable -- and he sit down , at the greatest possible distance from the slight remains of 's fire , look very deplorable . " you will soon be cooler , if you sit still , " say . " as soon as I be cooler I shall go back again . I could very ill be spared -- but such a point have be make of my come ! you will all be go soon I suppose ; the whole party break up . I meet _one_ as I come -- Madness in such weather !-- absolute madness ! " listen , and look , and soon perceive that 's state might be best define by the expressive phrase of be out of humour . some people be always cross when they be hot . such might be he constitution ; and as she know that eat and drink be often the cure of such incidental complaint , she recommend he take some refreshment ; he would find abundance of every thing in the dining - room -- and she humanely point out the door . " no -- he should not eat . he be not hungry ; it would only make he hotter . " in two minute , however , he relent in he own favour ; and mutter something about spruce - beer , walk off . return all she attention to she father , say in secret -- " I be glad I have do be in love with he . I should not like a man who be so soon discompose by a hot morning . 's sweet easy temper will not mind it . " he be go long enough to have have a very comfortable meal , and come back all the better -- grow quite cool -- and , with good manners , like himself -- able to draw a chair close to they , take a interest in they employment ; and regret , in a reasonable way , that he should be so late . he be not in he best spirit , but seem try to improve they ; and , at last , make himself talk nonsense very agreeably . they be look over view in . " as soon as my aunt get well , I shall go abroad , " say he . " I shall never be easy till I have see some of these place . you will have my sketch , some time or other , to look at -- or my tour to read -- or my poem . I shall do something to expose myself
myself . " " that may be -- but not by sketch in . you will never go to . you uncle and aunt will never allow you to leave . " " they may be induce to go too . a warm climate may be prescribe for she . I have more than half a expectation of we all go abroad . I assure you I have . I feel a strong persuasion , this morning , that I shall soon be abroad . I ought to travel . I be tired of do nothing . I want a change . I be serious , , whatever you penetrating eye may fancy -- I be sick of -- and would leave it to - morrow , if I could . " " you be sick of prosperity and indulgence . can not you invent a few hardship for yourself , and be contente to stay ? " " _I_ sick of prosperity and indulgence ! you be quite mistaken . I do not look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged . I be thwart in every thing material . I do not consider myself at all a fortunate person . " " you be not quite so miserable , though , as when you first come . go and eat and drink a little more , and you will do very well . another slice of cold meat , another dratch of and water , will make you nearly on a par with the rest of we . " " no -- I shall not stir . I shall sit by you . you be my best cure . " " we be go to Box to - morrow ; -- you will join we . it be not , but it will be something for a young man so much in want of a change . you will stay , and go with we ? " " no , certainly not ; I shall go home in the cool of the evening . " " but you may come again in the cool of to -morrow morning . " " no -- it will not be worth while . if I come , I shall be cross . " " then pray stay at . " " but if I do , I shall be crosser still . I can never bear to think of you all there without I . " " these be difficulty which you must settle for yourself . Chuse you own degree of crossness . I shall press you no more . " the rest of the party be now return , and all be soon collect . with some there be great joy at the sight of ; other take it very composedly ; but there be a very general distress and disturbance on 's disappearance be explai . that it be time for every body to go , conclude the subject ; and with a short final arrangement for the next day 's scheme , they part . 's little inclination to exclude himself increase so much , that he last word to , " well ; -- if _you_ wish I to stay and join the party , I will . " she smile she acceptance ; and nothing less than a summon from be to take he back before the follow evening . they have a very fine day for box ; and all the other outward circumstance of arrangement , accommodation , and punctuality , be in favour of a pleasant party . direct the whole , officiate safely between and the Vicarage , and every body be in good time . and go together ; and she niece , with the ; the gentleman on horseback . remain with . nothing be want but to be happy when they get there . miles be travel in expectation of enjoyment , and every body have a burst of admiration on first arrive ; but in the general amount of the day there be deficiency . there be a languor , a want of spirit , a want of union , which could not be get over . they separate too much into party . the walk together ; take charge of and ; and and belong to . and try , in vain , to make they harmonise better . it seem at first a accidental division , but it never materially varied . and , indeed , shew no unwillingness to mix , and be as agreeable as they could ; but during the two whole hour that be spend on the hill , there seem a principle of separation , between the other party , too strong for any fine prospect , or any cold collation , or any cheerful , to remove . at first it be downright dulness to . she have never see so silent and stupid . he say nothing worth hearing -- look without see -- admire without intelligence -- listen without know what she say . while he be so dull , it be no wonder that should be dull likewise ; and they be both insufferable . when they all sit down it be better ; to she taste a great deal better , for grow talkative and gay , make she he first object . every distinguishe attention that could be pay , be pay to she . to amuse she , and be agreeable in she eye , see all that he care for -- and , glad to be enliven , not sorry to be flatter , be gay and easy too , and give he all the friendly encouragement , the admission to be gallant , which she have ever give in the first and most animating period of they acquaintance ; but which now , in she own estimation , mean nothing , though
though in the judgment of most people look on it must have have such a appearance as no english word but flirtation could very well describe . " and flirt together excessively . " they be lay themselves open to that very phrase -- and to have it send off in a letter to by one lady , to by another . not that be gay and thoughtless from any real felicity ; it be rather because she feel less happy than she have expect . she laugh because she be disappoint ; and though she like he for he attention , and think they all , whether in friendship , admiration , or playfulness , extremely judicious , they be not win back she heart . she still intend he for she friend . " how much I be oblige to you , " say he , " for tell I to come to - day !-- if it have not be for you , I should certainly have lose all the happiness of this party . I have quite determined to go away again . " " yes , you be very cross ; and I do not know what about , except that you be too late for the best strawberry . I be a kinder friend than you deserve . but you be humble . you beg hard to be command to come . " " do not say I be cross . I be fatigue . the heat overcame I . " " it be hotter to - day . " " not to my feeling . I be perfectly comfortable to - day . " " you be comfortable because you be under command . " " you command ? -- yes . " " perhaps I intend you to say so , but I mean self - command . you have , somehow or other , broken bounds yesterday , and run away from you own management ; but to - day you be get back again -- and as I can not be always with you , it be best to believe you temper under you own command rather than mine . " " it come to the same thing . I can have no self - command without a motive . you order I , whether you speak or not . and you can be always with I . you be always with I . " " date from three o'clock yesterday . my perpetual influence could not begin earlier , or you would not have be so much out of humour before . " " three o'clock yesterday ! that be you date . I think I have see you first in . " " you gallantry be really unanswerable . but ( lowere she voice ) -- nobody speak except ourselves , and it be rather too much to be talk nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people . " " I say nothing of which I be asham , " reply he , with lively impudence . " I see you first in . let every body on the hill hear I if they can . let my accent swell to on one side , and Dork on the other . I see you first in . " and then whisper -- " we companion be excessively stupid . what shall we do to rouse they ? any nonsense will serve . they _shall_ talk . lady and gentleman , I be order by ( who , wherever she be , presides ) to say , that she desire to know what you be all think of ? " some laugh , and answer good - humouredly . say a great deal ; swell at the idea of 's presiding ; 's answer be the most distinct . " be sure that she would like to hear what we be all think of ? " " oh ! no , no "-- cry , laugh as carelessly as she could -- " upon no account in the world . it be the very last thing I would stand the brunt of just now . let I hear any thing rather than what you be all think of . I will not say quite all . there be one or two , perhaps , ( glance at and , ) whose thought I might not be afraid of knowe . " " it be a sort of thing , " cry emphatically , " which _I_ should not have think myself privileged to inquire into . though , perhaps , as the chaperon_ of the party -- _I_ never be in any circle -- explore party -- young lady -- marry woman -- " she muttering be chiefly to she husband ; and he murmure , in reply , " very true , my love , very true . exactly so , indeed -- quite unheard of -- but some lady say any thing . better pass it off as a joke . every body know what be due to _you_. " " it will not do , " whisper to ; " they be most of they affront . I will attack they with more address . lady and gentleman -- I be order by to say , that she waive she right of know exactly what you may all be think of , and only require something very entertaine from each of you , in a general way . here be seven of you , besides myself , ( who , she be pleased to say , be very entertaining already , ) and she only demand from each of you either one thing very clever , be it prise or verse , original or repeat -- or two thing moderately clever -- or three thing very dull indeed , and she engage to laugh heartily at
at they all . " " oh ! very well , " exclaim , " then I need not be uneasy . ' three thing very dull indeed . ' that will just do for I , you know . I shall be sure to say three dull thing as soon as ever I open my mouth , sha not I ? ( look round with the most good - humoured dependence on every body 's assent ) -- do not you all think I shall ? " could not resist . " ah ! ma 'am , but there may be a difficulty . pardon I -- but you will be limit as to number -- only three at once . " , deceive by the mock ceremony of she manner , do not immediately catch she mean ; but , when it burst on she , it could not anger , though a slight blush shew that it could pain she . " ah !-- well -- to be sure . yes , I see what she mean , ( turn to , ) and I will try to hold my tongue . I must make myself very disagreeable , or she would not have say such a thing to a old friend . " " I like you plan , " cry . " agree , agree . I will do my best . I be make a conundrum . how will a conundrum reckon ? " " low , I be afraid , sir , very low , " answer he son ; --" but we shall be indulgent -- especially to any one who lead the way . " " no , no , " say , " it will not reckon low . a conundrum of 's shall clear he and he next neighbour . come , sir , pray let I hear it . " " I doubt it be be very clever myself , " say . " it be too much a matter of fact , but here it be .-- what two letter of the alphabet be there , that express perfection ? " " what two letter !--express perfection ! I be sure I do not know . " " ah ! you will never guess . you , ( to ) , I be certain , will never guess .-- I will tell you .-- M. and a .-- em -ma .-- do you understand ? " understanding and gratification come together . it might be a very indifferent piece of wit , but find a great deal to laugh at and enjoy in it -- and so do and .-- it do not seem to touch the rest of the party equally ; some look very stupid about it , and gravely say , " this explain the sort of clever thing that be want , and have do very well for himself ; but he must have knock up every body else . _Perfection should not have come quite so soon . " " oh ! for myself , I protest I must be excuse , " say ; " _I_ really can not attempt -- I be not at all fond of the sort of thing . I have a acrostic once send to I upon my own name , which I be not at all pleased with . I know who it come from . a abominable puppy !-- you know who i mean ( nodd to she husband ) . these kind of thing be very well at , when one be sit round the fire ; but quite out of place , in my opinion , when one be explore about the country in summer . must excuse I . I be not one of those who have witty thing at every body 's service . I do not pretend to be a wit . I have a great deal of vivacity in my own way , but I really must be allow to judge when to speak and when to hold my tongue . pass we , if you please , . , , , and myself . we have nothing clever to say -- not one of we . " yes , yes , pray pass _me _, " add she husband , with a sort of sneer consciousness ; " _I have nothing to say that can entertain , or any other young lady . a old married man -- quite good for nothing . shall we walk , ? " " with all my heart . I be really tired of explore so long on one spot . come , , take my other arm . " decline it , however , and the husband and wife walk off . " happy couple ! " say , as soon as they be out of hearing :--" how well they suit one another !-- very lucky -- marry as they do , upon a acquaintance for only in a public place !-- they only know each other , I think , a few week in ! Peculiarly lucky !-- for as to any real knowledge of a person 's disposition that , or any public place , can give -- it be all nothing ; there can be no knowledge . it be only by see woman in they own home , among they own set , just as they always be , that you can form any just judgment . short of that , it be all guess and luck -- and will generally be ill - luck . how many a man have commit himself on a short acquaintance , and rue it all the rest of he life ! " , who have seldom speak before , except among she own confederate , speak now . " such thing do occur , undoubtedly . " -- she
she be stop by a cough . turn towards she to listen . " you be speak , " say he , gravely . she recovere she voice . " I be only go to observe , that though such unfortunate circumstance do sometimes occur both to man and woman , I can not imagine they to be very frequent . a hasty and imprudent attachment may arise -- but there be generally time to recover from it afterwards . I would be understand to mean , that it can be only weak , irresolute character , ( whose happiness must be always at the mercy of chance , ) who will suffer a unfortunate acquaintance to be a inconvenience , a oppression for ever . " he make no answer ; merely look , and bow in submission ; and soon afterwards say , in a lively tone , " well , I have so little confidence in my own judgment , that whenever I marry , I hope some body will chuse my wife for I . will you ? ( turn to . ) will you chuse a wife for I ?-- I be sure I should like any body fix on by you . you provide for the family , you know , ( with a smile at he father ) . find some body for I . I be in no hurry . adopt she , educate she . " " and make she like myself . " " by all mean , if you can . " " very well . I undertake the commission . you shall have a charming wife . " " she must be very lively , and have hazle eye . I care for nothing else . I shall go abroad for a couple of year -- and when I return , I shall come to you for my wife . remember . " be in no danger of forgetting . it be a commission to touch every favourite fee . would not Harriet be the very creature describ ? Hazle eye accept , two year more might make she all that he wish . he might even have in he thought at the moment ; who could say ? refer the education to she seem to imply it . " now , ma 'am , " say to she aunt , " shall we join ? " " if you please , my dear . with all my heart . I be quite ready . I be ready to have go with she , but this will do just as well . we shall soon overtake she . there she be -- no , that be somebody else . that be one of the lady in the irish car party , not at all like she .-- well , I declare -- " they walk off , follow in half a minute by . , he son , , and , only remain ; and the young man 's spirit now rise to a pitch almost unpleasant . even grow tired at last of flattery and merriment , and wish herself rather walk quietly about with any of the other , or sit almost alone , and quite unattended to , in tranquil observation of the beautiful view beneath she . the appearance of the servant look out for they to give notice of the carriage be a joyful sight ; and even the bustle of collecting and prepare to depart , and the solicitude of . to have _her_ carriage first , be gladly endure , in the prospect of the quiet drive home which be to close the very questionable enjoyment of this day of pleasure . such another scheme , compose of so many ill - assort people , she hope never to be betraye into again . while wait for the carriage , she find by she side . he look around , as if to see that no one be near , and then say , " Emma , I must once more speak to you as I have be use to do : a privilege rather endure than allow , perhaps , but I must still use it . I can not see you act wrong , without a remonstrance . how could you be so unfeeling to ? how could you be so insolent in you wit to a woman of she character , age , and situation ?-- , I have not think it possible . " recollect , blush , be sorry , but try to laugh it off . " Nay , how could I help say what I do ?-- nobody could have help it . it be not so very bad . I dare say she do not understand I . " " I assure you she do . she feel you full meaning . she have talk of it since . I wish you could have hear how she talk of it -- with what candour and generosity . I wish you could have hear she honour you forbearance , in be able to pay she such attention , as she be for ever receive from yourself and you father , when she society must be so irksome . " " oh ! " cry , " I know there be not a better creature in the world : but you must allow , that what be good and what be ridiculous be most unfortunately blend in she . " " they be blend , " say he , " I acknowledge ; and , be she prosperous , I could allow much for the occasional prevalence of the ridiculous over the good . be she a woman of fortune , I would leave every harmless absurdity to take its chance , I would not quarrel with you for any libertie of manner . be she
she you equal in situation -- but , , consider how far this be from be the case . she be poor ; she have sunk from the comfort she be bear to ; and , if she live to old age , must probably sink more . she situation should secure you compassion . it be badly do , indeed ! you , whom she have know from a infant , whom she have see grow up from a period when she notice be a honour , to have you now , in thoughtless spirits , and the pride of the moment , laugh at she , humble she -- and before she niece , too -- and before other , many of whom ( certainly _some _, ) would be entirely guide by _your_ treatment of she .-- this be not pleasant to you , -- and it be very far from pleasant to I ; but I must , I will ,-- I will tell you truth while I can ; satisfi with prove myself you friend by very faithful counsel , and trust that you will some time or other do I greater justice than you can do now . " while they talk , they be advanc towards the carriage ; it be ready ; and , before she could speak again , he have hand she in . he have misinterpret the feeling which have keep she face avert , and she tongue motionless . they be combine only of anger against herself , mortification , and deep concern . she have not be able to speak ; and , on enter the carriage , sink back for a moment overcome -- then reproach herself for have take no leave , make no acknowledgment , part in apparent sullenness , she look out with voice and hand eager to show a difference ; but it be just too late . he have turn away , and the horse be in motion . she continue to look back , but in vain ; and soon , with what appear unusual speed , they be half way down the hill , and every thing leave far behind . she be vex beyond what could have be express -- almost beyond what she could conceal . never have she feel so agitated , mortified , grieve , at any circumstance in she life . she be most forcibly struck . the truth of this representation there be no denying . she feel it at she heart . how could she have be so brutal , so cruel to ! how could she have expose herself to such ill opinion in any one she value ! and how suffer he to leave she without say one word of gratitude , of concurrence , of common kindness ! time do not compose she . as she reflect more , she seem but to feel it more . she never have be so depressed . happily it be not necessary to speak . there be only Harriet , who seem not in spirit herself , fag , and very willing to be silent ; and feel the tear run down she cheek almost all the way home , without be at any trouble to check they , extraordinary as they be . the wretchedness of a scheme to be in 's thought all the evening . how it might be consider by the rest of the party , she could not tell . they , in they different hom , and they different way , might be look back on it with pleasure ; but in she view it be a morning more completely misspent , more totally bare of rational satisfaction at the time , and more to be abhor in recollection , than any she have ever pass . a whole evening of back - gammon with she father , be felicity to it . there , indeed , lay real pleasure , for there she be give up the sweetest hour of the twenty - four to he comfort ; and feel that , unmerited as might be the degree of he fond affection and confid esteem , she could not , in she general conduct , be open to any severe reproach . as a daughter , she hope she be not without a heart . she hope no one could have say to she , " how could you be so unfeeling to you father ?-- I must , I will tell you truth while I can . " should never again -- no , never ! if attention , in future , could do away the past , she might hope to be forgive . she have be often remiss , she conscience tell she so ; remiss , perhaps , more in think than fact ; scornful , ungracious . but it should be so no more . in the warmth of true contrition , she would call upon she the very next morning , and it should be the beginning , on she side , of a regular , equal , kindly intercourse . she be just as determine when the morrow come , and go early , that nothing might prevent she . it be not unlikely , she think , that she might see in she way ; or , perhaps , he might come in while she be pay she visit . she have no objection . she would not be asham of the appearance of the penitence , so justly and truly hers . she eye be towards as she walk , but she see he not . " the lady be all at home . " she have never rejoice at the sound before , nor ever before enter the passage , nor walk up the stair , with any wish of give pleasure , but in conferring
conferring obligation , or of derive it , except in subsequent ridicule . there be a bustle on she approach ; a good deal of move and talk . she hear 's voice , something be to be do in a hurry ; the maid look frightened and awkward ; hope she would be pleased to wait a moment , and then usher she in too soon . the aunt and niece seem both escape into the adjoining room . she have a distinct glimpse of , look extremely ill ; and , before the door have shut they out , she hear say , " well , my dear , I shall _say you be lay down upon the bed , and I be sure you be ill enough . " poor old , civil and humble as usual , look as if she do not quite understand what be go on . " I be afraid be not very well , " say she , " but I do not know ; they _tell I she be well . I dare say my daughter will be here presently , . I hope you find a chair . I wish have not go . I be very little able -- have you a chair , ma'am ? do you sit where you like ? I be sure she will be here presently . " seriously hope she would . she have a moment 's fear of keep away from she . but soon come -- " very happy and obliged " -- but 's conscience tell she that there be not the same cheerful volubility as before -- less ease of look and manner . a very friendly inquiry after , she hope , might lead the way to a return of old feeling . the touch seem immediate . " ah ! , how kind you be !-- I suppose you have hear -- and be come to give we joy . this do not seem much like joy , indeed , in I --( twinkl away a tear or two ) -- but it will be very try for we to part with she , after have have she so long , and she have a dreadful headache just now , write all the morning :--such long letter , you know , to be write to , and . ' my dear , ' say I , ' you will blind yourself ' -- for tear be in she eye perpetually . one can not wonder , one can not wonder . it be a great change ; and though she be amazingly fortunate -- such a situation , I suppose , as no young woman before ever meet with on first go out -- do not think we ungrateful , , for such surprising good fortune --( again disperse she tear ) -- but , poor dear soul ! if you be to see what a headache she have . when one be in great pain , you know one can not feel any blessing quite as it may deserve . she be as low as possible . to look at she , nobody would think how delighted and happy she be to have secure such a situation . you will excuse she not come to you -- she be not able -- she be go into she own room -- I want she to lie down upon the bed . ' my dear , ' say I , 'I shall say you be lay down upon the bed :' but , however , she be not ; she be walk about the room . but , now that she have write she letter , she say she shall soon be well . she will be extremely sorry to miss see you , , but you kindness will excuse she . you be keep wait at the door -- I be quite asham -- but somehow there be a little bustle -- for it so happen that we have not hear the knock , and till you be on the stair , we do not know any body be come . ' it be only Mrs . , ' say I , ' depend upon it . nobody else would come so early . ' ' well , ' say she , ' it must be borne some time or other , and it may as well be now . ' but then come in , and say it be you . 'Oh ! ' say I , ' it be : I be sure you will like to see she .'-- 'I can see nobody , ' say she ; and up she get , and would go away ; and that be what make we keep you wait -- and extremely sorry and asham we be . ' if you must go , my dear , ' say I , ' you must , and I will say you be lay down upon the bed . ' " be most sincerely interested . she heart have be long grow kinder towards ; and this picture of she present suffering act as a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion , and leave she nothing but pity ; and the remembrance of the less just and less gentle sensation of the past , oblige she to admit that might very naturally resolve on see . or any other steady friend , when she might not bear to see herself . she speak as she feel , with earnest regret and solicitude -- sincerely wish that the circumstance which she collect from to be now actually determine on , might be as much for 's advantage and comfort as possible . " it must be a severe trial to they all . she have understood it be to be delay till 's return . " " so very
very kind ! " reply . " but you be always kind . " there be no bearing such a " always ; " and to break through she dreadful gratitude , make the direct inquiry of -- " where -- may I ask ?-- be go ? " " to a Smallridge -- charme woman -- most superior -- to have the charge of she three little girl -- delightful child . impossible that any situation could be more replete with comfort ; if we except , perhaps , 's own family , and 's ; but Smallridge be intimate with both , and in the very same neighbourhood :-- live only four mile from . will be only four mile from . " " . , I suppose , have be the person to whom owe -- " " yes , we good . the most indefatigable , true friend . she would not take a denial . she would not let say , ' no ;' for when first hear of it , ( it be the day before yesterday , the very morning we be at , ) when first heard of it , she be quite decide against accept the offer , and for the reason you mention ; exactly as you say , she have make up she mind to close with nothing till 's return , and nothing should induce she to enter into any engagement at present -- and so she tell over and over again -- and I be sure I have no more idea that she would change she mind !-- but that good , whose judgment never fail she , see farther than I do . it be not every body that would have stand out in such a kind way as she do , and refuse to take 's answer ; but she positively declare she would _not_ write any such denial yesterday , as wish she ; she would wait -- and , sure enough , yesterday evening it be all settle that should go . quite a surprize to I ! I have not the least idea ! -- take aside , and tell she at once , that upon think over the advantages of 's situation , she have come to the resolution of accept it .-- I do not know a word of it till it be all settled . " " you spend the evening with ? " " yes , all of we ; would have we come . it be settled so , upon the hill , while we be walk about with . ' you _must _all_ spend you evening with we , ' say she -- 'I positively must have you _all come . ' " " be there too , be he ? " " no , not ; he decline it from the first ; and though I think he would come , because Mrs . declare she would not let he off , he do not ; -- but my mother , and , and I , be all there , and a very agreeable evening we have . such kind friend , you know , Woodhouse , one must always find agreeable , though every body seem rather fag after the morning 's party . even pleasure , you know , be fatigue -- and I can not say that any of they see very much to have enjoy it . however , _I_ shall always think it a very pleasant party , and feel extremely obliged to the kind friend who include I in it . " " , I suppose , though you be not aware of it , have be make up she mind the whole day ? " " I dare say she have . " " whenever the time may come , it must be unwelcome to she and all she friend -- but I hope she engagement will have every alleviation that be possible -- I mean , as to the character and manners of the family . " " thank you , dear miss Woodhouse . yes , indeed , there be every thing in the world that can make she happy in it . except the Sucklings and Bragges , there be not such another nursery establishment , so liberal and elegant , in all 's acquaintance . , a most delightful woman !-- a style of live almost equal to -- and as to the child , except the little Suckling and little Bragges , there be not such elegant sweet child anywhere . will be treat with such regard and kindness !-- it will be nothing but pleasure , a life of pleasure .-- and she salary !-- I really can not venture to name she salary to you , . even you , use as you be to great sum , would hardly believe that so much could be give to a young person like . " " ah ! madam , " cry , " if other child be at all like what I remember to have be myself , I should think five time the amount of what I have ever yet hear name as a salary on such occasion , dearly earn . " " you be so noble in you idea ! " " and when be to leave you ? " " very soon , very soon , indeed ; that be the worst of it . within a fortnight . be in a great hurry . my poor mother do not know how to bear it . so then , I try to put it out of she thought , and say , come ma 'am , do not let we think about it any more . " " she friend must all be sorry to lose she ; and will not Colonel and Campbell be sorry to find
find that she have engage herself before they return ? " " yes ; say she be sure they will ; but yet , this be such a situation as she can not feel herself justifi in declining . I be so astonish when she first tell I what she have be say to , and when . at the same moment come congratulate I upon it ! it be before tea -- stay -- no , it could not be before tea , because we be just go to card -- and yet it be before tea , because I remember think -- oh ! no , now I recollect , now I have it ; something happen before tea , but not that . be call out of the room before tea , old 's son want to speak with he . poor old , I have a great regard for he ; he be clerk to my poor father twenty - seven year ; and now , poor old man , he be bed - ridden , and very poorly with the rheumatic gout in he joint -- I must go and see he to - day ; and so will , I be sure , if she get out at all . and poor 's son come to talk to about relief from the parish ; he be very well to do himself , you know , be head man at the Crown , ostler , and every thing of that sort , but still he can not keep he father without some help ; and so , when come back , he tell we what ostler have be tell he , and then it come out about the chaise have be send to Randalls to take to . that be what happen before tea . it be after tea that speak to . " would hardly give time to say how perfectly new this circumstance be to she ; but as without suppose it possible that she could be ignorant of any of the particular of 's go , she proceed to give they all , it be of no consequence . what have learn from the ostler on the subject , be the accumulation of the ostler 's own knowledge , and the knowledge of the servants at , be , that a messenger have come over from soon after the return of the party from -- which messenger , however , have be no more than be expect ; and that have send he nephew a few line , contain , upon the whole , a tolerable account of , and only wish he not to delay come back beyond the next morning early ; but that have resolve to go home directly , without wait at all , and he horse seem to have get a cold , have be send off immediately for the chaise , and the ostler have stand out and see it pass by , the boy go a good pace , and drive very steady . there be nothing in all this either to astonish or interest , and it catch 's attention only as it unit with the subject which already engage she mind . the contrast between 's importance in the world , and 's , struck she ; one be every thing , the other nothing -- and she sit musing on the difference of woman 's destiny , and quite unconscious on what she eye be fix , till rouse by 's say , " aye , I see what you be think of , the pianoforte . what be to become of that ?-- very true . poor dear be talk of it just now .-- ' you must go , ' say she . ' you and I must part . you will have no business here .-- let it stay , however , ' say she ; ' give it houseroom till come back . I shall talk about it to he ; he will settle for I ; he will help I out of all my difficulty . '-- and to this day , I do believe , she know not whether it be he present or he daughter 's . " now be oblige to think of the pianoforte ; and the remembrance of all she former fanciful and unfair conjecture be so little pleasing , that she soon allow herself to believe she visit have be long enough ; and , with a repetition of every thing that she could venture to say of the good wish which she really feel , take leave . 's pensive meditation , as she walk home , be not interrupt ; but on enter the parlour , she find those who must rouse she . and have arrive during she absence , and be sit with she father .-- immediately get up , and in a manner decidedly graver than usual , say , " I would not go away without see you , but I have no time to spare , and therefore must now be go directly . I be go to , to spend a few day with and . have you any thing to send or say , besides the ' love , ' which nobody carry ? " " nothing at all . but be not this a sudden scheme ? " " yes -- rather -- I have be think of it some little time . " be sure he have not forgive she ; he look unlike himself . time , however , she think , would tell he that they ink to be friend again . while he stand , as if meane to go , but not go -- she father begin he inquiry . " well , my dear , and do you get there safely ?-- and how do you
you find my worthy old friend and she daughter ?-- I dare say they must have be very much oblige to you for come . dear have be to call on and , , as I tell you before . she be always so attentive to they ! " 's colour be heighten by this unjust praise ; and with a smile , and shake of the head , which speak much , she look at .-- it seem as if there be a instantaneous impression in she favour , as if he eye receive the truth from she 's , and all that have pass of good in she feeling be at once catch and honoure .-- he look at she with a glow of regard . she be warmly gratify -- and in another moment still more so , by a little movement of more than common friendliness on he part .-- he take she hand ; -- whether she have not herself make the first motion , she could not say -- she might , perhaps , have rather offer it -- but he take she hand , press it , and certainly be on the point of carry it to he lip -- when , from some fancy or other , he suddenly let it go .-- why he should feel such a scruple , why he should change he mind when it be all but do , she could not perceive .-- he would have judge better , she think , if he have not stop .-- the intention , however , be indubitable ; and whether it be that he manners have in general so little gallantry , or however else it happen , but she think nothing become he more .-- it be with he , of so simple , yet so dignify a nature .-- she could not but recall the attempt with great satisfaction . it speak such perfect amity .-- he leave they immediately afterwards -- go in a moment . he always move with the alertness of a mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory , but now he seem more sudden than usual in he disappearance . could not regret she have go to , but she wish she have leave she ten minute earlier ; -- it would have be a great pleasure to talk over 's situation with .-- neither would she regret that he should be go to , for she know how much he visit would be enjoy -- but it might have happen at a better time -- and to have have longer notice of it , would have be pleasanter .-- they part thorough friend , however ; she could not be deceive as to the meaning of he countenance , and he unfinished gallantry ; -- it be all do to assure she that she have fully recover he good opinion .-- he have be sit with they half a hour , she find . it be a pity that she have not come back earlier ! in the hope of divert she father 's thought from the disagreeableness of 's go to ; and go so suddenly ; and go on horseback , which she know would be all very bad ; communicate she news of , and she dependence on the effect be justifi ; it supply a very useful check ,-- interested , without disturb he . he have long make up he mind to be go out as governess , and could talk of it cheerfully , but 's go to have be a unexpected blow . " I be very glad , indeed , my dear , to hear she be to be so comfortably settle . be very good - natured and agreeable , and I dare say she acquaintance be just what they ought to be . I hope it be a dry situation , and that she health will be take good care of . it ought to be a first object , as I be sure poor 's always be with I . you know , my dear , she be go to be to this new lady what be to we . and I hope she will be better off in one respect , and not be induce to go away after it have be she home so long . " the follow day bring news from to throw every thing else into the background . a express arrive at to announce the death of ! though she nephew have have no particular reason to hasten back on she account , she have not live above six - and - thirty hour after he return . a sudden seizure of a different nature from any thing forebod by she general state , have carry she off after a short struggle . the great be no more . it be feel as such thing must be feel . every body have a degree of gravity and sorrow ; tenderness towards the departed , solicitude for the surviving friend ; and , in a reasonable time , curiosity to know where she would be bury . tell we , that when lovely woman stoops to folly , she have nothing to do but to die ; and when she stoop to be disagreeable , it be equally to be recommend as a clearer of ill - fame . , after be dislike at least twenty - five year , be now speak of with compassionate allowances . in one point she be fully justified . she have never be admit before to be seriously ill . the event acquit she of all the fancifulness , and all the selfishness of imaginary complaint . " poor ! no doubt she have be suffer a great deal : more than any body have ever suppose -- and continual pain would try the temper . it
it be a sad event -- a great shock -- with all she fault , what would do without she ? 's loss would be dreadful indeed . would never get over it . " -- even shook he head , and look solemn , and say , " ah ! poor woman , who would have think it ! " and resolve , that he mourning should be as handsome as possible ; and he wife sit sighing and moralise over she broad hem with a commiseration and good sense , true and steady . how it would affect be among the earliest thought of both . it be also a very early speculation with . the character of , the grief of she husband -- she mind glance over they both with awe and compassion -- and then rest with lightened feeling on how might be affect by the event , how benefite , how freed . she see in a moment all the possible good . now , a attachment to would have nothing to encounter . , independent of he wife , be fear by nobody ; a easy , guidable man , to be persuade into any thing by he nephew . all that remain to be wish be , that the nephew should form the attachment , as , with all she goodwill in the cause , could feel no certainty of its be already form . behave extremely well on the occasion , with great self - command . what ever she might feel of brighter hope , she betraye nothing . be gratify , to observe such a proof in she of strengthen character , and refrain from any allusion that might endanger its maintenance . they speak , therefore , of 's death with mutual forbearance . short letter from be receive at Randalls , communicate all that be immediately important of they state and plan . be better than could be expect ; and they first removal , on the departure of the funeral for , be to be to the house of a very old friend in , to whom have be promise a visit the last ten year . at present , there be nothing to be do for ; good wish for the future be all that could yet be possible on 's side . it be a more pressing concern to show attention to , whose prospect be close , while 's open , and whose engagement now allow of no delay in any one at , who wish to show she kindness -- and with it be grow into a first wish . she have scarcely a stronger regret than for she past coldness ; and the person , whom she have be so many month neglecting , be now the very one on whom she would have lavish every distinction of regard or sympathy . she want to be of use to she ; want to show a value for she society , and testify respect and consideration . she resolve to prevail on she to spend a day at . a note be write to urge it . the invitation be refuse , and by a verbal message . " be not well enough to write ; " and when call at , the same morning , it appear that she be so much indisposed as to have be visit , though against she own consent , by himself , and that she be suffer under severe headach , and a nervous fever to a degree , which make he doubt the possibility of she go to 's at the time propose . she health seem for the moment completely derange -- appetite quite gone -- and though there be no absolutely alarming symptom , nothing touch the pulmonary complaint , which be the standing apprehension of the family , be uneasy about she . he think she have undertake more than she be equal to , and that she feel it so herself , though she would not own it . she spirit seem overcome . she present home , he could not but observe , be unfavourable to a nervous disorder :-- confin always to one room ; -- he could have wish it otherwise -- and she good aunt , though he very old friend , he must acknowledge to be not the best companion for a invalid of that description . she care and attention could not be question ; they be , in fact , only too great . he very much fear that derive more evil than good from they . listen with the warmest concern ; grieve for she more and more , and look around eager to discover some way of be useful . to take she -- be it only a hour or two -- from she aunt , to give she change of air and scene , and quiet rational conversation , even for a hour or two , might do she good ; and the follow morning she write again to say , in the most feeling language she could command , that she would call for she in the carriage at any hour that would name -- mention that she have 's decided opinion , in favour of such exercise for he patient . the answer be only in this short note : " 's compliment and thanks , but be quite unequal to any exercise . " feel that she own note have deserve something better ; but it be impossible to quarrel with word , whose tremulous inequality shew indisposition so plainly , and she think only of how she might best counteract this unwillingness to be see or assist . in spite of the answer , therefore , she order the carriage , and drive to 's , in the hope that would be induce to join she --
-- but it would not do ;-- come to the carriage door , all gratitude , and agree with she most earnestly in think a airing might be of the greatest service -- and every thing that message could do be try -- but all in vain . be oblige to return without success ; be quite unpersuadable ; the mere proposal of go out seem to make she worse wish she could have see she , and try she own power ; but , almost before she could hind the wish , make it appear that she have promise she niece on no account to let in . " indeed , the truth be , that poor dear could not bear to see any body -- any body at all -- , indeed , could not be deny -- and . have make such a point -- and have say so much -- but , except they , would really see nobody . " do not want to be class with the , the , and the , who would force themselves anywhere ; neither could she feel any right of preference herself -- she submit , therefore , and only question farther as to she niece 's appetite and diet , which she long to be able to assist . on that subject poor be very unhappy , and very communicative ; would hardly eat any thing :-- recommend nourishe food ; but every thing they could command ( and never have any body such good neighbour ) be distasteful . , on reach home , call the housekeeper directly , to a examination of she store ; and some arrowroot of very superior quality be speedily despatch to with a most friendly note . in half a hour the arrowroot be return , with a thousand thanks from , but " dear would not be satisfied without its be send back ; it be a thing she could not take -- and , moreover , she insist on she say , that she be not at all in want of any thing . " when afterwards hear that have be see wander about the meadow , at some distance from , on the afternoon of the very day on which she have , under the plea of be unequal to any exercise , so peremptorily refuse to go out with she in the carriage , she could have no doubt -- put every thing together -- that be resolve to receive no kindness from _her_. she be sorry , very sorry . she heart be grieve for a state which seem but the more pitiable from this sort of irritation of spirit , inconsistency of action , and inequality of power ; and it mortify she that she be give so little credit for proper feeling , or esteem so little worthy as a friend : but she have the consolation of know that she intention be good , and of be able to say to herself , that could have be privy to all she attempt of assist , could he even have see into she heart , he would not , on this occasion , have find any thing to reprove . one morning , about ten day after 's decease , be call downstairs to , who " could not stay five minute , and want particularly to speak with she ." -- he meet she at the parlour - door , and hardly ask she how she do , in the natural key of he voice , sink it immediately , to say , unheard by she father , " can you come to Randall at any time this morning ?-- do , if it be possible . want to see you . she must see you . " " be she unwell ? " " no , no , not at all -- only a little agitated . she would have order the carriage , and come to you , but she must see you _alone , and that you know --( nodd towards she father ) --Humph !-- can you come ? " " certainly . this moment , if you please . it be impossible to refuse what you ask in such a way . but what can be the matter ?-- be she really not ill ? " " Depend upon I -- but ask no more question . you will know it all in time . the most unaccountable business ! but hush , hush ! " to guess what all this mean , be impossible even for . something really important seem announce by he look ; but , as she friend be well , she endeavoure not to be uneasy , and settle it with she father , that she would take she walk now , she and be soon out of the house together and on they way at a quick pace for Randalls . " now , " -- say , when they be fairly beyond the sweep gate , -- " now , do let I know what have happen . " " no , no , " -- he gravely reply .--" do not ask I . I promise my wife to leave it all to she . she will break it to you better than I can . do not be impatient , ; it will all come out too soon . " " break it to I , " cry , stand still with terror .-- " ! -- , tell I at once .-- something have happene in . I know it have . tell I , I charge you tell I this moment what it be . " " no , indeed you be mistaken . " -- " do not trifle with I .-- consider how many of my dearest friend be now in . which of they
they be it ?-- I charge you by all that be sacred , not to attempt concealment . " " upon my word , " -- " you word !-- why not you honour !-- why not say upon you honour , that it have nothing to do with any of they ? good Heaven !-- what can be to be _break to I , that do not relate to one of that family ? " " upon my honour , " say he very seriously , " it do not . it be not in the smallest degree connect with any human being of the name of . " 's courage return , and she walk on . " I be wrong , " he continue , " in talk of its be _broke to you . I should not have use the expression . in fact , it do not concern you -- it concern only myself , -- that be , we hope !-- in short , my dear , there be no occasion to be so uneasy about it . I do not say that it be not a disagreeable business -- but thing might be much worse . -- if we walk fast , we shall soon be at Randalls . " find that she must wait ; and now it require little effort . she ask no more question therefore , merely employ she own fancy , and that soon point out to she the probability of its be some money concern -- something just come to light , of a disagreeable nature in the circumstance of the family , -- something which the late event at have bring forward . she fancy be very active . half a dozen natural child , perhaps -- and poor cut off !-- this , though very undesirable , would be no matter of agony to she . it inspire little more than a animating curiosity . " who be that gentleman on horseback ? " say she , as they proceed -- speak more to assist in keep he secret , than with any other view . " I do not know .-- one of the .-- ; -- it be not , I assure you . you will not see he . he be half way to by this time . " " have you son be with you , then ? " " oh ! yes -- do not you know ?-- well , well , never mind . " for a moment he be silent ; and then add , in a tone much more guarded and demure , " yes , come over this morning , just to ask we how we do . " they hurry on , and be speedily at .-- " well , my dear , " say he , as they enter the room --" I have bring she , and now I hope you will soon be better . I shall leave you together . there be no use in delay . I shall not be far off , if you want I . " -- and distinctly hear he add , in a lower tone , before he quit the room ,-- " I have be as good as my word . she have not the least idea . " be look so ill , and have a air of so much perturbation , that 's uneasiness increase ; and the moment they be alone , she eagerly say , " what be it my dear friend ? something of a very unpleasant nature , I find , have occur ; -- do let I know directly what it be . I have be walk all this way in complete suspense . we both abhor suspense . do not let mine continue longer . it will do you good to speak of you distress , whatever it may be . " " have you indeed no idea ? " say in a trembling voice . " can not you , my dear -- can not you form a guess as to what you be to hear ? " " so far as that it relate to , I do guess . " " you be right . it do relate to he , and I will tell you directly ; " ( resume she work , and seem resolve against look up . ) " he have be here this very morning , on a most extraordinary errand . it be impossible to express we surprize . he come to speak to he father on a subject , -- to announce a attachment -- " she stop to breathe . think first of herself , and then of . " more than a attachment , indeed , " resume ; " a engagement -- a positive engagement .-- what will you say , -- what will any body say , when it be know that and be engage ; -- nay , that they have be long engage ! " even jump with surprize ;-- and , horror - struck , exclaim , " !-- ! you be not serious ? you do not mean it ? " " you may well be amaze , " return , still avert she eye , and talk on with eagerness , that might have time to recover -- " you may well be amazed . but it be even so . there have be a solemn engagement between they ever since -- form at , and keep a secret from every body . not a creature know it but themselves -- neither the Campbell , nor she family , nor he .-- it be so wonderful , that though perfectly convince of the fact , it be yet almost incredible to myself . I can hardly believe it .-- I think I know he . " scarcely hear
hear what be say . -- she mind be divide between two idea -- she own former conversation with he about ; and poor Harriet ; -- and for some time she could only exclaim , and require confirmation , repeat confirmation . " well , " say she at last , try to recover herself ; " this be a circumstance which I must think of at least half a day , before I can at all comprehend it . what !--engage to she all the winter -- before either of they come to ? " " engage since , -- secretly engage .-- it have hurt I , , very much . it have hurt he father equally . _part_ of he conduct we can not excuse . " ponder a moment , and then reply , " I will not pretend _not to understand you ; and to give you all the relief in my power , be assure that no such effect have follow he attention to I , as you be apprehensive of . " look up , afraid to believe ; but 's countenance be as steady as she word . " that you may have less difficulty in believe this boast , of my present perfect indifference , " she continue , " I will farther tell you , that there be a period in the early part of we acquaintance , when I do like he , when I be very much dispose to be attach to he -- nay , be attach -- and how it come to cease , be perhaps the wonder . fortunately , however , it do cease . I have really for some time past , for at least these three month , care nothing about he . you may believe I , . this be the simple truth . " kiss she with tear of joy ; and when she could find utterance , assure she , that this protestation have do she more good than any thing else in the world could do . " will be almost as much relieve as myself , " say she . " on this point we have be wretch . it be we darling wish that you might be attach to each other -- and we be persuade that it be so .-- imagine what we have be feel on you account . " " I have escape ; and that I should escape , may be a matter of grateful wonder to you and myself . but this do not acquit _him , ; and I must say , that I think he greatly to blame . what right have he to come among we with affection and faith engage , and with manners so _very disengage ? what right have he to endeaavor to please , as he certainly do -- to distinguish any one young woman with persevering attention , as he certainly do -- while he really belong to another ?--How could he tell what mischief he might be do ?-- how could he tell that he might not be make I in love with he ?--very wrong , very wrong indeed . " " from something that he say , my dear , I rather imagine -- " " and how could _she_ bear such behaviour ! Composure with a witness ! to look on , while repeat attentions be offer to another woman , before she face , and not resent it .-- that be a degree of placidity , which I can neither comprehend nor respect . " " there be misunderstanding between they , ; he say so expressly . he have not time to enter into much explanation . he be here only a quarter of a hour , and in a state of agitation which do not allow the full use even of the time he could stay -- but that there have be misunderstanding he decidedly say . the present crisis , indeed , seem to be bring on by they ; and those misunderstanding might very possibly arise from the impropriety of he conduct . " " Impropriety ! oh ! -- it be too calm a censure . much , much beyond impropriety !-- it have sunk he , I can not say how it have sink he in my opinion . so unlike what a man should be !-- none of that upright integrity , that strict adherence to truth and principle , that disdain of trick and littleness , which a man should display in every transaction of he life . " " Nay , dear , now I must take he part ; for though he have be wrong in this instance , I have know he long enough to answer for he having many , very many , good quality ; and -- " " ! " cry , not attend to she .--" , too ! actually on the point of go as governess ! what could he mean by such horrible indelicacy ? to suffer she to engage herself -- to suffer she even to think of such a measure ! " " he know nothing about it , . on this article I can fully acquit he . it be a private resolution of hers , not communicate to he -- or at least not communicate in a way to carry conviction .-- yesterday , I know he say he be in the dark as to she plan . they burst on he , I do not know how , but by some letter or message -- and it be the discovery of what she be do , of this very project of hers , which determine he to come forward at once , own it all to he uncle , throw himself on he kindness , and , in short , put a end to the miserable
miserable state of concealment that have be carry on so long . " begin to listen better . " I be to hear from he soon , " continue . " he tell I at parting , that he should soon write ; and he speak in a manner which seem to promise I many particular that could not be give now . let we wait , therefore , for this letter . it may bring many extenuation . it may make many thing intelligible and excusable which now be not to be understand . do not let we be severe , do not let we be in a hurry to condemn he . let we have patience . I must love he ; and now that I be satisfied on one point , the one material point , I be sincerely anxious for its all turn out well , and ready to hope that it may . they must both have suffer a great deal under such a system of secresy and concealment . " " _His suffering , " reply dryly , " do not appear to have do he much harm . well , and how do take it ? " " most favourably for he nephew -- give he consent with scarcely a difficulty . Conceive what the event of a week have do in that family ! while poor live , I suppose there could not have be a hope , a chance , a possibility ; -- but scarcely be she remain at rest in the family vault , than she husband be persuade to act exactly opposite to what she would have require . what a bless it be , when undue influence do not survive the grave !-- he give he consent with very little persuasion . " " ah ! " think , " he would have do as much for . " " this be settle last night , and be off with the light this morning . he stop at , at the 's , I fancy , some time -- and then come on hither ; but be in such a hurry to get back to he uncle , to whom he be just now more necessary than ever , that , as I tell you , he could stay with we but a quarter of a hour .-- he be very much agitated -- very much , indeed -- to a degree that make he appear quite a different creature from any thing I have ever see he before .-- in addition to all the rest , there have be the shock of find she so very unwell , which he have have no previous suspicion of -- and there be every appearance of he have be feel a great deal . " " and do you really believe the affair to have be carry on with such perfect secresy ?-- the Campbell , the , do none of they know of the engagement ? " could not speak the name of without a little blush . " none ; not one . he positively say that it have be know to no being in the world but they two self . " " well , " say , " I suppose we shall gradually grow reconcile to the idea , and I wish they very happy . but I shall always think it a very abominable sort of proceeding . what have it be but a system of hypocrisy and deceit ,-- espionage , and treachery ?-- to come among we with profession of openness and simplicity ; and such a league in secret to judge we all !-- here have we be , the whole winter and spring , completely du , fancie ourselves all on a equal footing of truth and honour , with two people in the midst of we who may have be carry round , compare and sit in judgment on sentiment and word that be never mean for both to hear .-- they must take the consequence , if they have hear each other speak of in a way not perfectly agreeable ! " " I be quite easy on that head , " reply . " I be very sure that I never say any thing of either to the other , which both might not have hear . " " you be in luck .-- you only blunder be confine to my ear , when you imagine a certain friend of ours in love with the lady . " " true . but as I have always have a thoroughly good opinion of , I never could , under any blunder , have speak ill of she ; and as to speak ill of he , there I must have be safe . " at this moment appear at a little distance from the window , evidently on the watch . he wife give he a look which invite he in ; and , while he be come round , add , " now , dearest Emma , let I intreat you to say and look every thing that may set he heart at ease , and incline he to be satisfied with the match . let we make the best of it -- and , indeed , almost every thing may be fairly say in she favour . it be not a connexion to gratify ; but if do not feel that , why should we ? and it may be a very fortunate circumstance for he , for , I mean , that he should have attach himself to a girl of such steadiness of character and good judgment as I have always give she credit for -- and still be dispose to give she credit for , in spite of this one great deviation from the strict rule of right . and how much may be
be say in she situation for even that error ! " " Much , indeed ! " cry feelingly . " if a woman can ever be excuse for think only of herself , it be in a situation like 's . -- of such , one may almost say , that ' the world be not they 's , nor the world 's law . ' " she meet on he entrance , with a smile countenance , exclaim , " a very pretty trick you have be play I , upon my word ! this be a device , I suppose , to sport with my curiosity , and exercise my talent of guessing . but you really frightene I . I think you have lose half you property , at least . and here , instead of its be a matter of condolence , it turn out to be one of congratulation .-- I congratulate you , , with all my heart , on the prospect of have one of the most lovely and accomplish young woman in for you daughter . " a glance or two between he and he wife , convince he that all be as right as this speech proclaim ; and it be happy effect on he spirit be immediate . he air and voice recovere they usual briskness : he shook she heartily and gratefully by the hand , and enter on the subject in a manner to prove , that he now only want time and persuasion to think the engagement no very bad thing . he companion suggest only what could palliate imprudence , or smooth objection ; and by the time they have talk it all over together , and he have talk it all over again with , in they walk back to , he be become perfectly reconcile , and not far from think it the very best thing that could possibly have do . " , poor Harriet ! " -- those be the word ; in they lay the tormenting idea which could not get rid of , and which constitute the real misery of the business to she . have behave very ill by herself -- very ill in many way , -- but it be not so much _his_ behaviour as she _own , which make she so angry with he . it be the scrape which he have draw she into on 's account , that give the deepest hue to he offence .-- poor Harriet ! to be a second time the dupe of she misconception and flattery . have speak prophetically , when he once say , " Emma , you have be no friend to . " -- she be afraid she have do she nothing but disservice .--It be true that she have not to charge herself , in this instance as in the former , with be the sole and original author of the mischief ; with have suggest such feeling as might otherwise never have enter 's imagination ; for have acknowledge she admiration and preference of before she have ever give she a hint on the subject ; but she feel completely guilty of have encourage what she might have repress . she might have prevent the indulgence and increase of such sentiment . she influence would have be enough . and now she be very conscious that she ought to have prevent they .-- she feel that she have be risk she friend 's happiness on most insufficient grounds . common sense would have direct she to tell , that she must not allow herself to think of he , and that there be five hundred chance to one against he ever care for she .--" but , with common sense , " she add , " I be afraid I have have little to do . " she be extremely angry with herself . if she could not have be angry with too , it would have be dreadful .-- as for , she might at least relieve she feeling from any present solicitude on she account . would be anxiety enough ; she need no longer be unhappy about , whose trouble and whose ill - health have , of course , the same origin , must be equally under cure .-- she day of insignificance and evil be over .-- she would soon be well , and happy , and prosperous .-- could now imagine why she own attention have be slighte . this discovery laid many smaller matter open . no doubt it have be from jealousy .-- in 's eye she have be a rival ; and well might any thing she could offer of assistance or regard be repulse . a airing in the carriage would have be the rack , and arrowroot from the storeroom must have be poison . she understand it all ; and as far as she mind could disengage itself from the injustice and selfishness of angry feeling , she acknowledge that would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond she desert . but poor be such a engrossing charge ! there be little sympathy to be spare for any body else . be sadly fearful that this second disappointment would be more severe than the first . consider the very superior claim of the object , it ought ; and judge by its apparently stronger effect on 's mind , produce reserve and self - command , it would .-- she must communicate the painful truth , however , and as soon as possible . a injunction of secresy have be among 's parting word . " for the present , the whole affair be to be completely a secret . have make a point of it , as a token of respect to the wife he have so very recently lose ; and every body admit it to be no more than
than due decorum ." -- have promise ; but still must be accept . it be she superior duty . in spite of she vexation , she could not help feel it almost ridiculous , that she should have the very same distressing and delicate office to perform by , which have just go through by herself . the intelligence , which have be so anxiously announce to she , she be now to be anxiously announce to another . she hebe beat quick on hear 's footstep and voice ; so , she suppose , have poor feel when _she_ be approach Randalls . could the event of the disclosure bear a equal resemblance !-- but of that , unfortunately , there could be no chance . " well , ! " cry , come eagerly into the room -- " be not this the oddest news that ever be ? " " what news do you mean ? " reply , unable to guess , by look or voice , whether could indeed have receive any hint . " . do you ever hear any thing so strange ? oh !-- you need not be afraid of own it to I , for have tell I himself . I meet he just now . he tell I it be to be a great secret ; and , therefore , I should not think of mention it to any body but you , but he say you know it . " " what do tell you ? " --say , still perplex . " oh ! he tell I all about it ; that and be to be marry , and that they have be privately engage to one another this long while . how very odd ! " it be , indeed , so odd ; 's behaviour be so extremely odd , that do not know how to understand it . she character appear absolutely change . she seem to propose shew no agitation , or disappointment , or peculiar concern in the discovery . look at she , quite unable to speak . " have you any idea , " cry , " of he be in love with she ? -- you , perhaps , might . -- you ( blush as she speak ) who can see into every body 's heart ; but nobody else -- " " upon my word , " say , " I begin to doubt my have any such talent . can you seriously ask I , Harriet , whether I imagine he attach to another woman at the very time that I be -- tacitly , if not openly -- encourage you to give way to you own feeling ?-- I never have the slightest suspicion , till within the last hour , of 's have the least regard for . you may be very sure that if I have , I should have caution you accordingly . " " I ! " cry , colouring , and astonished . " why should you caution I ?-- you do not think I care about . " " I be delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject , " reply , smile ; " but you do not mean to deny that there be a time -- and not very distant either -- when you give I reason to understand that you do care about he ? " " !-- never , never . dear miss Woodhouse , how could you so mistake I ? " turn away distressed . " ! " cry , after a moment 's pause -- " what do you mean ?-- ! what do you mean ?-- mistake you !-- am I to suppose then ?-- " she could not speak another word .--her voice be lose ; and she sit down , wait in great terror till should answer . , who be stand at some distance , and with face turn from she , do not immediately say any thing ; and when she do speak , it be in a voice nearly as agitate as 's . " I should not have think it possible , " she begin , " that you could have misunderstand I ! I know we agree never to name he -- but consider how infinitely superior he be to every body else , I should not have think it possible that I could be suppose to mean any other person . , indeed ! I do not know who would ever look at he in the company of the other . I hope I have a better taste than to think of , who be like nobody by he side . and that you should have be so mistaken , be amazing !-- I be sure , but for believe that you entirely approve and mean to encourage I in my attachment , I should have consider it at first too great a presumption almost , to dare to think of he . at first , if you have not tell I that more wonderful thing have happen ; that there have be match of greater disparity ( those be you very word ) ;-- I should not have da to give way to -- I should not have think it possible -- but if _you _, who have be always acquaint with he -- " " ! " cry , collect herself resolutely -- " let we understand each other now , without the possibility of farther mistake . be you speak of -- ? " " to be sure I be . I never could have a idea of any body else -- and so I think you know . when we talk about he , it be as clear as possible . " " not quite , " return , with force calmness , " for all that
that you then say , appear to I to relate to a different person . I could almost assert that you have _nam . I be sure the service have render you , in protect you from the gipsy , be speak of . " " oh ! , how you do forget ! " " my dear Harriet , I perfectly remember the substance of what I say on the occasion . I tell you that I do not wonder at you attachment ; that consider the service he have render you , it be extremely natural :-- and you agree to it , express yourself very warmly as to you sense of that service , and mention even what you sensation have be in see he come forward to you rescue .-- the impression of it be strong on my memory . " " oh , dear , " cry , " now I recollect what you mean ; but I be think of something very different at the time . it be not the gipsy -- it be not that I mean . no ! ( with some elevation ) I be think of a much more precious circumstance -- of 's come and ask I to dance , when would not stand up with I ; and when there be no other partner in the room . that be the kind action ; that be the noble benevolence and generosity ; that be the service which make I begin to feel how superior he be to every other be upon earth . " " ! " cry , " this have be a most unfortunate -- most deplorable mistake ! -- what be to be do ? " " you would not have encourage I , then , if you have understand I ? at least , however , I can not be worse off than I should have be , if the other have be the person ; and now -- it _is_ possible -- " she pause a few moment . could not speak . " I do not wonder , , " she resume , " that you should feel a great difference between the two , as to I or as to any body . you must think one five hundred million time more above I than the other . but I hope , , that suppose -- that if -- strange as it may appear -- . but you know they be you own word , that _more wonderful thing have happen , match of _greater_ disparity have take place than between and I ; and , therefore , it seem as if such a thing even as this , may have occur before -- and if I should be so fortunate , beyond expression , as to -- if should really -- if _he_ do not mind the disparity , I hope , dear miss Woodhouse , you will not set yourself against it , and try to put difficulty in the way . but you be too good for that , I be sure . " be stand at one of the window . turn round to look at she in consternation , and hastily say , " Have you any idea of 's return you affection ? " " yes , " reply modestly , but not fearfully -- " I must say that I have . " 's eye be instantly withdrawn ; and she sit silently meditating , in a fix attitude , for a few minute . a few minute be sufficient for make she acquaint with she own heart . a mind like hers , once open to suspicion , make rapid progress . she touch -- she admit -- she acknowledge the whole truth . why be it so much worse that should be in love with , than with ? why be the evil so dreadfully increase by 's have some hope of a return ? it dart through she , with the speed of a arrow , that must marry no one but herself ! she own conduct , as well as she own heart , be before she in the same few minute . she see it all with a clearness which have never bless she before . how improperly have she be act by ! how inconsiderate , how indelicate , how irrational , how unfeeling have be she conduct ! what blindness , what madness , have lead she on ! it struck she with dreadful force , and she be ready to give it every bad name in the world . some portion of respect for herself , however , in spite of all these demerit -- some concern for she own appearance , and a strong sense of justice by --( there would be no need of _compassion to the girl who believe herself love by -- but justice require that she should not be make unhappy by any coldness now , ) give the resolution to sit and endure farther with calmness , with even apparent kindness . -- for she own advantage indeed , it be fit that the utmost extent of 's hope should be enquire into ; and have do nothing to forfeit the regard and interest which have be so voluntarily form and maintain -- or to deserve to be slighte by the person , whose counsels have never lead she right .-- Rouse from reflection , therefore , and subdue she emotion , she turn to Harriet again , and , in a more inviting accent , renew the conversation ; for as to the subject which have first introduce it , the wonderful story of , that be quite sunk and lose .-- neither of they think but of and themselves . , who have be stand in no unhappy reverie , be yet very glad to be call from
from it , by the now encourage manner of such a judge , and such a friend as , and only want invitation , to give the history of she hope with great , though trembl delight .-- 's trembling as she ask , and as she listen , be better conceal than 's , but they be not less . she voice be not unsteady ; but she mind be in all the perturbation that such a development of self , such a burst of threatening evil , such a confusion of sudden and perplex emotions , must create .-- she listen with much inward suffer , but with great outward patience , to 's detail .-- methodical , or well arrange , or very well deliver , it could not be expect to be ; but it contain , when separate from all the feebleness and tautology of the narration , a substance to sink she spirit --especially with the corroborating circumstance , which she own memory bring in favour of 's most improved opinion of . have be conscious of a difference in he behaviour ever since those two decisive dance .-- know that he have , on that occasion , find she much superior to he expectation . from that evening , or at least from the time of 's encourage she to think of he , have begin to be sensible of he talk to she much more than he have be use to do , and of he have indeed quite a different manner towards she ; a manner of kindness and sweetness !-- Latterly she have be more and more aware of it . when they have be all walk together , he have so often come and walk by she , and talk so very delightfully ! -- he seem to want to be acquaint with she . know it to have be very much the case . she have often observe the change , to almost the same extent .-- Harriet repeat expression of approbation and praise from he -- and feel they to be in the closest agreement with what she have know of he opinion of . he praise she for be without art or affectation , for have simple , honest , generous , feeling .-- she know that he see such recommendation in ; he have dwelt on they to she more than once .-- much that live in 's memory , many little particular of the notice she have receive from he , a look , a speech , a removal from one chair to another , a compliment imply , a preference infer , have be unnoticed , because unsuspected , by . circumstance that might swell to half a hour 's relation , and contain multiplied proof to she who have see they , have pass undiscerned by she who now hear they ; but the two latest occurrence to be mention , the two of strongest promise to , be not without some degree of witness from herself .-- the first , be he walk with she apart from the other , in the lime - walk at , where they have be walk some time before come , and he have take pain ( as she be convince ) to draw she from the rest to himself -- and at first , he have talk to she in a more particular way than he have ever do before , in a very particular way indeed !--( could not recall it without a blush . ) he seem to be almost ask she , whether she affections be engage .-- but as soon as she ( ) appear likely to join they , he change the subject , and begin talk about farming :-- the second , be he have sat talk with she nearly half a hour before come back from she visit , the very last morning of he be at -- though , when he first come in , he have say that he could not stay five minute -- and he have tell she , during they conversation , that though he must go to , it be very much against he inclination that he leave home at all , which be much more ( as feel ) than he have acknowledge to _her_. the superior degree of confidence towards , which this one article mark , give she severe pain . on the subject of the first of the two circumstance , she do , after a little reflection , venture the follow question . " might he not ?-- be not it possible , that when enquir , as you think , into the state of you affections , he might be allud to -- he might have 's interest in view ? but reject the suspicion with spirit . " ! no indeed !-- there be not a hint of . I hope I know better now , than to care for , or to be suspect of it . " when have close she evidence , she appeal to she dear , to say whether she have not good ground for hope . " I never should have presume to think of it at first , " say she , " but for you . you tell I to observe he carefully , and let he behaviour be the rule of mine -- and so I have . but now I seem to feel that I may deserve he ; and that if he do chuse I , it will not be any thing so very wonderful . " the bitter feeling occasion by this speech , the many bitter feeling , make the utmost exertion necessary on 's side , to enable she to say on reply , " Harriet , I will only venture to declare , that be the last man in the
the world , who would intentionally give any woman the idea of he feeling for she more than he really do . " seem ready to worship she friend for a sentence so satisfactory ; and be only save from rapture and fondness , which at that moment would have be dreadful penance , by the sound of she father 's footstep . he be come through the hall . be too much agitate to encounter he . " she could not compose herself -- would be alarme -- she have better go ; " -- with most ready encouragement from she friend , therefore , she pass off through another door -- and the moment she be go , this be the spontaneous burst of 's feeling : " oh ! that I have never see she ! " the rest of the day , the follow night , be hardly enough for she thought .-- she be bewilder amidst the confusion of all that have rush on she within the last few hour . every moment have bring a fresh surprize ; and every surprize must be matter of humiliation to she .-- how to understand it all ! how to understand the deception she have be thus practise on herself , and live under !-- the blunder , the blindness of she own head and heart !-- she sit still , she walk about , she try she own room , she try the shrubbery -- in every place , every posture , she perceive that she have act most weakly ; that she have be impos on by other in a most mortifying degree ; that she have be impos on herself in a degree yet more mortifying ; that she be wretch , and should probably find this day but the beginning of wretchedness . to understand , thoroughly understand she own heart , be the first endeavour . to that point go every leisure moment which she father 's claim on she allow , and every moment of involuntary absence of mind . how long have be so dear to she , as every feeling declare he now to be ? when have he influence , such influence begin ?-- when have he succeed to that place in she affection , which have once , for a short period , occupy ?-- she look back ; she compare the two -- compare they , as they have always stood in she estimation , from the time of the latter 's become known to she -- and as they must at any time have be compare by she , have it -- oh ! have it , by any blessed felicity , occur to she , to institute the comparison .-- she see that there never have be a time when she do not consider as infinitely the superior , or when he regard for she have not be infinitely the most dear . she see , that in persuade herself , in fancying , in acting to the contrary , she have be entirely under a delusion , totally ignorant of she own heart -- and , in short , that she have never really care for at all ! this be the conclusion of the first series of reflection . this be the knowledge of herself , on the first question of inquiry , which she reach ; and without be long in reach it .-- she be most sorrowfully indignant ; asham of every sensation but the one reveal to she -- she affection for .-- every other part of she mind be disgust . with insufferable vanity have she believe herself in the secret of every body 's feeling ; with unpardonable arrogance propose to arrange every body 's destiny . she be prove to have be universally mistaken ; and she have not quite do nothing -- for she have do mischief . she have bring evil on , on herself , and she too much fear , on . -- be this most unequal of all connexion to take place , on she must rest all the reproach of have give it a beginning ; for he attachment , she must believe to be produce only by a consciousness of 's ; -- and even be this not the case , he would never have know at all but for she folly . and be a union to distance every wonder of the kind .-- the attachment of and become commonplace , threadbare , stale in the comparison , excite no surprize , present no disparity , afforde nothing to be say or think .-- and ! -- such a elevation on she side ! such a debasement on he ! it be horrible to to think how it must sink he in the general opinion , to foresee the smile , the sneer , the merriment it would prompt at he expense ; the mortification and disdain of he brother , the thousand inconvenience to himself .-- could it be ?-- no ; it be impossible . and yet it be far , very far , from impossible .-- be it a new circumstance for a man of first - rate abilitie to be captivate by very inferior power ? be it new for one , perhaps too busy to seek , to be the prize of a girl who would seek he ?-- be it new for any thing in this world to be unequal , inconsistent , incongruous -- or for chance and circumstance ( as second cause ) to direct the human fate ? oh ! have she never bring forward ! have she leave she where she ink , and where he have tell she she ought ! -- have she not , with a folly which no tongue could express , prevent she marry the unexceptionable young man who would have make she happy
happy and respectable in the line of life to which she ought to belong -- all would have be safe ; none of this dreadful sequel would have be . how could ever have have the presumption to raise she thought to !-- how she could dare to fancy herself the chosen of such a man till actually assure of it !-- but be less humble , have fewer scruple than formerly .-- she inferiority , whether of mind or situation , seem little felt .-- she have see more sensible of 's be to stoop in marry she , than she now see of 's .-- ! be not that she own do too ? who have be at pain to give notion of self - consequence but herself ?-- who but herself have teach she , that she be to elevate herself if possible , and that she claim be great to a high worldly establishment ?-- if , from be humble , be grow avain , it be she do too . now that she be threaten with it be lose , have never know how much of she happiness depend on be _first_ with , first in interest and affection .-- satisfied that it be so , and feel it she due , she have enjoy it without reflection ; and only in the dread of be supplant , find how inexpressibly important it have be .-- long , very long , she feel she have be first ; for , have no female connexion of he own , there have be only whose claim could be compare with hers , and she have always know exactly how far he love and esteem . she have herself be first with he for many year past . she have not deserve it ; she have often be negligent or perverse , slighte he advice , or even wilfully oppos he , insensible of half he merit , and quarrell with he because he would not acknowledge she false and insolent estimate of she own -- but still , from family attachment and habit , and thorough excellence of mind , he have love she , and watch over she from a girl , with a endeavour to improve she , and a anxiety for she do right , which no other creature have at all share . in spite of all she fault , she know she be dear to he ; might she not say , very dear ?-- when the suggestion of hope , however , which must follow here , present themselves , she could not presume to indulge they . might think herself not unworthy of be peculiarly , exclusively , passionately love by . She_ could not . she could not flatter herself with any idea of blindness in he attachment to _her _. she have receive a very recent proof of its impartiality .-- how shocked have he be by she behaviour to ! how directly , how strongly have he express himself to she on the subject !-- not too strongly for the offence -- but far , far too strongly to issue from any feeling softer than upright justice and clear-sighted goodwill .-- she have no hope , nothing to deserve the name of hope , that he could have that sort of affection for herself which be now in question ; but there be a hope ( at time a slight one , at time much stronger , ) that might have deceive herself , and be overrat he regard for _her _.-- wish it she must , for he sake -- be the consequence nothing to herself , but he remain single all he life . could she be secure of that , indeed , of he never marry at all , she believe she should be perfectly satisfied .-- let he but continue the same to she and she father , the same to all the world ; let and lose none of they precious intercourse of friendship and confidence , and she peace would be fully secured .-- marriage , in fact , would not do for she . it would be incompatible with what she owed to she father , and with what she feel for he . nothing should separate she from she father . she would not marry , even if she be ask by . it must be she ardent wish that might be disappoint ; and she hope , that when able to see they together again , she might at least be able to ascertain what the chance for it be .-- she should see they henceforward with the closest observance ; and wretchedly as she have hitherto misunderstood even those she be watch , she do not know how to admit that she could be blind here .-- he be expect back every day . the power of observation would be soon give -- frightfully soon it appear when she thought be in one course . in the meanwhile , she resolve against see .-- it would do neither of they good , it would do the subject no good , to be talk of it farther .-- she be resolve not to be convinced , as long as she could doubt , and yet have no authority for opposing 's confidence . to talk would be only to irritate .-- she write to she , therefore , kindly , but decisively , to beg that she would not , at present , come to ; acknowledge it to be she conviction , that all farther confidential discussion of _one_ topic have better be avoid ; and hope , that if a few day be allow to pass before they meet again , except in the company of other -- she object only to a tete - a - tete -- they might be able to act as if
if they have forget the conversation of yesterday .-- Harriet submit , and approve , and be grateful . this point be just arrange , when a visitor arrive to tear 's thought be a little from the one subject which have engross they , sleep or wake , the last twenty - four hour -- . , who have be call on she daughter - in - law elect , and take in she way home , almost as much in duty to as in pleasure to herself , to relate all the particular of so interesting a interview . have accompany she to 's , and go through he share of this essential attention most handsomely ; but she have then induce to join she in a airing , be now return with much more to say , and much more to say with satisfaction , than a quarter of a hour spend in 's parlour , with all the encumbrance of awkward feeling , could have afforde . a little curiosity have ; and she make the most of it while she friend relate . have set off to pay the visit in a good deal of agitation herself ; and in the first place have wish not to go at all at present , to be allow merely to write to instead , and to defer this ceremonious call till a little time have pass , and could be reconcile to the engagement 's become known ; as , consider every thing , she think such a visit could not be pay without lead to report :-- but have think differently ; he be extremely anxious to show he approbation to and she family , and do not conceive that any suspicion could be accit by it ; or if it be , that it would be of any consequence ; for " such thing , " he observe , " always get about . " smile , and feel that have very good reason for say so . they have go , in short -- and very great have be the evident distress and confusion of the lady . she have hardly be able to speak a word , and every look and action have shew how deeply she be suffer from consciousness . the quiet , heart - felt satisfaction of the old lady , and the rapturous delight of she daughter -- who prove even too joyous to talk as usual , have be a gratifying , yet almost a affecting , scene . they be both so truly respectable in they happiness , so disinterested in every sensation ; think so much of ; so much of every body , and so little of themselves , that every kindly feeling be at work for they . 's recent illness have offer a fair plea for to invite she to a airing ; she have draw back and decline at first , but , on be press have yield ; and , in the course of they drive , have , by gentle encouragement , overcome so much of she embarrassment , as to bring she to converse on the important subject . apology for she seemingly ungracious silence in they first reception , and the warmest expressions of the gratitude she be always feel towards herself and , must necessarily open the cause ; but when these effusion be put by , they have talk a good deal of the present and of the future state of the engagement . be convince that such conversation must be the greatest relief to she companion , pend up within she own mind as every thing have so long be , and be very much pleased with all that she have say on the subject . " on the misery of what she have suffer , during the concealment of so many month , " continue , " she be energetic . this be one of she expressions . 'I will not say , that since I enter into the engagement I have not have some happy moment ; but I can say , that I have never know the blessing of one tranquil hour :' -- and the quivering lip , , which utter it , be a attestation that I feel at my heart . " " poor girl ! " say . " she think herself wrong , then , for have consent to a private engagement ? " " ! no one , I believe , can blame she more than she be dispose to blame herself . ' the consequence , ' say she , ' have be a state of perpetual suffer to I ; and so it uy . but after all the punishment that misconduct can bring , it be still not less misconduct . be no expiation . I never can be blameless . I have be act contrary to all my sense of right ; and the fortunate turn that every thing have take , and the kindness I be now receive , be what my conscience tell I ought not to be . ' ' do not imagine , madam , ' she continue , ' that I be teach wrong . do not let any reflection fall on the principle or the care of the friend who bring I up . the error have be all my own ; and I do assure you that , with all the excuse that present circumstance may appear to give , I shall yet dread make the story know to . ' " " poor girl ! " say again . " she love he then excessively , I suppose . it must have be from attachment only , that she could be lead to form the engagement . she affection must have overpower she judgment . " " yes , I have no doubt of she
she be extremely attach to he . " " I be afraid , " return , sigh , " that I must often have contribute to make she unhappy . " " on you side , my love , it be very innocently done . but she probably have something of that in she thought , when allud to the misunderstanding which he have give we hint of before . one natural consequence of the evil she have involve herself in , " she say , " be that of make she _unreasonable . the consciousness of have do amiss , have expose she to a thousand inquietude , and make she captious and irritable to a degree that must have be -- that have be -- hard for he to bear . 'I do not make the allowances , ' say she , ' which I ink to have do , for he temper and spirit -- he delightful spirit , and that gaiety , that playfulness of disposition , which , under any other circumstance , would , I be sure , have be as constantly bewitch to I , as they be at first . ' she then begin to speak of you , and of the great kindness you have shew she during she illness ; and with a blush which shew I how it be all connect , desire I , whenever I have a opportunity , to thank you -- I could not thank you too much -- for every wish and every endeavour to do she good . she be sensible that you have never receive any proper acknowledgment from herself . " " if I do not know she to be happy now , " say , seriously , " which , in spite of every little drawback from she scrupulous conscience , she must be , I could not bear these thanks ;-- for , oh ! , if there be a account draw up of the evil and the good I have do !-- well ( check herself , and try to be more lively ) , this be all to be forgote . you be very kind to bring I these interesting particular . they show she to the greatest advantage . I be sure she be very good -- I hope she will be very happy . it be fit that the fortune should be on he side , for I think the merit will be all on hers . " such a conclusion could not pass unanswer by . she think well of in almost every respect ; and , what be more , she love he very much , and she defence be , therefore , earnest . she talk with a great deal of reason , and at least equal affection -- but she have too much to urge for 's attention ; it be soon go to or to ; she forget to attempt to listen ; and when end with , " we have not yet have the letter we be so anxious for , you know , but I hope it will soon come , " she be oblige to pause before she answer , and at last oblige to answer at random , before she could at all recollect what letter it be which they be so anxious for . " be you well , my ? " be 's parting question . " oh ! perfectly . I be always well , you know . be sure to give I intelligence of the letter as soon as possible . " 's communications furnish with more food for unpleasant reflection , by increase she esteem and compassion , and she sense of past injustice towards . she bitterly regrett not have seek a closer acquaintance with she , and blush for the envious feeling which have certainly be , in some measure , the cause . have she follow 's know wish , in pay that attention to , which be every way she due ; have she try to know she better ; have she do she part towards intimacy ; have she endeavoure to find a friend there instead of in ; she must , in all probability , have be spare from every pain which press on she now.--Birth , ability , and education , have be equally mark one as a associate for she , to be receive with gratitude ; and the other -- what be she ?-- Suppose even that they have never become intimate friend ; that she have never be admit into 's confidence on this important matter -- which be most probable -- still , in know she as she ink , and as she might , she must have be preserve from the abominable suspicion of a improper attachment to , which she have not only so foolishly fashio and harbour herself , but have so unpardonably impart ; a idea which she greatly fear have be make a subject of material distress to the delicacy of 's feeling , by the levity or carelessness of 's . of all the source of evil surround the former , since she come to , she be persuade that she must herself have be the worst . she must have be a perpetual enemy . they never could have be all three together , without she have stab 's peace in a thousand instance ; and on box , perhaps , it have be the agony of a mind that would bear no more . the evening of this day be very long , and melancholy , at . the weather add what it could of gloom . a cold stormy rain set in , and nothing of appear but in the tree and shrub , which the wind be despoil , and the length of the day , which only make such cruel
cruel sight the longer visible . the weather affect , and he could only be keep tolerably comfortable by almost ceaseless attention on he daughter 's side , and by exertion which have never cost she half so much before . it remind she of they first forlorn tete - a - tete , on the evening of 's wedding - day ; but have walk in then , soon after tea , and dissipate every melancholy fancy . ! such delightful proof of 's attraction , as those sort of visit convey , might shortly be over . the picture which she have the drawn of the privation of the approaching winter , have prove erroneous ; no friend have desert they , no pleasure have be lose . -- but she present foreboding she fear would experience no similar contradiction . the prospect before she now , be threaten to a degree that could not be entirely dispell -- that might not be even partially brighten . if all take place that might take place among the circle of she friend , must be comparatively desert ; and she leave to cheer she father with the spirits only of ruin happiness . the child to be bear at Randalls must be a tie there even dearer than herself ; and 's heart and time would be occupy by it . they should lose she ; and , probably , in great measure , she husband also .-- would return among they no more ; and , it be reasonable to suppose , would soon cease to belong to . they would be married , and settle either at or near . all that be good would be withdraw ; and if to these loss , the loss of be to be add , what would remain of cheerful or of rational society within they reach ? to be no longer come there for he evening comfort !-- no longer walk in at all hour , as if ever willing to change he own home for they 's ! -- how be it to be endure ? and if he be to be lose to they for 's sake ; if he be to be think of hereafter , as find in 's society all that he want ; if be to be the chosen , the first , the dearest , the friend , the wife to whom he look for all the best blessing of existence ; what could be increase 's wretchedness but the reflection never far distant from she mind , that it have be all she own work ? when it come to such a pitch as this , she be not able to refrain from a start , or a heavy sigh , or even from walk about the room for a few seconds -- and the only source whence any thing like consolation or composure could be draw , be in the resolution of she own better conduct , and the hope that , however inferior in spirit and gaiety might be the follow and every future winter of she life to the past , it would yet find she more rational , more acquainted with herself , and leave she less to regret when it be gone . chapter xiii the weather continue much the same all the follow morning ; and the same loneliness , and the same melancholy , seem to reign at -- but in the afternoon it clear ; the wind change into a softer quarter ; the cloud be carry off ; the sun appear ; it be summer again . with all the eagerness which such a transition give , resolve to be out of door as soon as possible . never have the exquisite sight , smell , sensation of nature , tranquil , warm , and brilliant after a storm , be more attractive to she . she longe for the serenity they might gradually introduce ; and on 's come in soon after dinner , with a disengaged hour to give she father , she lose no time ill hurrie into the shrubbery .-- there , with spirit freshen , and think s a little relieved , she have take a few turn , when she see pass through the garden door , and come towards she .-- it be the first intimation of he be return from . she have be think of he the moment before , as unquestionably sixteen mile distant .-- there be time only for the quickest arrangement of mind . she must be collect and calm . in half a minute they be together . the " how would 'ye do 's " be quiet and constrain on each side . she ask after they mutual friend ; they be all well .-- when have he leave they ?-- only that morning . he must have have a wet ride . --yes .-- he mean to walk with she , she find . " he have just look into the dining - room , and as he be not want there , prefer be out of door . " -- she think he neither look nor speak cheerfully ; and the first possible cause for it , suggest by she fear , be , that he have perhaps be communicate he plan to he brother , and be pain by the manner in which they have be receive . they walk together . he be silent . she think he be often look at she , and try for a fuller view of she face than it suit she to give . and this belief produce another dread . perhaps he want to speak to she , of he attachment to Harriet ; he might be watch for encouragement to begin .-- she do not , could not , feel equal to lead the way to any
any such subject . he must do it all himself . yet she could not bear this silence . with he it be most unnatural . she consider -- resolve -- and , try to smile , begin -- " you have some news to hear , now you be come back , that will rather surprize you . " " have I ? " say he quietly , and look at she ; " of what nature ? " " oh ! the best nature in the world -- a wedding . " after wait a moment , as if to be sure she intend to say no more , he reply , " if you mean and , I have hear that already . " " how be it possible ? " cry , turn she glow cheek towards he ; for , while she speak , it occur to she that he might have call at 's in he way . " I have a few line on parish business from this morning , and at the end of they he give I a brief account of what have happen . " be quite relieved , and could presently say , with a little more composure , " probably have be less surprized than any of we , for you have have you suspicions .-- I have not forgote that you once try to give I a caution .-- I wish I have attend to it -- but --( with a sinking voice and a heavy sigh ) I seem to have be doom to blindness . " for a moment or two nothing be say , and she be unsuspicious of have excite any particular interest , till she find she arm draw within he , and press against he heart , and hear he thus say , in a tone of great sensibility , speak low , " time , my dearest , time will heal the wound . -- you own excellent sense -- you exertion for you father 's sake -- I know you will not allow yourself -- . " she arm be press again , as he add , in a more broken and subdue accent , " the feeling of the warmest friendship -- Indignation -- Abominable scoundrel ! " -- and in a louder , steadier tone , he conclude with , " he will soon be gone . they will soon be in . I be sorry for _her . she deserve a better fate . " understand he ; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter of pleasure , excit by such tender consideration , reply , " you be very kind -- but you be mistaken -- and I must set you right .-- I be not in want of that sort of compassion . my blindness to what be go on , lead I to act by they in a way that I must always be asham of , and I be very foolishly temp to say and do many thing which may well lay I open to unpleasant conjecture , but I have no other reason to regret that I be not in the secret earlier . " " ! " cry he , look eagerly at she , " be you , indeed ? " -- but check himself - - " no , no , I understand you -- forgive I -- I be pleased that you can say even so much .-- he be no object of regret , indeed ! and it will not be very long , I hope , before that become the acknowledgment of more than you reason .-- fortunate that you affections be not farther entangle !-- I could never , I confess , from you manners , assure myself as to the degree of what you feel -- I could only be certain that there be a preference -- and a preference which I never believe he to deserve .-- he be a disgrace to the name of man . -- and be he to be reward with that sweet young woman ?-- , , you will be a miserable creature . " " , " say , try to be lively , but really confuse -- " I be in a very extraordinary situation . I can not let you continue in you error ; and yet , perhaps , since my manners give such a impression , I have as much reason to be asham of confessing that I never have be at all attach to the person we be speak of , as it might be natural for a woman to feel in confess exactly the reverse .-- but I never have . " he listen in perfect silence . she wish he to speak , but he would not . she suppose she must say more before she be entitle to he clemency ; but it be a hard case to be oblige still to lower herself in he opinion . she go on , however . " I have very little to say for my own conduct .-- I be temp by he attention , and allow myself to appear pleased .-- a old story , probably -- a common case -- and no more than have happen to hundred of my sex before ; and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who set up as I do for understanding . many circumstance assist the temptation . he be the son of -- he be continually here -- I always find he very pleasant -- and , in short , for ( with a sigh ) let I swell out the cause ever so ingeniously , they all centre in this at last -- my vanity be flatter , and I allow he attention . Latterly , however -- for some time , indeed
indeed -- I have have no idea of they mean any thing .-- I think they a habit , a trick , nothing that call for seriousness on my side . he have impos on I , but he have not injure I . I have never be attach to he . and now I can tolerably comprehend he behaviour . he never wish to attach I . it be merely a blind to conceal he real situation with another .--It be he object to blind all about he ; and no one , I be sure , could be more effectually blinded than myself -- except that I be _not_ blinded -- that it be my good fortune -- that , in short , I be somehow or other safe from he . " she have hope for a answer here -- for a few word to say that she conduct be at least intelligible ; but he be silent ; and , as far as she could judge , deep in thought . at last , and tolerably in he usual tone , he say , " I have never have a high opinion of .-- I can suppose , however , that I may have underrate he . my acquaintance with he have be but trifl . -- and even if I have not underrate he hithertoo , he may yet turn out well . -- with such a woman he have a chance .-- I have no motive for wish he ill -- and for she sake , whose happiness will be involved in he good character and conduct , I shall certainly wish he well . " " I have no doubt of they be happy together , " say ; " I believe they to be very mutually and very sincerely attach . " " he be a most fortunate man ! " return , with energy . " so early in life -- at three - and - twenty -- a period when , if a man chuse a wife , he generally chuse ill . at three - and - twenty to have drawn such a prize ! what year of felicity that man , in all human calculation , have before he !-- assured of the love of such a woman -- the disinterested love , for 's character vouch for she disinterestedness ; every thing in he favour ,-- equality of situation -- I mean , as far as regard society , and all the habit and manners that be important ; equality in every point but one -- and that one , since the purity of she heart be not to be doubt , such as must increase he felicity , for it will be he to bestow the only advantage she want .-- a man would always wish to give a woman a better home than the one he take she from ; and he who can do it , where there be no doubt of _her_ regard , must , I think , be the happiest of mortal .-- be , indeed , the favourite of fortune . every thing turn out for he good . -- he meet with a young woman at a watering - place , gain she affection , can not even weary she by negligent treatment -- and have he and all he family seek round the world for a perfect wife for he , they could not have find she superior .--His aunt be in the way . t--His aunt die .-- he have only to speak . -- he friend be eager to promote he happiness .-- he have use every body ill -- and they be all delighted to forgive he .-- he be a fortunate man indeed ! " " you speak as if you envy he . " " and I do envy he , . in one respect he be the object of my envy . " could say no more . they seem to be within half a sentence of , and she immediate feeling be to avert the subject , if possible . she make she plan ; she would speak of something totally different -- the child in ; and she only wait for breath to begin , when start she , by say , " you will not ask I what be the point of envy .-- you be determine , I see , to have no curiosity . -- you be wise -- but _I_ can not be wise . , I must tell you what you will not ask , though I may wish it unsay the next moment . " " oh ! then , do not speak it , do not speak it , " she eagerly cry . " take a little time , consider , do not commit yourself . " " thank you , " say he , in a accent of deep mortification , and not another syllable follow . could not bear to give he pain . he be wish to confide in she -- perhaps to consult she ;-- cost she what it would , she would listen . she might assist he resolution , or reconcile he to it ; she might give just praise to , or , by represent to he he own independence , relieve he from that state of indecision , which must be more intolerable than any alternative to such a mind as he .-- they have reach the house . " you be go in , I suppose ? " say he . " no , " -- reply -- quite confirm by the depressed manner in which he still speak --" I should like to take another turn . be not gone . " and , after proceed a few step , she add -- " I stop you ungraciously , just now , ,
, and , I be afraid , give you pain . -- but if you have any wish to speak openly to I as a friend , or to ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation -- as a friend , indeed , you may command I .-- I will hear whatever you like . I will tell you exactly what I think . " " as a friend ! " --repeate .--" , that I fear be a word -- no , I have no wish -- stay , yes , why should I hesitate ?-- I have go too far already for concealment .-- , I accept you offer -- extraordinary as it may seem , I accept it , and refer myself to you as a friend .-- tell I , then , have I no chance of ever succeeding ? " he stop in he earnestness to look the question , and the expression of he eye overpower she . " my dearest , " say he , " for dearest you will always be , whatever the event of this hour 's conversation , my dearest , most beloved Emma -- tell I at once . say ' no , ' if it be to be say . " -- she could really say nothing .--" you be silent , " he cry , with great animation ; " absolutely silent ! at present I ask no more . " be almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment . the dread of be awaken from the happiest dream , be perhaps the most prominent feeling . " I can not make speeches , : " he soon resume ; and in a tone of such sincere , decide , intelligible tenderness as be tolerably convince .--" if I love you less , I might be able to talk about it more . but you know what I be . -- you hear nothing but truth from I .-- I have blame you , and lecture you , and you have borne it as no other woman in would have borne it .-- bear with the truth I would tell you now , dearest Emma , as well as you have borne with they . the manner , perhaps , may have as little to recommend they . know , I have be a very indifferent lover .-- but you understand I . -- yes , you see , you understand my feeling -- and will return they if you can . at present , I ask only to hear , once to hear you voice . " while he speak , 's mind be most busy , and , with all the wonderful velocity of thought , have be able -- and yet without lose a word -- to catch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole ; to see that 's hope have be entirely groundless , a mistake , a delusion , as complete a delusion as any of she own -- that be nothing ; that she be every thing herself ; that what she have be say relative to have be all take as the language of she own feeling ; and that she agitation , she doubt , she reluctance , she discouragement , have be all receive as discouragement from herself . -- and not only be there time for these conviction , with all they glow of attendant happiness ; there be time also to rejoice that 's secret have not escape she , and to resolve that it need not , and should not .-- it be all the service she could now render she poor friend ; for as to any of that heroism of sentiment which might have prompt she to entreat he to transfer he affection from herself to , as infinitely the most worthy of the two -- or even the more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse he at once and for ever , without vouchsaf any motive , because he could not marry they both , have it not . she feel for , with pain and with contrition ; but no flight of generosity run mad , oppose all that could be probable or reasonable , enter she brain . she have lead she friend astray , and it would be a reproach to she for ever ; but she judgment be as strong as she feeling , and as strong as it have ever be before , in reprobat any such alliance for he , as most unequal and degrading . she way be clear , though not quite smooth .-- she speak then , on be so entreate .-- what do she say ?-- just what she ought , of course . a lady always do .-- she say enough to show there need not be despair -- and to invite he to say more himself . he _had_ despaire at one period ; he have receive such a injunction to caution and silence , as for the time crush every hope ; --she have begin by refuse to hear he .-- the change have perhaps be somewhat sudden ; -- she proposal of take another turn , she renew the conversation which she have just put a end to , might be a little extraordinary !-- she feel its inconsistency ; but be so obliging as to put up with it , and seek no farther explanation . , very seldom , do complete truth belong to any human disclosure ; seldom can it happen that something be not a little disguise , or a little mistaken ; but where , as in this case , though the conduct be mistaken , the feeling be not , it may not be very material .-- could not impute to a more relenting heart than she possess , or a heart
heart more dispose to accept off he . he have , in fact , be wholly unsuspicious of he own influence . he have follow she into the shrubbery with no idea of try it . he have come , in he anxiety to see how she bear 's engagement , with no selfish view , no view at all , but of endeavouring , if she allow he a opening , to soothey or to counsel she .-- the rest have be the work of the moment , the immediate effect of what he hear , on he feeling . the delightful assurance of she total indifference towards , of she have a heart completely disengage from he , have give birth to the hope , that , in time , he might gain she affection himself ; -- but it have be no present hope -- he have only , in the momentary conquest of eagerness over judgment , aspire to be tell that she do not forbid he attempt to attach she .-- the superior hope which gradually open be so much the more enchanting .-- the affection , which he have be ask to be allow to create , if he could , be already he !-- within half a hour , he have pass from a thoroughly distressed state of mind , to something so like perfect happiness , that it could bear no other name . _her_ change be equal .-- this one half - hour have give to each the same precious certainty of be belove , have clear from each the same degree of ignorance , jealousy , or distrust .-- on he side , there have be a long - standing jealousy , old as the arrival , or even the expectation , of .-- he have be in love with , and jealous of , from about the same period , one sentiment have probably enlighten he as to the other . it be he jealousy of that have take he from the country .-- the box have decide he on go away . he would save himself from witnesse again such permit , encourage attention .-- he have go to learn to be indifferent .-- but he have go to a wrong place . there be too much domestic happiness in he brother 's house ; woman wore too amiable a form in it ; be too much like -- differ only in those strike inferiority , which always bring the other in brilliancy before he , for much to have be do , even have he time be longer . -- he have stay on , however , vigorously , day after day -- till this very morning 's post have convey the history of .-- then , with the gladness which must be feel , nay , which he do not scruple to feel , have never believe to be at all deserve , be there so much fond solicitude , so much keen anxiety for she , that he could stay no longer . he have ride home through the rain ; and have walk up directly after dinner , to see how this sweetest and best of all creature , faultless in spite of all she fault , bear the discovery . he have find she agitate and low .-- be a villain .-- he hear she declare that she have never love he . 's character be not desperate .-- she be he own , by hand and word , when they return into the house ; and if he could have think of then , he might have deem he a very good sort of fellow . what totally different feeling do take back into the house from what she have bring out !-- she have then be only da to hope for a little respite of suffering ; -- she be now in a exquisite flutter of happiness , and such happiness moreover as she believe must still be greater when the flutter should have pass away . they sit down to tea -- the same party round the same table -- how often it have be collect !-- and how often have she eye fall on the same shrub in the lawn , and observe the same beautiful effect of the western sun !-- but never in such a state of spirit , never in any thing like it ; and it be with difficulty that she could summon enough of she usual self to be the attentive lady of the house , or even the attentive daughter . poor little suspect what be plott against he in the breast of that man whom he be so cordially welcoming , and so anxiously hope might not have take cold from he ride .-- could he have see the heart , he would have car very little for the lung ; but without the most distant imagination of the impending evil , without the slightest perception of any thing extraordinary in the look or way of either , he repeat to they very comfortably all the article of news he have receive from , and talk on with much self - contentment , totally unsuspicious of what they could have tell he in return . as long as remain with they , 's fever continue ; but when he be go , she begin to be a little tranquillised and subdue -- and in the course of the sleepless night , which be the tax for such a evening , she find one or two such very serious point to consider , as make she feel , that even she happiness must have some alloy . she father -- and . she could not be alone without feel the full weight of they separate claim ; and how to guard the comfort of both to the utmost , be the question . with
with respect to she father , it be a question soon answer . she hardly know yet what would ask ; but a very short parley with she own heart produce the most solemn resolution of never quit she father .-- she even weep over the idea of it , as a sin of thought . while he live , it must be only a engagement ; but she flatter herself , that if divest of the danger of draw she away , it might become a increase of comfort to he .-- how to do she best by , be of more difficult decision ; -- how to spare she from any unnecessary pain ; how to make she any possible atonement ; how to appear least she enemy ?-- on these subject , she perplexity and distress be very great -- and she mind have to pass again and again through every bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that have ever surround it .-- she could only resolve at last , that she would still avoid a meeting with she , and communicate all that need be tell by letter ; that it would be inexpressibly desirable to have she remove just now for a time from , and -- indulge in one scheme more -- nearly resolve , that it might be practicable to get a invitation for she to .-- have be pleased with ; and a few week spend in must give she some amusement .-- she do not think it in 's nature to escape be benefite by novelty and variety , by the street , the shop , and the child .-- at any rate , it would be a proof of attention and kindness in herself , from whom every thing be due ; a separation for the present ; a averting of the evil day , when they must all be together again . she rise early , and write she letter to ; a employment which leave she so very serious , so nearly sad , that , in walk up to to breakfast , do not arrive at all too soon ; and half a hour steal afterwards to go over the same ground again with he , literally and figuratively , be quite necessary to reinstate she in a proper share of the happiness of the evening before . he have not leave she long , by no means long enough for she to have the slightest inclination for think of any body else , when a letter be bring she from -- a very thick letter ; -- she guess what it must contain , and deprecate the necessity of read it .-- she be now in perfect charity with ; she want no explanations , she want only to have she thought to herself -- and as for understand any thing he write , she be sure she be incapable of it .-- it must be wad through , however . she open the packet ; it be too surely so ;-- a note from to herself , usher in the letter from to . " I have the greatest pleasure , my dear , in forwarding to you the enclose . I know what thorough justice you will do it , and have scarcely a doubt of it be happy effect .-- I think we shall never materially disagree about the writer again ; but I will not delay you by a long preface .-- we be quite well .-- this letter have be the cure of all the little nervousness I have be feel lately .-- I do not quite like you look on , but it be a ungenial morning ; and though you will never own be affect by weather , I think every body feel a north - east wind .-- I feel for you dear father very much in the storm of afternoon and yesterday morning , but have the comfort of hearing last night , by , that it have not make he ill . " yours ever , " a . w . " [ to . ] - . my , " if i make myself intelligible yesterday , this letter will be expect ; but expect or not , I know it will be read with candour and indulgence .-- you be all goodness , and I believe there will be need of even all you goodness to allow for some part of my past conduct .-- but I have be forgive by one who have still more to resent . my courage rise while I write . it be very difficult for the prosperous to be humble . I have already meet with such success in two application for pardon , that I may be in danger of think myself too sure of yours , and of those among you friend who have have any ground of offence .-- you must all endeavour to comprehend the exact nature of my situation when I first arrive at Randall ; you must consider I as have a secret which be to be keep at all hazard . this be the fact . my right to place myself in a situation require such concealment , be another question . I shall not discuss it here . for my temptation to _think_ it a right , I refer every caviller to a brick house , sash window below , and casement above , in . I da not address she openly ; my difficulty in the then state of must be too well know to require definition ; and I be fortunate enough to prevail , before we part at , and to induce the most upright female mind in the creation to stoop in charity to a secret engagement . -- have she refuse , I should have go mad . -- but you will be ready to say ,
, what be you hope in do this ? -- what do you look forward to ?-- to any thing , every thing -- to time , chance , circumstance , slow effect , sudden burst , perseverance and weariness , health and sickness . every possibility of good be before I , and the first of blessing secure , in obtain she promise of faith and correspondence . if you need farther explanation , I have the honour , my dear madam , of be you husband 's son , and the advantage of inherit a disposition to hope for good , which no inheritance of house or lands can ever equal the value of . -- see I , then , under these circumstance , arrive on my first visit to Randalls ; -- and here I be conscious of wrong , for that visit might have be sooner pay . you will look back and see that I do not come till be in ; and as _you_ be the person slighte , you will forgive I instantly ; but I must work on my father 's compassion , by remind he , that so long as I absent myself from he house , so long I lose the blessing of know you . my behaviour , during the very happy fortnight which I spend with you , do not , I hope , lay I open to reprehension , except on one point . and now I come to the principal , the only important part of my conduct while belong to you , which excite my own anxiety , or require very solicitous explanation . with the greatest respect , and the warmest friendship , do I mention ; my father perhaps will think I ought to add , with the deepest humiliation .-- a few word which drop from he yesterday speak he opinion , and some censure I acknowledge myself liable to .-- my behaviour to indicate , I believe , more than it ought .-- in order to assist a concealment so essential to I , I be lead on to make more than a allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which we be immediately throw .-- I can not deny that be my ostensible object -- but I be sure you will believe the declaration , that have I not be convinced of she indifference , I would not have be induce by any selfish view to go on .-- Amiable and delightful as be , she never give I the idea of a young woman likely to be attach ; and that she be perfectly free from any tendency to be attach to I , be as much my conviction as my wish .-- she receive my attention with a easy , friendly , goodhumoured playfulness , which exactly sui I . we seem to understand each other . from we relative situation , those attention be she due , and be feel to be so .-- whether begin really to understand I before the expiration of that fortnight , I can not say ; -- when I call to take leave of she , I remember that I be within a moment of confess the truth , and I then fancie she be not without suspicion ; but I have no doubt of she have since detect I , at least in some degree .-- she may not have surmise the whole , but she quickness must have penetrat a part . I can not doubt it . you will find , whenever the subject become freed from its present restraint , that it do not take she wholly by surprize . she frequently give I hint of it . I remember she tell I at the ball , that I owe gratitude for she attention to .-- I hope this history of my conduct towards she will be admit by you and my father as great extenuation of what you see amiss . while you consider I as have sinn against , I could deserve nothing from either . Acquit I here , and procure for I , when it be allowable , the acquittal and good wish of that say , whom I regard with so much brotherly affection , as to long to have she as deeply and as happily in love as myself .-- whatever strange thing I say or do during that fortnight , you have now a key to . my heart be in , and my business be to get my body thither as often as might be , and with the least suspicion . if you remember any queerness , set they all to the right account .-- of the pianoforte so much talk of , I feel it only necessary to say , that its be order be absolutely unknown to --, who would never have allow I to send it , have any choice be give she .-- the delicacy of she mind throughout the whole engagement , my dear madam , be much beyond my power of do justice to . you will soon , I earnestly hope , know she thoroughly yourself .-- no description can describe she . she must tell you herself what she be -- yet not by word , for never be there a human creature who would so designedly suppress she own merit .-- since I begin this letter , which will be longer than I foresee , I have hear from she .-- she give a good account of she own health ; but as she never complain , I dare not depend . I want to have you opinion of she look . I know you will soon call on she ; she be live in dread of the visit . perhaps it be pay already . let I hear from you without delay ; I be impatient for
for a thousand particular . remember how few minute I be at Randalls , and in how bewilder , how mad a state : and I be not much better yet ; still insane either from happiness or misery . when I think of the kindness and favour I have meet with , of she excellence and patience , and my uncle 's generosity , I be mad with joy : but when I recollect all the uneasiness I occasion she , and how little I deserve to be forgive , I be mad with anger . if I could but see she again ! -- but I must not propose it yet . my uncle have be too good for I to encroach .-- I must still add to this long letter . you have not hear all that you ought to hear . I could not give any connect detail yesterday ; but the suddenness , and , in one light , the unseasonableness with which the affair burst out , need explanation ; for though the event of the 26th ult. , as you will conclude , immediately open to I the happiest prospect , I should not have presume on such early measure , but from the very particular circumstance , which leave I not a hour to lose . I should myself have shrunk from any thing so hasty , and she would have feel every scruple of mine with multiplied strength and refinement .-- but I have no choice . the hasty engagement she have enter into with that woman -- here , my dear madam , I be obliged to leave off abruptly , to recollect and compose myself .-- I have be walk over the country , and be now , I hope , rational enough to make the rest of my letter what it ought to be .-- it be , in fact , a most mortifying retrospect for I . I behave shamefully . and here I can admit , that my manners to , in be unpleasant to , be highly blameable . She_ disapprove they , which ought to have be enough .-- my plea of conceal the truth she do not think sufficient .-- she be displease ; I think unreasonably so : I think she , on a thousand occasion , unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious : I think she even cold . but she be always right . if I have follow she judgment , and subdue my spirits to the level of what she deem proper , I should have escape the greatest unhappiness I have ever know .-- we quarrell .-- do you remember the morning spend at ?--_There_ every little dissatisfaction that have occur before come to a crisis . I be late ; I meet she walk home by herself , and want to walk with she , but she would not suffer it . she absolutely refuse to allow I , which I then think most unreasonable . now , however , I see nothing in it but a very natural and consistent degree of discretion . while I , to blind the world to we engagement , be behave one hour with objectionable particularity to another woman , be she to be consent the next to a proposal which might have make every previous caution useless ? -- have we be meet walk together between and , the truth must have be suspect .-- I be mad enough , however , to resent .-- I doubt she affection . I doubte it more the next day on box ; when , provoke by such conduct on my side , such shameful , insolent neglect of she , and such apparent devotion to , as it would have be impossible for any woman of sense to endure , she speak she resentment in a form of word perfectly intelligible to I .-- in short , my dear madam , it be a quarrel blameless on she side , abominable on mine ; and I return the same evening to , though I might have stay with you till the next morning , merely because I would be as angry with she as possible . even then , I be not such a fool as not to mean to be reconcile in time ; but I be the injured person , injure by she coldness , and I go away determined that she should make the first advance .-- I shall always congratulate myself that you be not of the box . have you witness my behaviour there , I can hardly suppose you would ever have think well of I again . it be effect upon she appear in the immediate resolution it produce : as soon as she find I be really go from , she close with the offer of that officious ; the whole system of whose treatment of she , by the bye , have ever fill I with indignation and hatred . I must not quarrel with a spirit of forbearance which have be so richly extend towards myself ; but , otherwise , I should loudly protest against the share of it which that woman have know .-- ' , ' indeed !-- you will observe that I have not yet indulge myself in call she by that name , even to you . think , then , what I must have endure in hearing it bandy between the with all the vulgarity of needless repetition , and all the insolence of imaginary superiority . have patience with I , I shall soon have do .-- she close with this offer , resolve to break with I entirely , and write the next day to tell I that we never be to meet again .-- _She _felt _to _engagement _to_ be _a_ _source _of_ _repentance_ _and_ _misery _to_ _each _: _she _dissolve _it_.-- this letter reach
reach I on the very morning of my poor aunt 's death . I answer it within a hour ; but from the confusion of my mind , and the multiplicity of business fal on I at once , my answer , instead of be send with all the many other letter of that day , be lock up in my writing - desk ; and I , trust that I have write enough , though but a few line , to satisfy she , remain without any uneasiness .-- I be rather disappointed that I do not hear from she again speedily ; but I make excuse for she , and be too busy , and -- may I add ?-- too cheerful in my view to be captious .-- we remove to ; and two day afterwards I receive a parcel from she , my own letter all return !-- and a few line at the same time by the post , state she extreme surprize at not have have the smallest reply to she last ; and adding , that as silence on such a point could not be misconstrued , and as it must be equally desirable to both to have every subordinate arrangement conclude as soon as possible , she now send I , by a safe conveyance , all my letter , and request , that if I could not directly command hers , so as to send they to Highbury within a week , I would forward they after that period to she at --: in short , the full direction to 's , near , star I in the face . I know the name , the place , I know all about it , and instantly see what she have be do . it be perfectly accordant with that resolution of character which I know she to possess ; and the secrecy she have maintain , as to any such design in she former letter , be equally descriptive of its anxious delicacy . for the world would not she have seem to threat I .-- imagine the shock ; imagine how , till I have actually detect my own blunder , I rave at the blunders of the post .-- what be to be do ?-- one thing only .-- I must speak to my uncle . without he sanction I could not hope to be listen to again .-- I speak ; circumstance be in my favour ; the late event have soften away he pride , and he be , earlier than I could have anticipate , wholly reconcile and comply ; and could say at last , poor man ! with a deep sigh , that he wish I might find as much happiness in the marriage state as he have do .-- I feel that it would be of a different sort .-- be you dispose to pity I for what I must have suffer in opening the cause to he , for my suspense while all be at stake ?-- no ; do not pity I till I reach , and see how ill I have make she . do not pity I till I see she wan , sick look .-- I reach at the time of day when , from my knowledge of they late breakfast hour , I be certain of a good chance of find she alone .-- I be not disappoint ; and at last I be not disappoint either in the object of my journey . a great deal of very reasonable , very just displeasure I have to persuade away . but it be do ; we be reconcile , dearer , much dearer , than ever , and no moment 's uneasiness can ever occur between we again . now , my dear madam , I will release you ; but I could not conclude before . a thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you have ever shew I , and ten thousand for the attention you heart will dictate towards she .-- if you think I in a way to be happier than I deserve , I be quite of you opinion .-- call I the child of good fortune . I hope she be right .-- in one respect , my good fortune be undoubted , that of be able to subscribe myself , you oblige and affectionate , . . this letter must make its way to 's feeling . she be oblige , in spite of she previous determination to the contrary , to do it all the justice that foretold . as soon as she come to she own name , it be irresistible ; every line relate to herself be interesting , and almost every line agreeable ; and when this charm cease , the subject could still maintain itself , by the natural return of she former regard for the writer , and the very strong attraction which any picture of love must have for she at that moment . she never stopt till she have go through the whole ; and though it be impossible not to feel that he have be wrong , yet he have be less wrong than she have suppose -- and he have suffer , and be very sorry -- and he be so grateful to , and so much in love with , and she be so happy herself , that there be no be severe ; and could he have enter the room , she must have shaken hand with he as heartily as ever . she think so well of the letter , that when come again , she desire he to read it . she be sure of 's wish it to be communicate ; especially to one , who , like , have see so much to blame in he conduct . " I shall be very
very glad to look it over , " say he ; " but it seem long . I will take it home with I at night . " but that would not do . be to call in the evening , and she must return it by he . " I would rather be talk to you , " he reply ; " but as it seem a matter of justice , it shall be do . " he begin -- stop , however , almost directly to say , " Had I be offer the sight of one of this gentleman 's letter to he mother - in - law a few month ago , , it would not have be take with such indifference . " he proceed a little farther , read to himself ; and then , with a smile , observe , " Humph ! a fine complimentary opening : but it be he way . one man 's style must not be the rule of another ' . we will not be severe . " " it will be natural for I , " he add shortly afterwards , " to speak my opinion aloud as I read . by do it , I shall feel that I be near you . it will not be so great a loss of time : but if you dislike it -- " " not at all . I should wish it . " return to he reading with greater alacrity . " he trifle here , " say he , " as to the temptation . he know he be wrong , and have nothing rational to urge .-- bad .-- he ought not to have form the engagement .--'His father 's disposition :' -- he be unjust , however , to he father . 's sanguine temper be a blessing on all he upright and honourable exertion ; but earn every present comfort before he endeavoure to gain it .-- very true ; he do not come till be here . " " and I have not forget , " say , " how sure you be that he might have come sooner if he would . you pass it over very handsomely -- but you be perfectly right . " " I be not quite impartial in my judgament , :-- but yet , I think -- have _you not be in the case -- I should still have distrust he . " when he come to , he be obliged to read the whole of it aloud -- all that related to she , with a smile ; a look ; a shake of the head ; a word or two of assent , or disapprobation ; or merely of love , as the subject require ; conclude , however , seriously , and , after steady reflection , thus -- " very bad -- though it might have be worse .-- play a most dangerous game . too much indebt to the event for he acquittal .-- no judge of he own manners by you .-- deceive in fact by he own wish , and regardless of little besides he own convenience .-- Fancy you to have fathom he secret . Natural enough !-- he own mind full of intrigue , that he should suspect it in other .-- mystery ; finesse -- how they pervert the understanding ! my , do not every thing serve to prove more and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all we dealings with each other ? " agree to it , and with a blush of sensibility on 's account , which she could not give any sincere explanation of . " you have better go on , " say she . he do so , but very soon stopt again to say , " the pianoforte ! ah ! that be the act of a very , very young man , one too young to consider whether the inconvenience of it might not very much exceed the pleasure . a boyish scheme , indeed !-- I can not comprehend a man 's wishing to give a woman any proof of affection which he know she would rather dispense with ; and he do know that she would have prevent the instrument 's come if she could . " after this , he make some progress without any pause . 's confession of have behaved shamefully be the first thing to call for more than a word in passing . " I perfectly agree with you , sir , " -- be then he remark . " you do behave very shamefully . you never write a truer line . " and have go through what immediately follow of the basis of they disagreement , and he persisting to act in direct opposition to 's sense of right , he make a fuller pause to say , " this be very bad . -- he have induce she to place herself , for he sake , in a situation of extreme difficulty and uneasiness , and it should have be he first object to prevent she from suffering unnecessarily .-- she must have have much more to contend with , in carry on the correspondence , than he could . he should have respecte even unreasonable scruple , have there be such ; but hers be all reasonable . we must look to she one fault , and remember that she have do a wrong thing in consent to the engagement , to bear that she should have be in such a state of punishment . " know that he be now get to the party , and grow uncomfortable . she own behaviour have be so very improper ! she be deeply asham , and a little afraid of he next look . it be all read , however , steadily , attentively
attentively , and without the smallest remark ; and , except one momentary glance at she , instantly withdrawn , in the fear of give pain -- no remembrance of seem to exist . " there be no saying much for the delicacy of we good friend , the Eltons , " be he next observation .--" he feeling be natural .-- what ! actually resolve to break with he entirely !-- she feel the engagement to be a source of repentance and misery to each -- she dissolve it .-- what a view this give of she sense of he behaviour !-- well , he must be a most extraordinary -- " " Nay , nay , read on .-- you will find how very much he suffer . " " I hope he do , " reply coolly , and resume the letter . " ' !'-- what do this mean ? what be all this ? " " she have engage to go as governess to 's child -- a dear friend of 's - - a neighbour of Maple Grove ; and , by the bye , I wonder how bear the disappointment ? " " say nothing , my dear , while you oblige I to read -- not even of . only one page more . I shall soon have do . what a letter the man write ! " " I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards he . " " well , there _i feel here .-- he do seem to have suffer in find she ill .-- certainly , I can have no doubt of he be fond of she . ' Dearer , much dearer than ever . ' I hope he may long continue to feel all the value of such a reconciliation . -- he be a very liberal thanker , with he thousand and ten of thousand .--'Happier than I deserve . ' come , he know himself there . ' call I the child of good fortune .'-- those be 's word , be they ?-- and a fine ending -- and there be the letter . the child of good fortune ! that be you name for he , be it ? " " you do not appear so well satisfied with he letter as I be ; but still you must , at least I hope you must , think the better of he for it . I hope it do he some service with you . " " yes , certainly it do . he have have great fault , fault of inconsideration and thoughtlessness ; and I be very much of he opinion in think he likely to be happier than he deserve : but still as he be , beyond a doubt , really attach to , and will soon , it may be hope , have the advantage of be constantly with she , I be very ready to believe he character will improve , and acquire from hers the steadiness and delicacy of principle that it want . and now , let I talk to you of something else . I have another person 's interest at present so much at heart , that I can not think any longer about . ever since I leave you this morning , , my mind have be hard at work on one subject . " the subject follow ; it be in plain , unaffected , gentlemanlike , such as use even to the woman he be in love with , how to be able to ask she to marry he , without attack the happiness of she father . 's answer be ready at the first word . " while she dear father live , any change of condition must be impossible for she . she could never quit he . " part only of this answer , however , be admit . the impossibility of she quit she father , feel as strongly as herself ; but the inadmissibility of any other change , he could not agree to . he have be think it over most deeply , most intently ; he have at first hope to induce to remove with she to ; he have want to believe it feasible , but he knowledge of would not suffer he to deceive himself long ; and now he confess he persuasion , that such a transplantation would be a risk of she father 's comfort , perhaps even of he life , which must not be hazard . Woodhouse take from !-- no , he feel that it ought not to be attempt . but the plan which have arisen on the sacrifice of this , he trust he dearest would not find in any respect objectionable ; it be , that he should be receive at ; that so long as she father 's happiness in other word he life -- require to continue she home , it should be he likewise . of they all remove to , have already have she own passing thought . like he , she have try the scheme and reject it ; but such a alternative as this have not occur to she . she be sensible of all the affection it evince . she feel that , in quit , he must be sacrifice a great deal of independence of hour and habit ; that in live constantly with she father , and in no house of he own , there would be much , very much , to be borne with . she promise to think of it , and advise he to think of it more ; but he be fully convinced , that no reflection could alter he wish or he opinion on the subject . he have give it , he could assure she , very long and calm consideration ; he
he have be walk away from the whole morning , to have he thought to himself . " ah ! there be one difficulty unprovide for , " cry . " I be sure will not like it . you must get he consent before you ask mine . " she promise , however , to think of it ; and pretty nearly promise , moreover , to think of it , with the intention of find it a very good scheme . it be remarkable , that , in the many , very many , point of view in which she be now begin to consider , be never strike with any sense of injury to she nephew , whose rights as heir-expectant had formerly be so tenaciously regard . think she must of the possible difference to the poor little boy ; and yet she only give herself a saucy conscious smile about it , and find amusement in detect the real cause of that violent dislike of 's marry , or any body else , which at the time she have wholly imputed to the amiable solicitude of the sister and the aunt . this proposal of he , this plan of marry and continue at -- the more she contemplate it , the more pleasing it become . he evil seem to lessen , she own advantage to increase , they mutual good to outweigh every drawback . such a companion for herself in the period of anxiety and cheerlessness before she !-- such a partner in all those duty and care to which time must be give increase of melancholy ! she would have be too happy but for poor Harriet ; but every blessing of she own seem to involve and advance the suffering of she friend , who must now be even exclude from . the delightful family party which be secure for herself , poor Harriet must , in mere charitable caution , be keep at a distance from . she would be a loser in every way . could not deplore she future absence as any deduction from she own enjoyment . in such a party , would be rather a dead weight than otherwise ; but for the poor girl herself , it seem a peculiarly cruel necessity that be to be place she in such a state of unmerited punishment . in time , of course , would be forget , that be , supplant ; but this could not be expect to happen very early . himself would be do nothing to assist the cure ;-- not like . , always so kind , so feel , so truly considerate for every body , would never deserve to be less worshipped than now ; and it really be too much to hope even of , that she could be in love with more than _three_ man in one year . it be a very great relief to to find as desirous as herself to avoid a meeting . they intercourse be painful enough by letter . how much worse , have they be oblige to meet ! express herself very much as might be suppose , without reproach , or apparent sense of ill - usage ; and yet fancie there be a something of resentment , a something border on it in she style , which increase the desirableness of they be separate .-- it might be only she own consciousness ; but it seem as if a angel only could have be quite without resentment under such a stroke . she have no difficulty in procure 's invitation ; and she be fortunate in have a sufficient reason for ask it , without resort to invention .-- there be a tooth amiss . really wish , and have wish some time , to consult a dentist . be delighted to be of use ; any thing of ill health be a recommendation to she -- and though not so fond of a dentist as of a , she be quite eager to have under she care .-- when it be thus settle on she sister 's side , propose it to she friend , and find she very persuadable .-- be to go ; she be invite for at least a fortnight ; she be to be convey in 's carriage .-- it be all arrange , it be all complete , and be safe in . now could , indeed , enjoy 's visit ; now she could talk , and she could listen with true happiness , unchecked by that sense of injustice , of guilt , of something most painful , which have haunt she when remember how disappoint a heart be near she , how much might at that moment , and at a little distance , be endure by the feeling which she have lead astray herself . the difference of at 's , or in , make perhaps a unreasonable difference in 's sensation ; but she could not think of she in without object of curiosity and employment , which must be avert the past , and carry she out of herself . she would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place in she mind which have occupi . there be a communication before she , one which _so only could be competent to make -- the confession of she engagement to she father ; but she would have nothing to do with it at present .-- she have resolve to defer the disclosure till be safe and well . no additional agitation should be throw at this period among those she love -- and the evil should not act on herself by anticipation before the appointed time .-- a fortnight , at least , of leisure and peace of mind , to cry every warmer , but more agitating , delight , should be hers
hers . she soon resolve , equally as a duty and a pleasure , to employ half a hour of this holiday of spirit in call on .-- she ought to go -- and she be long to see she ; the resemblance of they present situation increase every other motive of goodwill . it would be a _secret_ satisfaction ; but the consciousness of a similarity of prospect would certainly add to the interest with which she should attend to any thing might communicate . she go -- she have drive once unsuccessfully to the door , but have not be into the house since the morning after box , when poor have be in such distress as have fill she with compassion , though all the worst of she suffering have be unsuspected .-- the fear of be still unwelcome , determi she , though assure of they be at home , to wait in the passage , and send up she name .-- she hear announce it ; but no such bustle succeed as poor have before make so happily intelligible .-- no ; she hear nothing but the instant reply of , " beg she to walk up ; " -- and a moment afterwards she be meet on the stair by herself , come eagerly forward , as if no other reception of she be feel sufficient .-- have never see she look so well , so lovely , so engage . there be consciousness , animation , and warmth ; there be every thing which she countenance or manner could ever have want .-- she come forward with a offer hand ; and say , in a low , but very feel tone , " this be most kind , indeed !-- , it be impossible for I to express -- I hope you will believe -- excuse I for be so entirely without word . " be gratify , and would soon have shewn no want of word , if the sound of 's voice from the sitting - room have not check she , and make it expedient to compress all she friendly and all she congratulatory sensation into a very , very earnest shake of the hand . and be together . be out , which account for the previous tranquillity . could have wish . elsewhere ; but she be in a humour to have patience with every body ; and as Mrs . meet she with unusual graciousness , she hope the rencontre would do they no harm . she soon believe herself to penetrate 's thought , and understand why she be , like herself , in happy spirit ; it be be in 's confidence , and fancie herself acquaint with what be still a secret to other people . see symptom of it immediately in the expression of she face ; and while pay she own compliment to , and appear to attend to the good old lady 's reply , she see she with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which she have apparently be read aloud to , and return it into the purple and gold reticule by she side , say , with significant nod , " we can finish this some other time , you know . you and I shall not want opportunity . and , in fact , you have hear all the essential already . I only want to prove to you that admit we apology , and be not offend . you see how delightfully she write . oh ! she be a sweet creature ! you would have doate on she , have you go . -- but not a word more . let we be discreet -- quite on we good behaviour .--Hush !-- you remember those line -- I forget the poem at this moment : " for when a lady 's in the case , " you know all other thing give place . " now I say , my dear , in _our_ case , for _lady , read ---- mum ! a word to the wise .-- I be in a fine flow of spirit , a not I ? but I want to set you heart at ease as to .--_ my_ representation , you see , have quite appease she . " and again , on 's merely turn she head to look at . 's knitting , she add , in a half whisper , " I mention no _name , you will observe .-- oh ! no ; cautious as a minister of state . I manage it extremely well . " could not doubt . it be a palpable display , repeat on every possible occasion . when they have all talk a little while in harmony of the weather and , she find herself abruptly address with , " do not you think , , we saucy little friend here be charmingly recover not you think she cure do the highest credit ?--( here be a side - glance of great meaning at . ) upon my word , have restore she in a wonderful short time !-- oh ! if you have see she , as I do , when she be at the worst ! " -- and when be say something to , whisper farther , " we do not say a word of any _assistance_ that might have ; not a word of a certain young physician from .-- oh ! no ; shall have all the credit . " " I have scarce have the pleasure of see you , , " she shortly afterwards begin , " since the party to . very pleasant party . but yet I think there be something want . thing do not seem -- that be , there see a little cloud upon the spirit of some .-- so it
it appear to I at least , but I might be mistaken . however , I think it answer so far as to tempt one to go again . what say you both to we collect the same party , and explore to again , while the fine weather last ?-- it must be the same party , you know , quite the same party , not _one_ exception . " after this come in , and could not help be divert by the perplexity of she first answer to herself , result , she suppose , from doubt of what might be say , and impatience to say every thing . " thank you , dear miss Woodhouse , you be all kindness .-- it be impossible to say -- yes , indeed , I quite understand -- dearest 's prospect -- that be , I do not mean .-- but she be charmingly recover .-- how be ?-- I be so glad .-- quite out of my power .-- such a happy little circle as you find we here . -- yes , indeed .-- charme young man !-- that be -- so very friendly ; I mean good !--such attention to ! " -- and from she great , she more than commonly thankful delight towards . for be there , guess that there have be a little show of resentment towards , from the vicarage quarter , which be now graciously overcome .-- after a few whisper , indeed , which place it beyond a guess , , speak louder , say , " yes , here I be , my good friend ; and here I have be so long , that anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise ; but , the truth be , that I be wait for my lord and master . he promise to join I here , and pay he respects to you . " " what ! be we to have the pleasure of a call from ?-- that will be a favour indeed ! for I know gentlemen do not like morning visit , and 's time be so engaged . " " upon my word it be , .-- he really be engage from morning to night .-- there be no end of people 's come to he , on some pretence or other .-- the magistrate , and overseer , and churchwarden , be always want he opinion . they seem not able to do any thing without he .--' upon my word , ,' I often say , ' rather you than I .-- I do not know what would become of my crayon and my instrument , if I have half so many applicant .'-- bad enough as it be , for I absolutely neglect they both to a unpardonable degree .-- I believe I have not play a bar this fortnight .-- however , he be come , I assure you : yes , indeed , on purpose to wait on you all . " and put up she hand to scree she word from --" a congratulatory visit , you know .-- oh ! yes , quite indispensable . " look about she , so happily !-- " he promise to come to I as soon as he could disengage himself from ; but he and Knightley be shut up together in deep consultation .-- be 's right hand . " would not have smile for the world , and only say , " be go on foot to ? -- he will have a hot walk . " " oh ! no , it be a meeting at the , a regular meeting . and will be there too ; but one be apt to speak only of those who lead .-- I fancy and have every thing they own way . " " have not you mistaken the day ? " say . " I be almost certain that the meeting at the be not till to - morrow .-- be at yesterday , and speak of it as for . " " oh ! no , the meeting be certainly to - day , " be the abrupt answer , which denote the impossibility of any blunder on 's side .-- " I do believe , " she continue , " this be the most troublesome parish that ever be . we never hear of such thing at . " " you parish there be small , " say . " upon my word , my dear , I do not know , for I never hear the subject talk of . " " but it be prove by the smallness of the school , which I have hear you speak of , as under the patronage of you sister and . ; the only school , and not more than five - and - twenty child . " " ah ! you clever creature , that be very true . what a think brain you have ! I say , , what a perfect character you and I should make , if we could be shake together . my liveliness and you solidity would produce perfection .-- not that I presume to insinuate , however , that _some people may not think _you_ perfection already . --but hush !-- not a word , if you please . " it seem a unnecessary caution ; be want to give she word , not to , but to , as the latter plainly see . the wish of distinguishe she , as far as civility permit , be very evident , though it could not often proceed beyond a look . make he appearance . he lady greet he with some of she sparkling vivacity . " very pretty , sir , upon my word ; to send I on here , to be a encumbrance to my
my friend , so long before you vouchsafe to come !-- but you know what a dutiful creature you have to deal with . you know I should not stir till my lord and master appear .-- here have I be sit this hour , give these young lady a sample of true conjugal obedience -- for who can say , you know , how soon it may be want ? " be so hot and tired , that all this wit seem throw away . he civility to the other lady must be pay ; but he subsequent object be to lament over himself for the heat he be suffer , and the walk he have have for nothing . " when I get to , " say he , " Knightley could not be find . very odd ! very unaccountable ! after the note I send he this morning , and the message he return , that he should certainly be at home till one . " " Donwell ! " cry he wife .--" my dear , you have not be to ! -- you mean the Crown ; you come from the meeting at the Crown . " " no , no , that be to - morrow ; and I particularly want to see to - day on that very account .-- such a dreadful broiling morning !-- I go over the field too --( speak in a tone of great ill - usage , ) which make it so much the worse . and then not to find he at home ! I assure you I be not at all pleased . and no apology leave , no message for I . the housekeeper declare she know nothing of my be expect .-- very extraordinary ! -- and nobody know at all which way he be gone . perhaps to , perhaps to the , perhaps into he woods .-- , this be not like we friend ! -- can you explain it ? " amuse herself by protesting that it be very extraordinary , indeed , and that she have not a syllable to say for he . " I can not imagine , " say , ( feel the indignity as a wife ought to do , ) " I can not imagine how he could do such a thing by you , of all people in the world ! the very last person whom one should expect to be forgote !-- my dear , he must have leave a message for you , I be sure he must .-- not even could be so very eccentric ;-- and he servants forget it . Depend upon it , that be the case : and very likely to happen with the Donwell servants , who be all , I have often observe , extremely awkward and remiss .-- I be sure I would not have such a creature as he stand at we sideboard for any consideration . and as for , hold she very cheap indeed .-- she promise a receipt , and never send it . " " I meet , " continue , " as I get near the house , and he tell I I should not find he master at home , but I do not believe he .-- see rather out of humwe . he do not know what be come to he master lately , he say , but he could hardly ever get the speech of he . I have nothing to do with 's wants , but it really be of very great importance that _i_ should see to - day ; and it become a matter , therefore , of very serious inconvenience that I should have have this hot walk to no purpose . " feel that she could not do better than go home directly . in all probability she be at this very time wait for there ; and might be preserve from sink deeper in aggression towards , if not towards . she be pleased , on take leave , to find determined to attend she out of the room , to go with she even downstairs ; it give she a opportunity which she immediately make use of , to say , " it be as well , perhaps , that I have not have the possibility . have you not be surround by other friend , I might have be temp to introduce a subject , to ask question , to speak more openly than might have be strictly correct .-- I feel that I should certainly have be impertinent . " " oh ! " cry , with a blush and a hesitation which think infinitely more become to she than all the elegance of all she usual composure -- " there would have be no danger . the danger would have be of my weary you . you could not have gratify I more than by express a interest -- . indeed , , ( speak more collectedly , ) with the consciousness which I have of misconduct , very great misconduct , it be particularly consol to I to know that those of my friend , whose good opinion be most worth preserving , be not disgust to such a degree as to -- I have not time for half that I could wish to say . I long to make apology , excuse , to urge something for myself . I feel it so very due . but , unfortunately -- in short , if you compassion do not stand my friend -- " " oh ! you be too scrupulous , indeed you be , " cry warmly , and take she hand . " you owe I no apology ; and every body to whom you might be suppose to owe they , be so perfectly satisfied , so delighted even
even -- " " you be very kind , but I know what my manners be to you .-- so cold and artificial !-- I have always a part to act .-- it be a life of deceit !-- I know that I must have disgust you . " " pray say no more . I feel that all the apology should be on my side . let we forgive each other at once . we must do whatever be to be do quickest , and I think we feeling will lose no time there . I hope you have pleasant account from ? " " very . " " and the next news , I suppose , will be , that we be to lose you -- just as I begin to know you . " " oh ! as to all that , of course nothing can be think of yet . I be here till claim by and . " " nothing can be actually settle yet , perhaps , " reply , smile -- " but , excuse I , it must be think of . " the smile be return as answer , " you be very right ; it have be think of . and I will own to you , ( I be sure it will be safe ) , that so far as we live with at , it be settled . there must be three month , at least , of deep mourning ; but when they be over , I imagine there will be nothing more to wait for . " " thank you , thank you .-- this be just what I want to be assure of .-- oh ! if you know how much I love every thing that be decide and open !-- good - bye , good - bye . " 's friend be all make happy by she safety ; and if the satisfaction of she well - do could be increase to , it be by know she to be the mother of a little girl . she have be decide in wishing for a . she would not acknowledge that it be with any view of make a match for she , hereafter , with either of 's son ; but she be convinced that a daughter would suit both father and mother best . it would be a great comfort to , as he grow older -- and even might be grow older ten year hence -- to have he fireside enliven by the sport and the nonsense , the freak and the fancie of a child never banish from home ; and -- no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to she ; and it would be quite a pity that any one who so well know how to teach , should not have they power in exercise again . " she have have the advantage , you know , of practise on I , " she continue -- " like on , in 's and , and we shall now see she own little educate on a more perfect plan . " " that be , " reply , " she will indulge she even more than she do you , and believe that she do not indulge she at all . it will be the only difference . " " poor child ! " cry ; " at that rate , what will become of she ? " " nothing very bad .-- the fate of thousand . she will be disagreeable in infancy , and correct herself as she grow older . I be lose all my bitterness against spoilt child , my dearest . I , who be owe all my happiness to you _, would not it be horrible ingratitude in I to be severe on they ? " laugh , and reply : " but I have the assistance of all you endeavour to counteract the indulgence of other people . I doubt whether my own sense would have correcte I without it . " " do you ?-- I have no doubt . give you understand :-- give you principle . you must have do well . my interference be quite as likely to do harm as good . it be very natural for you to say , what right have he to lecture I ?-- and I be afraid very natural for you to feel that it be do in a disagreeable manner . I do not believe I do you any good . the good be all to myself , by make you a object of the tenderest affection to I . I could not think about you so much without doat on you , fault and all ; and by dint of fancying so many error , have be in love with you ever since you be thirteen at least . " " I be sure you be of use to I , " cry . " I be very often influence rightly by you -- oftener than I would own at the time . I be very sure you do I good . and if poor little be to be spoil , it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much for she as you have do for I , except fall in love with she when she be thirteen . " " how often , when you be a girl , have you say to I , with one of you saucy look . Knightley , I be go to do so - and - so ; papa say I may , or I have 's leave ' -- something which , you know , I do not approve . in such case my interference be give you two bad feeling instead of one . " " what a amiable creature I be !--
!-- No wonder you should hold my speech in such affectionate remembrance . " " ' .'-- you always call I , ' ; ' and , from habit , it have not so very formal a sound .-- and yet it be formal . I want you to call I something else , but I do not know what . " " I remember once call you ' , ' in one of my amiable fit , about ten year ago . I do it because I think it would offend you ; but , as you make no objection , I never do it again . " " and can not you call I ' ' now ? " " impossible !-- I never can call you any thing but ' . . ' I will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of , by call you .-- but I will promise , " she add presently , laugh and blush -- " I will promise to call you once by you Christian name . I do not say when , but perhaps you may guess where ; -- in the building in which take for better , for worse . " grieve that she could not be more openly just to one important service which he better sense would have render she , to the advice which would have save she from the worst of all she womanly folly -- she wilful intimacy with ; but it be too tender a subject .-- she could not enter on it .-- be very seldom mention between they . this , on he side , might merely proceed from she not be think of ; but be rather inclin to attribute it to delicacy , and a suspicion , from some appearance , that they friendship be decline . she be aware herself , that , part under any other circumstance , they certainly should have correspond more , and that she intelligence would not have rest , as it now almost wholly do , on 's letter . he might observe that it be so . the pain of be oblige to practise concealment towards he , be very little inferior to the pain of have unhappy . send quite as good a account of she visitor as could be expect ; on she first arrival she have think she out of spirit , which appear perfectly natural , as there be a dentist to be consult ; but , since that business have be over , she do not appear to find different from what she have know she before .-- , to be sure , be no very quick observer ; yet if have not be equal to play with the child , it would not have escape she . 's comforts and hope be most agreeably carry on , by 's be to stay longer ; she fortnight be likely to be a month at least . and be to come down in , and she be invite to remain till they could bring she back . " do not even mention you friend , " say . " here be he answer , if you like to see it . " it be the answer to the communication of he intend marriage . accept it with a very eager hand , with a impatience all alive to know what he would say about it , and not at all check by hearing that she friend be unmentioned . " enter like a brother into my happiness , " continue , " but he be no complimenter ; and though I well know he to have , likewise , a most brotherly affection for you , he be so far from make flourish , that any other young woman might think he rather cool in she praise . but I be not afraid of you see what he write . " " he write like a sensible man , " reply , when she have read the letter . " I honour he sincerity . it be very plain that he consider the good fortune of the engagement as all on my side , but that he be not without hope of my grow , in time , as worthy of you affection , as you think I already . have he say any thing to bear a different construction , I should not have believe he . " " my , he mean no such thing . he only mean -- " " he and I should differ very little in we estimation of the two , " interrupt she , with a sort of serious smile -- " much less , perhaps , than he be aware of , if we could enter without ceremony or reserve on the subject . " " , my dear -- " " oh ! " she cry with more thorough gaiety , " if you fancy you brother do not do I justice , only wait till my dear father be in the secret , and hear he opinion . Depend upon it , he will be much farther from do _you_ justice . he will think all the happiness , all the advantage , on you side of the question ; all the merit on mine . I wish I may not sink into ' poor Emma ' with he at once .-- he tender compassion towards oppressed worth can go no farther . " " ah ! " he cry , " I wish you father might be half as easily convince as will be , of we have every right that equal worth can give , to be happy together . I be amuse by one part of 's letter -- do you notice it ?--where he say , that my information do not take he wholly by surprize , that he
he be rather in expectation of hear something of the kind . " " if I understand you brother , he only mean so far as you have some thought of marrying . he have no idea of I . he seem perfectly unprepared for that . " " yes , yes -- but I be amuse that he should have see so far into my feeling . what have he be judge by be not conscious of any difference in my spirit or conversation that could prepare he at this time for my marrying any more than at another .-- but it be so , I suppose . I dare say there be a difference when I be stay with they the other day . I believe I do not play with the child quite so much as usual . I remember one even the poor boy say , ' uncle seem always tired now . ' " the time be come when the news must spread farther , and other person ' reception of it try . as soon as be sufficientely recover to admit 's visit , have it in view that she gentle reasoning should be employ in the cause , resolve first to announce it at home , and then at Randalls .-- but how to break it to she father at last !-- she have bound herself to do it , in such a hour of 's absence , or when it come to the point she heart would have fail she , and she must have put it off ; but be to come at such a time , and follow up the beginning she be to make .-- she be force to speak , and to speak cheerfully too . she must not make it a more decided subject of misery to he , by a melancholy tone herself . she must not appear to think it a misfortune .-- with all the spirit she could command , she prepare he first for something strange , and then , in a few word , say , that if he consent and approbation could be obtain -- which , she trust , would be attend with no difficulty , since it be a plan to promote the happiness of all -- she and mean to marry ; by which mean would receive the constant addition of that person 's company whom she know he love , next to he daughter and , best in the world . poor man !-- it be at first a considerable shock to he , and he try earnestly to dissuade she from it . she be remind , more than once , of have always say she would never marry , and assure that it would be a great deal better for she to remain single ; and tell of poor , and poor . -- but it would not do . hang about he affectionately , and smile , and say it must be so ; and that he must not class she with and , whose marriage take they from , have , indeed , make a melancholy change : but she be not go from ; she should be always there ; she be introduce no change in they number or they comfort but for the better ; and she be very sure that he would be a great deal the happier for have always at hand , when he be once get use to the idea . -- do he not love very much ?-- he would not deny that he do , she be sure .-- whom do he ever want to consult on business but ?-- who be so useful to he , who so ready to write he letter , who so glad to assist he ?-- who so cheerful , so attentive , so attach to he ?-- would not he like to have he always on the spot ?--Ye . that be all very true . could not be there too often ; he should be glad to see he every day ; -- but they do see he every day as it be .-- why could not they go on as they have do ? could not be soon reconcile ; but the worst be overcome , the idea be give ; time and continual repetition must do the rest .-- to 's entreaty and assurance succeed 's , whose fond praise of she give the subject even a kind of welcome ; and he be soon use to be talk to by each , on every fair occasion .-- they have all the assistance which could give , by letter of the strongest approbation ; and be ready , on the first meeting , to consider the subject in the most serviceable light -- first , as a settle , and , secondly , as a good one -- well aware of the nearly equal importance of the two recommendation to 's mind .--It be agree upon , as what be to be ; and every body by whom he be use to be guide assure he that it would be for he happiness ; and have some feeling himself which almost admit it , he begin to think that some time or other -- in another year or two , perhaps -- it might not be so very bad if the marriage do take place . be act no part , feign no feeling in all that she say to he in favour of the event .-- she have be extremely surprized , never more so , than when first open the affair to she ; but she see in it only increase of happiness to all , and have no scruple in urge he to the utmost .-- she have such a regard for , as to think he deserv even she dearest ; and
and it be in every respect so proper , suitable , and unexceptionable a connexion , and in one respect , one point of the highest importance , so peculiarly eligible , so singularly fortunate , that now it seem as if could not safely have attach herself to any other creature , and that she have herself be the stupidest of being in not have think of it , and wish it long ago .-- how very few of those man in a rank of life to address would have renounce they own home for ! and who but could know and bear with , so as to make such a arrangement desirable !-- the difficulty of disposing of poor have be always feel in she husband 's plan and she own , for a marriage between and . how to settle the claim of and have be a continual impediment -- less acknowledge by than by herself -- but even he have never be able to finish the subject better than by say -- " Those matter will take care of themselves ; the young people will find a way . " but here there be nothing to be shift off in a wild speculation on the future . it be all right , all open , all equal . no sacrifice on any side worth the name . it be a union of the highest promise of felicity in itself , and without one real , rational difficulty to oppose or delay it . , with she baby on she knee , indulge in such reflection as these , be one of the happiest woman in the world . if any thing could increase she delight , it be perceive that the baby would soon have outgrown it be first set of cap . the news be universally a surprize wherever it spread ; and have he five minute share of it ; but five minute be enough to familiarise the idea to he quickness of mind .-- he see the advantages of the match , and rejoice in they with all the constancy of he wife ; but the wonder of it be very soon nothing ; and by the end of a hour he be not far from believe that he have always foreseen it . " it be to be a secret , I conclude , " say he . " these matter be always a secret , till it be find out that every body know they . only let I be tell when I may speak out .-- I wonder whether have any suspicion . " he go to Highbury the next morning , and satisfy himself on that point . he tell she the news . be not she like a daughter , he eldest daughter ?-- he must tell she ; and be present , it pass , of course , to , , and , immediately afterwards . it be no more than the principal be prepare for ; they have calculate from the time of its be know at , how soon it would be over ; and be think of themselves , as the evening wonder in many a family circle , with great sagacity . in general , it be a very well approve match . some might think he , and other might think she , the most in luck . one set might recommend they all remove to , and leave for the ; and another might predict disagreement among they servants ; but yet , upon the whole , there be no serious objection raise , except in one habitation , the Vicarage .-- there , the surprize be not soften by any satisfaction . care little about it , compare with he wife ; he only hope " the young lady 's pride would now be contente ; " and suppose " she have always meant to catch if she could ; " and , on the point of live at , could daringly exclaim , " rather he than I !" -- but be very much discompose indeed .-- " poor ! poor fellow !--sad business for he .-- she be extremely concerned ; for , though very eccentric , he have a thousand good quality .-- how could he be so take in ? -- do not think he at all in love -- not in the least .-- poor !-- there would be a end of all pleasant intercourse with he .-- how happy he have be to come and dine with they whenever they ask he ! but that would be all over now .-- poor fellow !-- no more explore party to make for _her_. oh ! no ; there would be a Mr . to throw cold water on every thing .-- extremely disagreeable ! but she be not at all sorry that she have abuse the housekeeper the other day .-- shock plan , live together . it would never do . she know a family near who have try it , and be oblige to separate before the end of the first quarter . pass on . a few more to - morrow , and the party from would be arrive . it be a alarming change ; and be think of it one morning , as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve she , when come in , and distressing thought be put by . after the first chat of pleasure he be silent ; and then , in a graver tone , begin with , " I have something to tell you , Emma ; some news . " " good or bad ? " say she , quickly , look up in he face . " I do not know which it ought to be call . " " oh ! good I be sure .-- I see
see it in you countenance . you be try not to smile . " " I be afraid , " say he , compose he feature , " I be very much afraid , my dear , that you will not smile when you hear it . " " indeed ! but why so ?--i can hardly imagine that any thing which please or amuse you , should not please and amuse I too . " " there be one subject , " he reply , " I hope but one , on which we do not think alike . " he pause a moment , again smile , with he eye fix on she face . " do nothing occur to you ?-- do not you recollect ?-- . " she cheek flush at the name , and she feel afraid of something , though she know not what . " have you hear from she yourself this morning ? " cry he . " you have , I believe , and know the whole . " " no , I have not ; I know nothing ; pray tell I . " " you be prepare for the worst , I see -- and very bad it be . marry . " give a start , which do not seem like be prepare -- and she eye , in eager gaze , say , " no , this be impossible ! " but she lip be close . " it be so , indeed , " continue ; " I have it from himself . he leave I not half a hour ago . " she be still look at he with the most speak amazement . " you like it , my , as little as I fear .-- I wish we opinion be the same . but in time they will . time , you may be sure , will make one or the other of we think differently ; and , in the meanwhile , we need not talk much on the subject . " " you mistake I , you quite mistake I , " she reply , exert herself . " it be not that such a circumstance would now make I unhappy , but I can not believe it . it seem a impossibility !-- you can not mean to say , that have accept . you can not mean that he have even propose to she again -- yet . you only mean , that he intend it . " " I mean that he have do it , " answer , with smile but determine decision , " and be accept . " " ! " she cry .-- " well ! " -- then have recourse to she workbasket , in excuse for lean down she face , and conceal all the exquisite feeling of delight and entertainment which she know she must be expressing , she add , " well , now tell I every thing ; make this intelligible to I . how , where , when ?-- let I know it all . I never be more surprized -- but it do not make I unhappy , I assure you .-- how -- how have it be possible ? " " it be a very simple story . he go to town on business three day ago , and I get he to take charge of some papers which I be want to send to .-- he deliver these papers to , at he chamber , and be ask by he to join they party the same evening to 's . they be go to take the two eldest boy to 's . the party be to be we brother and sister , , -- and . my friend could not resist . they call for he in they way ; be all extremely amused ; and my brother ask he to dine with they the next day -- which he do -- and in the course of that visit ( as I understand ) he find a opportunity of speak to ; and certainly do not speak in vain .-- she make he , by she acceptance , as happy even as he be deserive . he come down by yesterday 's coach , and be with I this morning immediately after breakfast , to report he proceedings , first on my affair , and then on he own . this be all that I can relate of the how , where , and when . you friend will make a much longer history when you see she .-- she will give you all the minute particular , which only woman 's language can make interesting .-- in we communication we deal only in the great .-- however , I must say , that 's heart seem for _him , and to _me_ , very overflowing ; and that he do mention , without its be much to the purpose , that on quit they box at 's , my brother take charge of and little , and he follow with and ; and that at one time they be in such a crowd , as to make rather uneasy . " he stop da not attempt any immediate reply . to speak , she be sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness . she must wait a moment , or he would think she mad . she silence disturb he ; and after observe she a little while , he add , " , my love , you say that this circumstance would not now make you unhappy ; but I be afraid it give you more pain than you expect . he situation be a evil -- but you must consider it as what satisfy you friend ; and I will answer for you thinking better and better of he
he as you know he more . he good sense and good principles would delight you .-- as far as the man be concerned , you could not wish you friend in better hand . he rank in society I would alter if I could , which be say a great deal I assure you , .-- you laugh at I about ; but I could quite as ill spare . " he want she to look up and smile ; and have now bring herself not to smile too broadly -- she do -- cheerfully answer , " you need not be at any pain to reconcile I to the match . I think be do extremely well . _her_ connexion may be worse than _he . in respectability of character , there can be no doubt that they be . I have be silent from surprize merely , excessive surprize . you can not imagine how suddenly it have come on I ! how peculiarly unprepared I be !-- for I have reason to believe she very lately more determined against he , much more , than she be before . " " you ought to know you friend best , " reply ; " but I should say she be a good - tempered , soft - hear girl , not likely to be very , very determined against any young man who tell she he love she . " could not help laugh as she answer , " upon my word , I believe you know she quite as well as I do .-- but , , be you perfectly sure that she have absolutely and downright _accept he . I could suppose she might in time -- but can she already ?-- do not you misunderstand he ?-- you be both talking of other thing ; of business , show of cattle , or new drill -- and might not you , in the confusion of so many subject , mistake he ?--It be not Harriet 's hand that he be certain of -- it be the dimension of some famious ox . " the contrast between the countenance and air of and be , at this moment , so strong to 's feeling , and so strong be the recollection of all that have so recently pass on 's side , so fresh the sound of those word , speak with such emphasis , " no , I hope I know better than to think of , " that she be really expect the intelligence to prove , in some measure , premature . it could not be otherwise . " do you dare say this ? " cry . " do you dare to suppose I so great a blockhead , as not to know what a man be talk of ?-- what do you deserve ? " " oh ! I always deserve the best treatment , because I never put up with any other ; and , therefore , you must give I a plain , direct answer . be you quite sure that you understand the term on which and now be ? " " I be quite sure , " he reply , speak very distinctly , " that he tell I she have accept he ; and that there be no obscurity , nothing doubtful , in the word he use ; and I think I can give you a proof that it must be so . he ask my opinion as to what he be now to do . he know of no one but Mrs . to whom he could apply for information of she relation or friend . could I mention any thing more fit to be do , than to go to ? I assure he that I could not . then , he say , he would endeaavor to see she in the course of this day . " " I be perfectly satisfied , " reply , with the brightest smile , " and most sincerely wish they happy . " " you be materially change since we talk on this subject before . " " I hope so -- for at that time I be a fool . " " and I be change also ; for I be now very willing to grant you all 's good quality . I have take some pain for you sake , and for 's sake , ( whom I have always have reason to believe as much in love with she as ever , ) to get acquainted with she . I have often talk to she a good deal . you must have see that I do . sometimes , indeed , I have think you be half suspect I of pleading poor 's cause , which be never the case ; but , from all my observation , I be convinced of she be a artless , amiable girl , with very good notion , very seriously good principle , and place she happiness in the affections and utility of domestic life .-- much of this , I have no doubt , she may thank you for . " " I ! " cry , shak she head .-- " ah ! poor Harriet ! " she check herself , however , and submit quietly to a little more praise than she deserv . they conversation be soon afterwards close by the entrance of she father . she be not sorry . she want to be alone . she mind be in a state of flutter and wonder , which make it impossible for she to be collect . she be in dancing , singe , exclaim spirit ; and till she have move about , and talk to herself , and laugh and reflecte , she could be fit for nothing rational . she father 's business be to announce 's
's be go out to put the horse to , preparatory to they now daily drive to Randalls ; and she have , therefore , a immediate excuse for disappearing . the joy , the gratitude , the exquisite delight of she sensation may be imagine . the sole grievance and alloy thus remove in the prospect of 's welfare , she be really in danger of become too happy for security .-- what have she to wish for ? nothing , but to grow more worthy of he , whose intention and judgment have be ever so superior to she own . nothing , but that the lesson of she past folly might teach she humility and circumspection in future . serious she be , very serious in she thankfulness , and in she resolution ; and yet there be no prevent a laugh , sometimes in the very midst of they . she must laugh at such a close ! such a end of the doleful disappointment of five week back ! such a heart -- such a Harriet ! now there would be pleasure in she return -- every thing would be a pleasure . it would be a great pleasure to know . high in the rank of she most serious and heartfelt felicity , be the reflection that all necessity of concealment from would soon be over . the disguise , equivocation , mystery , so hateful to she to practise , might soon be over . she could now look forward to give he that full and perfect confidence which she disposition be most ready to welcome as a duty . in the gayest and happiest spirit she set forward with she father ; not always listen , but always agree to what he say ; and , whether in speech or silence , connive at the comfortable persuasion of he be oblige to go to Randalls every day , or poor would be disappoint . they arrive .-- be alone in the drawing - room :-- but hardly have they be tell of the baby , and receive the thanks for come , which he ask for , when a glimpse be catch through the blind , of two figure pass near the window . " it be and , " say . " I be just go to tell you of we agreeable surprize in see he arrive this morning . he stay till to - morrow , and have be persuade to spend the day with we .-- they be come in , I hope . " in half a minute they be in the room . be extremely glad to see he -- but there be a degree of confusion -- a number of embarrassing recollection on each side . they meet readily and smile , but with a consciousness which at first allow little to be say ; and have all sit down again , there be for some time such a blank in the circle , that begin to doubt whether the wish now indulge , which she have long felt , of see once more , and of see he with , would yield its proportion of pleasure . when join the party , however , and when the baby be fetch , there be no longer a want of subject or animation -- or of courage and opportunity for to draw near she and say , " I have to thank you , , for a very kind forgive message in one of 's letter . I hope time have not make you less willing to pardon . I hope you do not retract what you then say . " " no , indeed , " cry , most happy to begin , " not in the least . I be particularly glad to see and shake hand with you -- and to give you joy in person . " he thank she with all he heart , and continue some time to speak with serious feeling of he gratitude and happiness . " be not she look well ? " say he , turn he eye towards . " better than she ever use to do ?-- you see how my father and doat upon she . " but he spirit be soon rise again , and with laughing eye , after mention the expect return of the Campbell , he name the name of .-- blush , and forbade its be pronounce in she hearing . " I can never think of it , " she cry , " without extreme shame . " " the shame , " he answer , " be all mine , or ought to be . but be it possible that you have no suspicion ?-- I mean of late . early , I know , you have none . " " I never have the smallest , I assure you . " " that appear quite wonderful . I be once very near -- and I wish I have -- it would have be better . but though I be always do wrong thing , they be very bad wrong thing , and such as do I no service .-- it would have be a much better transgression have I break the bond of secrecy and tell you every thing . " " it be not now worth a regret , " say . " I have some hope , " resume he , " of my uncle 's be persuade to pay a visit at Randalls ; he want to be introduce to she . when the Campbell be return , we shall meet they in , and continue there , I trust , till we may carry she northward . -- but now , I be at such a distance from she -- be not it hard , ?-- till this morning , we have not
not once meet since the day of reconciliation . do not you pity I ? " speak she pity so very kindly , that with a sudden accession of gay thought , he cry , " ah ! by the bye , " then sink he voice , and look demure for the moment --" I hope be well ? " he pause .-- she colour and laugh .--" I know you see my letter , and think you may remember my wish in you favour . let I return you congratulation .-- I assure you that I have hear the news with the warmest interest and satisfaction .-- he be a man whom I can not presume to praise . " be delighted , and only want he to go on in the same style ; but he mind be the next moment in he own concern and with he own , and he next word be , " do you ever see such a skin ?--such smoothness ! such delicacy !-- and yet without be actually fair .-- one can not call she fair . it be a most uncommon complexion , with she dark eye - lash and hair -- a most distinguishing complexion ! so peculiarly the lady in it .-- just colour enough for beauty . " " I have always admire she complexion , " reply , archly ; " but do not I remember the time when you find fault with she for be so pale ?-- when we first begin to talk of she .-- have you quite forgote ? " " oh ! no -- what a impudent dog I be !-- how could I dare -- " but he laugh so heartily at the recollection , that could not help say , " I do suspect that in the midst of you perplexity at that time , you have very great amusement in trick we all .-- I be sure you have .-- I be sure it be a consolation to you . " " oh ! no , no , no --how can you suspect I of such a thing ? I be the most miserable wretch ! " " not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth . I be sure it be a source of high entertainment to you , to feel that you be take we all in .-- perhaps I be the readier to suspect , because , to tell you the truth , I think it might have be some amusement to myself in the same situation . I think there be a little likeness between we . " he bow . " if not in we disposition , " she presently add , with a look of true sensibility , " there be a likeness in we destiny ; the destiny which bid fair to connect we with two character so much superior to we own . " " true , true , " he answer , warmly . " no , not true on you side . you can have no superior , but most true on mine .-- she be a complete angel . look at she . be not she a angel in every gesture ? observe the turn of she throat . observe she eye , as she be look up at my father .-- you will be glad to hear ( inclin he head , and whisper seriously ) that my uncle mean to give she all my aunt 's jewel . they be to be new set . I be resolve to have some in a ornament for the head . will not it be beautiful in she dark hair ? " " very beautiful , indeed , " reply ; and she speak so kindly , that he gratefully burst out , " how delighted I be to see you again ! and to see you in such excellent look !-- I would not have miss this meeting for the world . I should certainly have call at , have you fail to come . " the other have be talk of the child , give a account of a little alarm she have be under , the evening before , from the infant 's appear not quite well . she believe she have be foolish , but it have alarme she , and she have be within half a minute of send for . perhaps she ought to be asham , but have be almost as uneasy as herself .-- in ten minute , however , the child have be perfectly well again . this be she history ; and particularly interest it be to , who commend she very much for think of send for , and only regret that she have not do it . " she should always send for , if the child appear in the slightest degree disorder , be it only for a moment . she could not be too soon alarm , nor send for too often . it be a pity , perhaps , that he have not come last night ; for , though the child seem well now , very well consider , it would probably have be better if have see it . " catch the name . " ! " say he to , and try , as he speak , to catch 's eye . " my friend ! what be they say about he be here this morning ?-- and how do he travel now ?--Has he set up he carriage ? " soon recollect , and understand he ; and while she join in the laugh , it be evident from 's countenance that she too be really hear he , though try to seem deaf . " such a extraordinary dream of mine ! " he cry . " I can never think of it without laugh .--
.-- she hear we , she hear we , . I see it in she cheek , she smile , she vain attempt to fry . look at she . do not you see that , at this instant , the very passage of she own letter , which send I the report , be pass under she eye -- that the whole blunder be spread before she -- that she can attend to nothing else , though pretend to listen to the other ? " be force to smile completely , for a moment ; and the smile partly remain as she turn towards he , and say in a conscious , low , yet steady voice , " how you can bear such recollection , be astonish to I !-- they _will sometimes obtrude -- but how you can court they ! " he have a great deal to say in return , and very entertainingly ; but 's feeling be chiefly with , in the argument ; and on leave Randalls , and fall naturally into a comparison of the two man , she feel , that please as she have be to see , and really regard he as she do with friendship , she have never be more sensible of 's high superiority of character . the happiness of this most happy day , receive its completion , in the animated contemplation of he worth which this comparison produce . if have still , at interval , a anxious feeling for , a momentary doubt of its be possible for she to be really cured of she attachment to , and really able to accept another man from unbiased inclination , it be not long that she have to suffer from the recurrence of any such uncertainty . a very few day bring the party from , and she have no sooner a opportunity of be one hour alone with , than she become perfectly satisfied -- unaccountable as it be !-- that have thoroughly supplant , and be now form all she view of happiness . be a little distressed -- do look a little foolish at first : but have once own that she have be presumptuous and silly , and self - deceive , before , she pain and confusion seem to die away with the word , and leave she without a care for the past , and with the fullest exultation in the present and future ; for , as to she friend 's approbation , have instantly remove every fear of that nature , by meet she with the most unqualified congratulation .-- be most happy to give every particular of the evening at 's , and the dinner the next day ; she could dwell on it all with the utmost delight . but what do such particular explain ?-- the fact be , as could now acknowledge , that have always like ; and that he continue to love she have be irresistible .-- Beyond this , it must ever be unintelligible to . the event , however , be most joyful ; and every day be give she fresh reason for think so .-- 's parentage become known . she prove to be the daughter of a tradesman , rich enough to afford she the comfortable maintenance which have ever be hers , and decent enough to have always wished for concealment .-- such be the blood of gentility which have formerly be so ready to vouch for !-- it be likely to be as untainted , perhaps , as the blood of many a gentleman : but what a connexion have she be prepare for -- or for the Churchill -- or even for !-- the stain of illegitimacy , unbleach by nobility or wealth , would have be a stain indeed . no objection be raise on the father 's side ; the young man be treat liberally ; it be all as it should be : and as become acquainted with , who be now introduce at , she fully acknowledge in he all the appearance of sense and worth which could bid fairest for she little friend . she have no doubt of 's happiness with any good - tempered man ; but with he , and in the home he offer , there would be the hope of more , of security , stability , and improvement . she would be place in the midst of those who love she , and who have better sense than herself ; retire enough for safety , and occupy enough for cheerfulness . she would be never lead into temptation , nor leave for it to find she out . she would be respectable and happy ; and admit she to be the luckiest creature in the world , to have create so steady and persever a affection in such a man ; -- or , if not quite the luckiest , to yield only to herself . , necessarily draw away by she engagement with the , be less and less at ; which be not to be regret .-- the intimacy between she and must sink ; they friendship must change into a calmer sort of goodwill ; and , fortunately , what ought to be , and must be , see already begin , and in the most gradual , natural manner . before the end of , attend to church , and see she hand bestow on with so complete a satisfaction , as no remembrance , even connect with as he stand before they , could impay .-- perhaps , indeed , at that time she scarcely see , but as the clergyman whose bless at the altar might next fall on herself .-- and , the latest couple engage of the three , be the first to be marry . have already quit , and be restore to the
