Eyre by a preface to the first edition of " " be unnecessary , I give none : this second edition demand a few word both of acknowledgment and miscellaneous remark . my thanks be due in three quarter . to the Public , for the indulgent ear it have inclin to a plain tale with few pretension . to the press , for the fair field it be honest suffrage have open to a obscure aspirant . to my Publisher , for the aid they tact , they energy , they practical sense and frank liberality have afford a unknown and unrecommended Author . the press and the Public be but vague personification for I , and I must thank they in vague term ; but my Publisher be definite : so be certain generous critic who have encourage I as only large - hear and high - minded man know how to encourage a struggle stranger ; to they , i.e. , to my Publisher and the select reviewer , I say cordially , gentlemen , I thank you from my heart . have thus acknowledge what I owe those who have aide and approve I , I turn to another class ; a small one , so far as I know , but not , therefore , to be overlook . I mean the timorous or carp few who doubt the tendency of such book as " : " in whose eye whatever be unusual be wrong ; whose ear detect in each protest against bigotry -- that parent of crime -- a insult to piety , that regent of on earth . I would suggest to such doubter certain obvious distinction ; I would remind they of certain simple truths . Conventionality be not morality . self -righteousness be not religion . to attack the first be not to assail the last . to pluck the mask from the face of the Pharisee , be not to lift a impious hand to the of . these thing and deed be diametrically oppose : they be as distinct as be vice from virtue . too often confound they : they should not be confound : appearance should not be mistaken for truth ; narrow human doctrine , that only tend to elate and magnify a few , should not be substitute for the world - redeem creed of . there be -- I repeat it -- a difference ; and it be a good , and not a bad action to mark broadly and clearly the line of separation between they . the world may not like to see these idea dissever , for it have be accustom to blend they ; finde it convenient to make external show pass for sterl worth -- to let white - wash wall vouch for clean shrine . it may hate he who dare to scrutinise and expose -- to rase the gilding , and show base metal under it -- to penetrate the sepulchre , and reveal charnel relic : but hate as it will , it be indebt to he . Ahab do not like , because he never prophesy good concern he , but evil ; probably he like the sycophant son of better ; yet might have escape a bloody death , have he but stop he ear to flattery , and open they to faithful counsel . there be a man in we own day whose word be not fram to tickle delicate ear : who , to my thinking , come before the great one of society , much as the son of come before the thron king of and ; and who speak truth as deep , with a power as prophet - like and as vital -- a mien as dauntless and as daring . be the satirist of " " admire in high place ? I can not tell ; but I think if some of those amongst whom he hurl the fire of he sarcasm , and over whom he flash the levin - brand of he denunciation , be to take he warning in time -- they or they seed might yet escape a fatal - . why have I allude to this man ? I have allude to he , reader , because I think I see in he a intellect profounder and more unique than he contemporary have yet recognise ; because I regard he as the first social regenerator of the day -- as the very master of that work corps who would restore to rectitude the warped system of thing ; because I think no commentator on he writings have yet find the comparison that suit he , the term which rightly characterise he talent . they say he be like Field : they talk of he wit , humour , comic power . he resemble Field as a eagle do a vulture : Fielding could stoop on carrion , but never do . he wit be bright , he humour attractive , but both bear the same relation to he serious genius that the mere lambent sheet - lightning play under the edge of the summer - cloud do to the electric death - spark hid in its womb . finally , I have allude to , because to he -- if he will accept the tribute of a total stranger -- I have dedicate this second edition of " . " 21st , 1847 . note to the third Edition I avail myself of the opportunity which a third edition of " " afford I , of again address a word to the Public , to explain that my claim to the title of novelist rest on this one work alone . if , therefore , the authorship of other work of fiction have be attribute to I , a honour be award where it be not merit ; and consequently , deny where
where it be justly due . this explanation will serve to rectify mistake which may already have be make , and to prevent future error . . 13th , 1848 . chapter I there be no possibility of take a walk that day . we have be wander , indeed , in the leafless shrubbery a hour in the morning ; but since dinner ( . re , when there be no company , dine early ) the cold winter wind have bring with it cloud so sombre , and a rain so penetrating , that further out - door exercise be now out of the question . I be glad of it : I never like long walk , especially on chilly afternoons : dreadful to I be the come home in the raw twilight , with nipped finger and toe , and a heart sadden by the chiding of , the nurse , and humble by the consciousness of my physical inferiority to , , and . the say , , and be now cluster round they mama in the drawing - room : she lay recline on a sofa by the fireside , and with she darling about she ( for the time neither quarrell nor cry ) look perfectly happy . I , she have dispense from join the group ; say , " she regret to be under the necessity of keep I at a distance ; but that until she hear from , and could discover by she own observation , that I be endeavour in good earnest to acquire a more sociable and childlike disposition , a more attractive and sprightly manner -- something lighter , franker , more natural , as it be -- she really must exclude I from privileges intend only for contented , happy , little child . " " what do say I have do ? " I ask . " , I do not like caviller or questioner ; beside , there be something truly forbid in a child take up she elder in that manner . be seat somewhere ; and until you can speak pleasantly , remain silent . " a breakfast - room adjoin the drawing - room , I slipp in there . it contain a bookcase : I soon possess myself of a volume , take care that it should be one store with picture . I mount into the window - seat : gather up my foot , I sit cross - leg , like a ; and , have draw the red moreen curtain nearly close , I be shrin in double retirement . fold of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand ; to the left be the clear pane of glass , protect , but not separa I from the drear day . at interval , while turn over the leaf of my book , I study the aspect of that winter afternoon . , it offer a pale blank of mist and cloud ; near a scene of wet lawn and storm - beat shrub , with ceaseless rain sweep away wildly before a long and lamentable blast . I return to my book -- 's History of british bird : the letterpress thereor I care little for , generally speak ; and yet there be certain introductory page that , child as I be , I could not pass quite as a blank . they be those which treat of the haunt of sea-fowl ; of " the solitary rock and promontory " by they only inhabit ; of the coast of , stud with isle from its southern extremity , the Lindeness , or , to the Cape - " where the , in vast whirl , Boils round the naked , melancholy isle of farthest Thule ; and the surge Pour in among the stormy Hebride . " could I pass unnotice the suggestion of the bleak shore of , , , , , , with " the vast sweep of the , and those forlorn region of dreary space , -- that reservoir of frost and snow , where firm field of ice , the accumulation of centurie of winter , glaze in Alpine height above height , surround the pole , and concentre the multiplied rigour of extreme cold . " of these death - white realm I form a idea of my own : shadowy , like all the half -comprehended notion that float dim through child 's brain , but strangely impressive . the word in these introductory page connect themselves with the succeeding vignette , and give significance to the rock stand up alone in a sea of billow and spray ; to the broken boat strand on a desolate coast ; to the cold and ghastly moon glance through bar of cloud at a wreck just sinke . I can not tell what sentiment haunt the quite solitary churchyard , with its inscribe headstone ; its gate , its two tree , its low horizon , girdle by a broken wall , and its newly -risen crescent , attest the hour of eventide . the two ship becalm on a torpid sea , I believe to be marine phantoms . the fiend pin down the thief 's pack behind he , I pass over quickly : it be a object of terror . so be the black horned thing seat aloon on a rock , survey a distant crowd surround a gallow . each picture tell a story ; mysterious often to my undeveloped understanding and imperfect feeling , yet ever profoundly interesting : as interesting as the tale sometimes narrate on winter evening , when she chance to be in good humour ; and when , have bring she ironing - table to the nursery hearth , she allow we to sit about it , and while she get up . 's lace frill ,
, and crimp she nightcap border , feed we eager attention with passage of love and adventure take from old fairy tale and other ballad ; or ( as at a later period I discover ) from the page of , and , of . with on my knee , I be then happy : happy at least in my way . I fear nothing but interruption , and that come too soon . the breakfast - room door open . " Boh ! ! " cry the voice of ; then he pause : he find the room apparently empty . " where the dicken be she ! " he continue . " Lizzy ! Georgy ! ( call to he sister ) be not here : tell mama she be run out into the rain -- bad animal ! " " it be well I draw the curtain , " think I ; and I wish fervently he might not discover my hiding - place : nor would have find it out himself ; he be not quick either of vision or conception ; but just put she head in at the door , and say at once - " she be in the window - seat , to be sure , . " and I come out immediately , for I tremble at the idea of be drag forth by the say Jack . " what do you want ? " I ask , with awkward diffidence . " , ' what do you want , master Reed ? ' " be the answer . " I want you to come here ; " and seate himself in a arm -chair , he intimate by a gesture that I be to approach and stand before he . be a schoolboy of fourteen year old ; four year older than I , for I be but ten : large and stout for he age , with a dingy and unwholesome skin ; thick lineament in a spacious visage , heavy limb and large extremity . he gorge himself habitually at table , which make he bilious , and give he a dim and bleared eye and flabby cheek . he ought now to have be at school ; but he mama have take he home for a month or two , " on account of he delicate health . " , the master , affirm that he would do very well if he have fewer cake and sweetmeat send he from home ; but the mother 's heart turn from a opinion so harsh , and inclin rather to the more refin idea that 's sallowness be owe to over-application and , perhaps , to pine after home . have not much affection for he mother and sister , and a antipathy to I . he bully and punish I ; not two or three time in the week , nor once or twice in the day , but continually : every nerve I have fear he , and every morsel of flesh in my bone shrank when he come near . there be moment when I be bewilder by the terror he inspire , because I have no appeal whatever against either he menace or he infliction ; the servants do not like to offend they young master by take my part against he , and . be blind and deaf on the subject : she never see he strike or hear he abuse I , though he do both now and then in she very presence , more frequently , however , behind she back . Habitually obedient to , I come up to he chair : he spend some three minute in thrusting out he tongue at I as far as he could without damage the root : I know he would soon strike , and while dread the blow , I muse on the disgusting and ugly appearance of he who would presently deal it . I wonder if he read that notion in my face ; for , all at once , without speak , he strike suddenly and strongly . I totter , and on regain my equilibrium retire back a step or two from he chair . " that be for you impudence in answer a while since , " say he , " and for you sneak way of get behind curtain , and for the look you have in you eye two minute since , you rat ! " Accustom to 's abuse , I never have a idea of reply to it ; my care be how to endure the blow which would certainly follow the insult . " what be you do behind the curtain ? " he ask . " I be read . " " show the book . " I return to the window and fetch it thence . " you have no business to take we book ; you be a dependent , mama say ; you have no money ; you father leave you none ; you ought to beg , and not to live here with gentleman 's child like we , and eat the same meal we do , and wear clothes at we mama 's expense . now , I will teach you to rummage my bookshelf : for they be mine ; all the house belong to I , or will do in a few year . go and stand by the door , out of the way of the mirror and the window . " I do so , not at first aware what be he intention ; but when I see he lift and poise the book and stand in act to hurl it , I instinctively start aside with a cry of alarm : not soon enough , however ; the volume be fling , it hit I , and I fall , strike my head
head against the door and cut it . the cut b , the pain be sharp : my terror have pass its climax ; other feeling succeed . " Wick and cruel boy ! " I say . " you be like a murderer -- you be like a slave -driver -- you be like the emperor ! " I have read 's History of , and have form my opinion of , , &c . also I have draw parallel in silence , which I never think thus to have declare aloud . " what ! what ! " he cry . " do she say that to I ? do you hear she , and ? will not I tell mama ? but first -- " he run headlong at I : I feel he grasp my hair and my shoulder : he have close with a desperate thing . I really see in he a tyrant , a murderer . I feel a drop or two of blood from my head trickle down my neck , and be sensible of somewhat pungent suffe : these sensation for the time predominate over fear , and I receive he in frantic sort . I do not very well know what I do with my hand , but he call I " ! ! " and bellow out aloud . be near he : and have run for , who be go upstairs : she now come upon the scene , follow by and she may . we be part : I hear the word - " dear ! dear ! what a fury to fly at ! " " do ever anybody see such a picture of passion ! " then subjoin - " take she away to the red -room , and lock she in there . " four hand be immediately laid upon I , and I be borne upstairs . chapter ii I resist all the way : a new thing for I , and a circumstance which greatly strengthen the bad opinion and be dispose to entertain of I . the fact be , I be a trifle beside myself ; or rather out of myself , as the would say : I be conscious that a moment 's mutiny have already render I liable to strange penalties , and , like any other rebel slave , I feel resolve , in my desperation , to go all length . " hold she arm , : she be like a mad cat . " " for shame ! for shame ! " cry the lady 's - maid . " what shocke conduct , , to strike a young gentleman , you benefactress 's son ! you young master . " " master ! how be he my master ? be I a servant ? " " no ; you be less than a servant , for you do nothing for you keep . there , sit down , and think over you wickedness . " they have get I by this time into the apartment indicate by , and have thrust I upon a stool : my impulse be to rise from it like a spring ; they two pair of hand arrest I instantly . " if you do not sit still , you must be tie down , " say . " , lend I you garter ; she would break mine directly . " turn to divest a stout leg of the necessary ligature . this preparation for bond , and the additional ignominy it infer , take a little of the excitement out of I . " do not take they off , " I cry ; " I will not stir . " in guarantee whereof , I attach myself to my seat by my hand . " mind you do not , " say ; and when she have ascertain that I be really subsid , she loose she hold of I ; then she and stand with fold arm , look darkly and doubtfully on my face , as incredulous of my sanity . " she never do so before , " at last say , turn to the Abigail . " but it be always in she , " be the reply . " I have tell often my opinion about the child , and agree with I . she be a underhand little thing : I never see a girl of she age with so much cover . " answer not ; but ere long , address I , she say -- " you ink to be aware , , that you be under obligation to . Reed : she keep you : if she be to turn you off , you would have to go to the poorhouse . " I have nothing to say to these word : they be not new to I : my very first recollection of existence include hints of the same kind . this reproach of my dependence have become a vague sing - song in my ear : very painful and crush , but only half intelligible . join in - " and you ought not to think yourself on a equality with the and , because kindly allow you to be bring up with they . they will have a great deal of money , and you will have none : it be you place to be humble , and to try to make yourself agreeable to they . " " what we tell you be for you good , " add , in no harsh voice , " you should try to be useful and pleasant , then , perhaps , you would have a home here ; but if you become passionate and rude , Missis will send you away , I be sure . " " , " say , " will punish she
she : he might strike she dead in the midst of she tantrum , and then where would she go ? come , , we will leave she : I would not have she heart for anything . say you prayer , , when you be by yourself ; for if you do not repent , something bad might be permit to come down the chimney and fetch you away . " they go , shutt the door , and lock it behind they . the red -room be a square chamber , very seldom sleep in , I might say never , indeed , unless when a chance influx of visitor at render it necessary to turn to account all the accommodation it contain : yet it be one of the largest and stateliest chamber in the mansion . a bed support on massive pillars of mahogany , hang with curtain of deep red damask , stand out like a tabernacle in the centre ; the two large window , with they blind always draw down , be half shroude in festoon and fall of similar drapery ; the carpet be red ; the table at the foot of the bed be cover with a crimson cloth ; the wall be a soft fawn colour with a blush of pink in it ; the wardrobe , the toilet - table , the chair be of darkly polish old mahogany . out of these deep surround shade rise high , and glar white , the pile - up mattress and pillow of the bed , spread with a snowy counterpane . Scarcely less prominent be a ample cushion easy - chair near the head of the bed , also white , with a footstool before it ; and look , as I think , like a pale throne . this room be chill , because it seldom have a fire ; it be silent , because remote from the nursery and kitchen ; solemn , because it be know to be so seldom enter . the house -maid alone come here on , to wipe from the mirror and the furniture a week 's quiet dust : and . Reed herself , at far interval , visit it to review the contents of a certain secret drawer in the wardrobe , where be store diver parchment , she jewel - casket , and a miniature of she decease husband ; and in those last word lie the secret of the red - room -- the spell which keep it so lonely in spite of its grandeur . have be dead nine year : it be in this chamber he breathe he last ; here he lay in state ; hence he coffin be borne by the undertaker 's man ; and , since that day , a sense of dreary consecration have guard it from frequent intrusion . my seat , to which and the bitter have leave I rivet , be a low ottoman near the marble chimney - piece ; the bed rise before I ; to my right hand there be the high , dark wardrobe , with subdue , break reflection varie the gloss of its panel ; to my left be the muff window ; a great looking - glass between they repeat the vacant majesty of the bed and room . I be not quite sure whether they have lock the door ; and when I da move , I get up and go to see . ! yes : no jail be ever more secure . return , I have to cross before the look - glass ; my fascinated glance involuntarily explore the depth it reveal . all look colder and darker in that visionary hollow than in reality : and the strange little figure there gaze at I , with a white face and arm speck the gloom , and glitter eye of fear move where all else be still , have the effect of a real spirit : I think it like one of the tiny phantoms , half fairy , half imp , 's evening story represent as come out of lone , ferny dell in moor , and appear before the eyes of belated traveller . I return to my stool . be with I at that moment ; but it be not yet she hour for complete victory : my blood be still warm ; the mood of the revolted slave be still brace I with its bitter vigour ; I have to stem a rapid rush of retrospective thought before I quail to the dismal present . all 's violent tyranny , all he sister 's proud indifference , all he mother 's aversion , all the servants ' partiality , turn up in my disturbed mind like a dark deposit in a turbid well . why be I always suffer , always browbeat , always accuse , for ever condemn ? why could I never please ? why be it useless to try to win any one 's favour ? , who be headstrong and selfish , be respecte . , who have a spoiled temper , a very acrid spite , a captious and insolent carriage , be universally indulged . she beauty , she pink cheek and golden curl , seem to give delight to all who look at she , and to purchase indemnity for every fault . no one thwart , much less punish ; though he twist the neck of the pigeon , kill the little pea-chick , set the dog at the sheep , stripp the hothouse vine of they fruit , and break the bud off the choicest plant in the conservatory : he call he mother " old girl , " too ; sometimes revil she for she dark skin , similar to he own ; bluntly disregard she wish ; not unfrequently tore and spoil she silk
silk attire ; and he be still " she own darling . " I da commit no fault : I strove to fulfil every duty ; and I be term naughty and tiresome , sull and sneak , from morning to noon , and from noon to night . my head still ach and b with the blow and fall I have receive : no one have reprove for wantonly strike I ; and because I have turn against he to avert farther irrational violence , I be load with general opprobrium . " Unjust ! -- unjust ! " say my reason , force by the agonising stimulus into precocious though transitory power : and , equally wrotch up , instigate some strange expedient to achieve escape from insupportable oppression -- as run away , or , if that could not be effect , never eat or drink more , and let myself die . what a consternation of soul be mine that dreary afternoon ! how all my brain be in tumult , and all my heart in insurrection ! yet in what darkness , what dense ignorance , be the mental battle fight ! I could not answer the ceaseless inward question -- why I thus suffer ; now , at the distance of -- I will not say how many year , I see it clearly . I be a discord in : I be like nobody there ; I have nothing in harmony with . or she child , or she chosen vassalage . if they do not love I , in fact , as little do I love they . they be not bound to regard with affection a thing that could not sympathise with one amongst they ; a heterogeneous thing , oppose to they in temperament , in capacity , in propensity ; a useless thing , incapable of serve they interest , or add to they pleasure ; a noxious thing , cherish the germ of indignation at they treatment , of contempt of they judgment . I know that have I be a sanguine , brilliant , careless , exacting , handsome , romping child -- though equally dependent and friendless -- . would have endure my presence more complacently ; she child would have entertain for I more of the cordiality of fellow - feel ; the servants would have be less prone to make I the scapegoat of the nursery . Daylight begin to forsake the red -room ; it be past four o'clock , and the beclouded afternoon be tend to drear twilight . I hear the rain still beat continuously on the staircase window , and the wind how in the grove behind the hall ; I grow by degree cold as a stone , and then my courage sank . my habitual mood of humiliation , self - doubt , forlorn depression , fall damp on the ember of my decaying ire . all say I be wick , and perhaps I might be so ; what think have I be but just conceive of starve myself to death ? that certainly be a crime : and be I fit to die ? or be the vault under the chancel of a invite bourne ? in such vault I have be tell do lie bury ; and lead by this thought to recall he idea , I dwelt on it with gathering dread . I could not remember he ; but I know that he be my own uncle -- my mother 's brother -- that he have take I when a parentless infant to he house ; and that in he last moment he have require a promise of . re that she would rear and maintain I as one of she own child . . probably consider she have keep this promise ; and so she have , I dare say , as well as she nature would permit she ; but how could she really like a interloper not of she race , and unconnecte with she , after she husband 's death , by any tie ? it must have be most irksome to find herself bound by a hard - wrung to stand in the stead of a parent to a strange child she could not love , and to see a uncongenial alien permanently intrude on she own family group . a singular notion dawn upon I . I doubt not -- never doubt -- that if have be alive he would have treat I kindly ; and now , as I sit look at the white bed and overshadow wall -- occasionally also turn a fascinated eye towards the dimly gleaning mirror -- I begin to recall what I have hear of dead man , trouble in they grave by the violation of they last wish , revisit the earth to punish the perjured and avenge the oppress ; and I think 's spirit , harass by the wrongs of he sister 's child , might quit its abode -- whether in the church vault or in the unknown world of the depart -- and rise before I in this chamber . I wip my tear and hush my sob , fearful lest any sign of violent grief might wake a preternatural voice to comfort I , or elicit from the gloom some halo face , bend over I with strange pity . this idea , consolatory in theory , I feel would be terrible if realise : with all my might I endeavoure to stifle it -- I endeavoure to be firm . Shak my hair from my eye , I lift my head and try to look boldly round the dark room ; at this moment a light gleam on the wall . be it , I ask myself , a ray from the moon penetrate some aperture in the blind ? no ; moonlight be still
still , and this stir ; while I gaze , it glide up to the ceiling and quiver over my head . I can now conjecture readily that this streak of light be , in all likelihood , a gleam from a lantern carry by some one across the lawn : but then , prepare as my mind be for horror , shaken as my nerve be by agitation , I think the swift darting beam be a herald of some come vision from another world . my heart beat thick , my head grow hot ; a sound fill my ear , which I deem the rushing of wing ; something see near I ; I be oppress , suffocate : endurance break down ; I rush to the door and shake the lock in desperate effort . come run along the outer passage ; the key turn , and enter . " , be you ill ? " say . " what a dreadful noise ! it go quite through I ! " exclaim . " take I out ! let I go into the nursery ! " be my cry . " what for ? be you hurt ? have you see something ? " again demand . " oh ! I see a light , and I think a ghost would come . " I have now get hold of 's hand , and she do not snatch it from I . " she have scream out on purpose , " declare , in some disgust . " and what a scream ! if she have be in great pain one would have excuse it , but she only want to bring we all here : I know she naughty trick . " " what be all this ? " demand another voice peremptorily ; and . come along the corridor , she cap fly wide , she gow rust stormily . " and , I believe I give order that should be leave in the red - room till I come to she myself . " " scream so loud , ma 'am , " plead . " let she go , " be the only answer . " loose 's hand , child : you can not succeed in get out by these means , be assure . I abhor artifice , particularly in child ; it be my duty to show you that trick will not answer : you will now stay here a hour longer , and it be only on condition of perfect submission and stillness that I shall liberate you then . " " of aunt ! have pity ! forgive I ! I can not endure it -- let I be punish some other way ! I shall be kill if -- " " Silence ! this violence be all most repulsive : " and so , no doubt , she feel it . I be a precocious actress in she eyes ; she sincerely look on I as a compound of virulent passion , mean spirit , and dangerous duplicity . and have retreate , . Reed , impatient of my now frantic anguish and wild sob , abruptly thrust I back and lock I in , without farther parley . I hear she sweep away ; and soon after she be go , I suppose I have a species of fit : unconsciousness close the scene . chapter III the next thing I remember be , wake up with a feeling as if I have have a frightful nightmare , and see before I a terrible red glare , cross with thick black bars . I hear voice , too , speak with a hollow sound , and as if muff by a rush of wind or water : agitation , uncertainty , and a all - predominat sense of terror confuse my faculty . Ere long , I become aware that some one be handle I ; lift I up and support I in a sit posture , and that more tenderly than I have ever be raise or upheld before . I rest my head against a pillow or a arm , and feel easy . in five minute more the cloud of bewilderment dissolve : I know quite well that I be in my own bed , and that the red glare be the nursery fire . it be night : a candle burn on the table ; stand at the bed - foot with a basin in she hand , and a gentleman sit in a chair near my pillow , lean over I . I feel a inexpressible relief , a soothing conviction of protection and security , when I know that there be a stranger in the room , a individual not belong to , and not related to . turn from ( though she presence be far less obnoxious to I than that of , for instance , would have be ) , I scrutinise the face of the gentleman : I know he ; it be , a apothecary , sometimes call in by . re when the servants be ail : for herself and the child she employ a physician . " well , who be I ? " he ask . I pronounce he name , offer he at the same time my hand : he take it , smile and say , " we shall do very well by - and - by . " then he lay I down , and address , charge she to be very careful that I be not disturb during the night . have give some further direction , and intimate that he should call again the next day , he depart ; to my grief : I feel so sheltered and befriend while he sit in the chair near my pillow ; and as he close the door after he
he , all the room darken and my heart again sank : inexpressible sadness weigh it down . " do you feel as if you should sleep , ? " ask , rather softly . Scarcely da I answer she ; for I fear the next sentence might be rough . " I will try . " " would you like to drink , or could you eat anything ? " " no , thank you , . " " then I think I shall go to bed , for it be past twelve o'clock ; but you may call I if you want anything in the night . " wonderful civility this ! it embolden I to ask a question . " , what be the matter with I ? be I ill ? " " you fall sick , I suppose , in the red -room with crying ; you will be better soon , no doubt . " go into the housemaid 's apartment , which be near . I hear she say - " , come and sleep with I in the nursery ; I dare not for my life be alone with that poor child to - night : she might die ; it be such a strange thing she should have that fit : I wonder if she see anything . be rather too hard . " come back with she ; they both go to bed ; they be whisper together for half - a - hour before they fall asleep . I catch scrap of they conversation , from which I be able only too distinctly to infer the main subject discuss . " something pass she , all dress in white , and vanish " -- " a great black dog behind he " -- " Three loud rap on the chamber door " -- " a light in the churchyard just over he grave , " &c . &c . at last both slept : the fire and the candle go out . for I , the watch of that long night pass in ghastly wakefulness ; straine by dread : such dread as child only can feel . no severe or prolonge bodily illness follow this incident of the red -room ; it only give my nerve a shock of which I feel the reverberation to this day . yes , , to you I owe some fearful pang of mental suffering , but I ought to forgive you , for you know not what you do : while rende my heart - string , you think you be only uproot my bad propensity . next day , by noon , I be up and dress , and sit wrap in a shawl by the nursery hearth . I feel physically weak and break down : but my worse ailment be a unutterable wretchedness of mind : a wretchedness which keep draw from I silent tear ; no sooner have I wip one salt drop from my cheek than another follow . yet , I think , I ought to have be happy , for none of the Reed be there , they be all go out in the carriage with they mama . Abbot , too , be sew in another room , and , as she move hither and thither , put away toy and arrange drawer , address to I every now and then a word of unwonted kindness . this state of thing should have be to I a paradise of peace , accustom as I be to a life of ceaseless reprimand and thankless fagge ; but , in fact , my rack nerves be now in such a state that no calm could soothe , and no pleasure excite they agreeably . have be down into the kitchen , and she bring up with she a tart on a certain brightly paint china plate , whose bird of paradise , nestle in a wreath of convolvuli and rosebud , have be will not to stir in I a most enthusiastic sense of admiration ; and which plate I have often petition to be allow to take in my hand in order to examine it more closely , but have always hithertoo be deem unworthy of such a privilege . this precious vessel be now place on my knee , and I be cordially invite to eat the circlet of delicate pastry upon it . vain favour ! come , like most other favour long deferred and often wish for , too late ! I could not eat the tart ; and the plumage of the bird , the tints of the flower , see strangely fad : I put both plate and tart away . ask if I would have a book : the word act as a transient stimulus , and I beg she to fetch 's from the library . this book I have again and again peruse with delight . I consider it a narrative of fact , and discover in it a vein of interest deeper than what I find in fairy tale : for as to the elf , have seek they in vain among foxglove leave and bell , under mushroom and beneath the ground - ivy mantl old wall - nooks , I have at length make up my mind to the sad truth , that they be all go out of to some savage country where the wood be wilder and thicker , and the population more scant ; whereas , and be , in my creed , solid part of the earth 's surface , I doubt not that I might one day , by take a long voyage , see with my own eye the little field , house , and tree , the diminutive people , the tiny cow , sheep , and bird of the one realm ; and the corn-field forest
forest - high , the mighty mastiff , the monster cat , the tower - like man and woman , of the other . yet , when this cherish volume be now place in my hand -- when I turn over its leave , and seek in its marvellous picture the charm I have , till now , never fail to find -- all be eerie and dreary ; the giant be gaunt goblin , the pigmy malevolent and fearful imp , a most desolate wanderer in most dread and dangerous region . I close the book , which I da no longer peruse , and put it on the table , beside the untasted tart . have now finish dusting and tidy the room , and have wash she hand , she open a certain little drawer , full of splendid shred of silk and satin , and begin make a new bonnet for 's doll . meantime she sang : she song be - " in the day when we go gipsy , a long time ago . " I have often hear the song before , and always with lively delight ; for have a sweet voice , -- at least , I think so . but now , though she voice be still sweet , I find in its melody a indescribable sadness . sometimes , preoccupy with she work , she sang the refrain very low , very lingeringly ; " a long time ago " come out like the saddest cadence of a funeral hymn . she pass into another ballad , this time a really doleful one . " my foot they be sore , and my limb they be weary ; be the way , and the mountain be wild ; will the twilight close moonless and dreary over the path of the poor orphan child . " why do they send I so far and so lonely , up where the moor spread and grey rock be pile ? be hard - hear , and kind angels only watch o 'er the step of a poor orphan child . " yet distant and soave the night breeze be blowing , Clouds there be none , and clear star beam mild , , in he mercy , protection be show , and hope to the poor orphan child . " Ev'n should I fall o 'er the broken bridge pass , or stray in the marsh , by false light beguil , will my , with promise and bless , take to he bosom the poor orphan child . " there be a thought that for strength should avail I , though both of shelter and kindr despoil ; be a home , and a rest will not fail I ; be a friend to the poor orphan child . " " come , , do not cry , " say as she finish . she might as well have say to the fire , " do not burn ! " but how could she divine the morbid suffer to which I be a prey ? in the course of the morning come again . " what , already up ! " say he , as he enter the nursery . " well , nurse , how be she ? " answer that I be do very well . " then she ought to look more cheerful . come here , : you name be , be it not ? " " yes , sir , . " " well , you have be cry , ; can you tell I what about ? have you any pain ? " " no , sir . " " oh ! I daresay she be cry because she could not go out with in the carriage , " interpose . " surely not ! why , she be too old for such pettishness . " I think so too ; and my self - thesteey be woun by the false charge , I answer promptly , " I never cry for such a thing in my life : I hate go out in the carriage . I cry because I be miserable . " " oh fie , ! " say . the good apothecary appear a little puzzle . I be stand before he ; he fix he eye on I very steadily : he eye be small and grey ; not very bright , but I dare say I should think they shrewd now : he have a hard - featured yet good - natured look face . have consider I at leisure , he say - " what make you ill yesterday ? " " she have a fall , " say , again put in she word . " fall ! why , that be like a baby again ! can not she manage to walk at she age ? she must be eight or nine year old . " " I be knock down , " be the blunt explanation , jerk out of I by another pang of mortified pride ; " but that do not make I ill , " I add ; while help himself to a pinch of snuff . as he be return the box to he waistcoat pocket , a loud bell ring for the servants ' dinner ; he know what it be . " that be for you , nurse , " say he ; " you can go down ; I will give a lecture till you come back . " would rather have stay , but she be oblige to go , because punctuality at meal be rigidly enforce at . " the fall do not make you ill ; what do , then ? " pursue when be gone . " I be shut up in a room where there be a ghost till after dark . " I
I see smile and fry at the same time . " Ghost ! what , you be a baby after all ! you be afraid of ghost ? " " of 's ghost I be : he die in that room , and be laid out there . neither nor any one else will go into it at night , if they can help it ; and it be cruel to shut I up alone without a candle , -- so cruel that I think I shall never forget it . " " Nonsense ! and be it that make you so miserable ? be you afraid now in daylight ? " " no : but night will come again before long : and besides , -- I be unhappy , -- very unhappy , for other thing . " " what other thing ? can you tell I some of they ? " how much I wish to reply fully to this question ! how difficult it be to frame any answer ! child can feel , but they can not analyse they feeling ; and if the analysis be partially effect in thought , they know not how to express the result of the process in word . Fearful , however , of lose this first and only opportunity of relieive my grief by impart it , I , after a disturbed pause , contrive to frame a meagre , though , as far as it go , true response . " for one thing , I have no father or mother , brother or sister . " " you have a kind aunt and cousin . " again I pause ; then bunglingly enounce - " but knock I down , and my aunt shut I up in the red - room . " Lloyd a second time produce he snuff - box . " do not you think a very beautiful house ? " ask he . " be you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at ? " " it be not my house , sir ; and say I have less right to be here than a servant . " " Pooh ! you can not be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendid place ? " " if I have anywhere else to go , I should be glad to leave it ; but I can never get away from till I be a woman . " " perhaps you may -- who know ? have you any relation besides ? " " I think not , sir . " " none belong to you father ? " " I do not know . I ask re once , and she say possibly I might have some poor , low relation call , but she know nothing about they . " " if you have such , would you like to go to they ? " I reflect . Poverty look grim to grow people ; still more so to children : they have not much idea of industrious , work , respectable poverty ; they think of the word only as connect with rag clothes , scanty food , fireless grate , rude manners , and debase vex : poverty for I be synonymous with degradation . " no ; I should not like to belong to poor people , " be my reply . " not even if they be kind to you ? " I shook my head : I could not see how poor people have the means of be kind ; and then to learn to speak like they , to adopt they manners , to be uneducated , to grow up like one of the poor woman I see sometimes nurse they child or wash they clothes at the cottage door of the village of : no , I be not heroic enough to purchase liberty at the price of caste . " but be you relatives so very poor ? be they work people ? " " I can not tell ; aunt . say if I have any , they must be a beggarly set : I should not like to go a begging . " " would you like to go to school ? " again I reflect : I scarcely know what school be : sometimes speak of it as a place where young lady sit in the stock , wore backboard , and be expect to be exceedingly genteel and precise : hate he school , and abuse he master ; but 's taste be no rule for mine , and if 's account of school - discipline ( gather from the young lady of a family where she have liv before come to ) be somewhat appal , she detail of certain accomplishment attaine by these same young lady were , I think , equally attractive . she boast of beautiful painting of landscape and flower by they execute ; of song they could se and piece they could play , of purse they could net , of french book they could translate ; till my spirit be move to emulation as I listen . besides , school would be a complete change : it imply a long journey , a entire separation from , a entrance into a new life . " I should indeed like to go to school , " be the audible conclusion of my musing . " well , well ! who know what may happen ? " say , as he get up . " the child ought to have change of air and scene , " he add , speak to himself ; " nerve not in a good state . " now return ; at the same moment the carriage be hear roll up the gravel - walk . " be that you mistress , nurse ?
? " ask . " I should like to speak to she before I go . " invite he to walk into the breakfast - room , and lead the way out . in the interview which follow between he and . re , I presume , from after-occurrence , that the apothecary venture to recommend my be send to school ; and the recommendation be no doubt readily enough adopt ; for as say , in discuss the subject with when both sit sewing in the nursery one night , after I be in bed , and , as they think , asleep , " Missis be , she da say , glad enough to get rid of such a tiresome , ill - conditioned child , who always look as if she be watch everybody , and scheme plot underhand . " Abbot , I think , give I credit for be a sort of infantine guy Fawkes . on that same occasion I learn , for the first time , from 's communication to , that my father have be a poor clergyman ; that my mother have marry he against the wish of she friend , who consider the match beneath she ; that my grandfather be so irritated at she disobedience , he cut she off without a shilling ; that after my mother and father have be marry a year , the latter catch the typhus fever while visit among the poor of a large manufacturing town where he curacy be situate , and where that disease be then prevalent : that my mother take the infection from he , and both die within a month of each other . , when she hear this narrative , sigh and say , " poor be to be pitie , too , . " " yes , " respond ; " if she be a nice , pretty child , one might compassionate she forlornness ; but one really can not care for such a little toad as that . " " not a great deal , to be sure , " agree : " at any rate , a beauty like would be more move in the same condition . " " yes , I doat on ! " cry the fervent . " little darling ! -- with she long curl and she blue eye , and such a sweet colour as she have ; just as if she be pain ! -- , I could fancy a Welsh rabbit for supper . " " so could I -- with a roast onion . come , we will go down . " they go . chapter iv from my discourse with , and from the above report conference between and , I gather enough of hope to suffice as a motive for wish to get well : a change seem near , -- I desire and wait it in silence . it tarry , however : day and week pass : I have regain my normal state of health , but no new allusion be make to the subject over which I brood . . survey I at time with a severe eye , but seldom address I : since my illness , she have draw a more marked line of separation than ever between I and she own child ; appoint I a small closet to sleep in by myself , condemn I to take my meal alone , and pass all my time in the nursery , while my cousin be constantly in the drawing - room . not a hint , however , do she drop about send I to school : still I feel a instinctive certainty that she would not long endure I under the same roof with she ; for she glance , now more than ever , when turn on I , express a insuperable and root aversion . and , evidently act accord to order , speak to I as little as possible : thrust he tongue in he cheek whenever he see I , and once attempt chastisement ; but as I instantly turn against he , rouse by the same sentiment of deep ire and desperate revolt which have stir my corruption before , he think it better to desist , and run from I titter execration , and vow I have burst he nose . I have indeed levelled at that prominent feature as hard a blow as my knuckle could inflict ; and when I see that either that or my look daunt he , I have the greatest inclination to follow up my advantage to purpose ; but he be already with he mama . I hear he in a blubbering tone commence the tale of how " that nasty " have fly at he like a mad cat : he be stop rather harshly - " do not talk to I about she , : I tell you not to go near she ; she be not worthy of notice ; I do not choose that either you or you sister should associate with she . " here , lean over the banister , I cry out suddenly , and without at all deliberating on my word - " they be not fit to associate with I . " be rather a stout woman ; but , on hear this strange and audacious declaration , she run nimbly up the stair , sweep I like a whirlwind into the nursery , and crush I down on the edge of my crib , da I in a emphatic voice to rise from that place , or utter one syllable during the remainder of the day . " what would uncle say to you , if he be alive ? " be my scarcely voluntary demand . I say scarcely voluntary , for it see as if my tongue pronounce word without my
my will consent to they utterance : something speak out of I over which I have no control . " what ? " say under she breath : she usually could compose grey eye become troubled with a look like fear ; she take she hand from my arm , and gaze at I as if she really do not know whether I be child or fiend . I be now in for it . " my uncle be in heaven , and can see all you do and think ; and so can papa and mama : they know how you shut I up all day long , and how you wish I dead . " Mr . re soon rally she spirits : she shook I most soundly , she box both my ear , and then leave I without a word . supply the hiatus by a homily of a hour 's length , in which she prove beyond a doubt that I be the most wicked and abandon child ever rear under a roof . I half believe she ; for I feel indeed only bad feeling surge in my breast . , , and half of pass away . and the have be celebrate at with the usual festive cheer ; present have be interchange , dinner and evening party give . from every enjoyment I be , of course , exclude : my share of the gaiety consist in witnesse the daily apparelling of and , and see they descmend to the drawing - room , dress out in thin muslin frock and scarlet sash , with hair elaborately ringlet ; and afterwards , in listen to the sound of the piano or the harp play below , to the passing to and for of the butler and footman , to the jingling of glass and china as refreshment be hand , to the broken hum of conversation as the drawing - room door open and close . when tired of this occupation , I would retire from the stairhead to the solitary and silent nursery : there , though somewhat sad , I be not miserable . to speak truth , I have not the least wish to go into company , for in company I be very rarely notice ; and if have but be kind and companionable , I should have deem it a treat to spend the evening quietly with she , instead of pass they under the formidable eye of re , in a room full of lady and gentleman . but , as soon as she have dress she young lady , use to take herself off to the lively region of the kitchen and housekeeper 's room , generally bear the candle along with she . I then sit with my doll on my knee till the fire get low , glancing round occasionally to make sure that nothing worse than myself haunt the shadowy room ; and when the ember sank to a dull red , I undress hastily , tugge at knot and string as I best might , and seek shelter from cold and darkness in my crib . to this crib I always take my doll ; human being must love something , and , in the dearth of worthier object of affection , I contrive to find a pleasure in love and cherish a faded graven image , shabby as a miniature scarecrow . it puzzle I now to remember with what absurd sincerity I doate on this little toy , half fancie it alive and capable of sensation . I could not sleep unless it be fold in my night - gown ; and when it lay there safe and warm , I be comparatively happy , believe it to be happy likewise . long do the hour seem while I wait the departure of the company , and listen for the sound of 's step on the stair : sometimes she would come up in the interval to seek she thimble or she scissors , or perhaps to bring I something by way of supper -- a bun or a cheese - cake -- then she would sit on the bed while I eat it , and when I have finish , she would tick the clothes round I , and twice she kiss I , and say , " good night , . " when thus gentle , seem to I the best , prettiest , kindest be in the world ; and I wish most intensely that she would always be so pleasant and amiable , and never push I about , or scold , or task I unreasonably , as she be too often will not to do . must , I think , have be a girl of good natural capacity , for she be smart in all she do , and have a remarkable knack of narrative ; so , at least , I judge from the impression make on I by she nursery tale . she be pretty too , if my recollection of she face and person be correct . I remember she as a slim young woman , with black hair , dark eye , very nice feature , and good , clear complexion ; but she have a capricious and hasty temper , and indifferent idea of principle or justice : still , such as she be , I prefer she to any one else at . it be the fifteenth of , about nine o'clock in the morning : be go down to breakfast ; my cousin have not yet be summon to they mama ; be put on she bonnet and warm garden - coat to go and feed she poultry , a occupation of which she be fond : and not less so of sell the egg to the housekeeper and hoard up the money she thus obtain .
. she have a turn for traffic , and a mark propensity for save ; show not only in the vending of egg and chicken , but also in drive hard bargain with the gardener about flower - root , seed , and slips of plant ; that functionary have order from . re to buy of he young lady all the product of she parterre she wish to sell : and would have sell the hair off she head if she could have make a handsome profit thereby . as to she money , she first secret it in odd corner , wrap in a rag or a old curl - paper ; but some of these hoard have be discover by the housemaid , , fearful of one day lose she value treasure , consent to intrust it to she mother , at a usurious rate of interest -- fifty or sixty per cent. ; which interest she exact every quarter , keep she account in a little book with anxious accuracy . sit on a high stool , dress she hair at the glass , and interweave she curl with artificial flowers and fad feather , of which she have find a store in a drawer in the attic . I be make my bed , have receive strict order from to get it arrange before she return ( for now frequently employ I as a sort of under-nurserymaid , to tidy the room , dust the chair , & c. ) . have spread the quilt and fold my night - dress , I go to the window - seat to put in order some picture - book and doll 's house furniture scatter there ; a abrupt command from to let she plaything alone ( for the tiny chair and mirror , the fairy plate and cup , be she property ) stop my proceedings ; and then , for lack of other occupation , I fall to breathe on the frost- flower with which the window be fret , and thus clear a space in the glass through which I might look out on the grounds , where all be still and petrify under the influence of a hard frost . from this window be visible the porter 's lodge and the carriage - road , and just as I have dissolve so much of the silver - white foliage veile the pane as left room to look out , I see the gate throw open and a carriage roll through . I watch it ascend the drive with indifference ; carriage often come to , but none ever bring visitor in whom I be interested ; it stop in front of the house , the door - bell rang loudly , the new - comer be admit . all this be nothing to I , my vacant attention soon find livelier attraction in the spectacle of a little hungry robin , which come and chirru on the twig of the leafless cherry - tree nail against the wall near the casement . the remain of my breakfast of bread and milk stand on the table , and have crumble a morsel of roll , I be tugge at the sash to put out the crumb on the window - sill , when come run upstairs into the nursery . " , take off you pinafore ; what be you do there ? have you washed you hand and face this morning ? " I give another tug before I answer , for I want the bird to be secure of its bread : the sash yield ; I scatter the crumb , some on the stone sill , some on the cherry - tree bough , then , close the window , I reply - " no , ; I have only just finish dusting . " " troublesome , careless child ! and what be you do now ? you look quite red , as if you have be about some mischief : what be you open the window for ? " I be spare the trouble of answering , for see in too great a hurry to listen to explanations ; she haul I to the washstand , inflict a merciless , but happily brief scrub on my face and hand with soap , water , and a coarse towel ; disciplin my head with a bristly brush , denude I of my pinafore , and then hurrie I to the top of the stair , bid I go down directly , as I be want in the breakfast - room . I would have ask who want I : I would have demand if . re be there ; but be already go , and have close the nursery - door upon I . I slowly descend . for nearly three month , I have never be call to . 's presence ; restrict so long to the nursery , the breakfast , dining , and draw - room be become for I awful region , on which it dismay I to intrude . I now stand in the empty hall ; before I be the breakfast - room door , and I stop , intimidate and trembl . what a miserable little poltroon have fear , engender of unjust punishment , make of I in those day ! I fear to return to the nursery , and fear to go forward to the parlour ; ten minute I stand in agitate hesitation ; the vehement ring of the breakfast - room bell decide I ; I must enter . " who could want I ? " I ask inwardly , as with both hand I turn the stiff door - handle , which , for a second or two , resist my effort . " what should I see besides aunt Reed in the apartment ? -- a man or
or a woman ? " the handle turn , the door unclosed , and pass through and curtsey low , I look up at -- a black pillar ! -- such , at least , appear to I , at first sight , the straight , narrow , sable - clad shape stand erect on the rug : the grim face at the top be like a carve mask , place above the shaft by way of capital . . occupy she usual seat by the fireside ; she make a signal to I to approach ; I do so , and she introduce I to the stony stranger with the word : " this be the little girl respecte whom I apply to you . " he , for it be a man , turn he head slowly towards where I stand , and have examine I with the two inquisitive - look grey eye which twinkle under a pair of bushy brows , say solemnly , and in a bass voice , " she size be small : what be she age ? " " ten year . " " so much ? " be the doubtful answer ; and he prolonge he scrutiny for some minute . presently he address I -- " you name , little girl ? " " , . " in utter these words I look up : he seem to I a tall gentleman ; but then I be very little ; he feature be large , and they and all the line of he frame be equally harsh and prim . " well , , and be you a good child ? " impossible to reply to this in the affirmative : my little world hold a contrary opinion : I be silent . . answer for I by a expressive shake of the head , add soon , " perhaps the less say on that subject the better , . " " sorry indeed to hear it ! she and I must have some talk ; " and bend from the perpendicular , he install he person in the arm - chair opposite 's . " come here , " he say . I step across the rug ; he place I square and straight before he . what a face he have , now that it be almost on a level with mine ! what a great nose ! and what a mouth ! and what large prominent tooth ! " no sight so sad as that of a naughty child , " he begin , " especially a naughty little girl . do you know where the wick go after death ? " " they go to hell , " be my ready and orthodox answer . " and what be hell ? can you tell I that ? " " a pit full of fire . " " and should you like to fall into that pit , and to be burn there for ever ? " " no , sir . " " what must you do to avoid it ? " I deliberate a moment ; my answer , when it do come , be objectionable : " I must keep in good health , and not die . " " how can you keep in good health ? child younger than you die daily . I bury a little child of five year old only a day or two since , -- a good little child , whose soul be now in heaven . it be to be fear the same could not be say of you be you to be call hence . " not be in a condition to remove he doubt , I only cast my eye down on the two large foot plan on the rug , and sigh , wish myself far enough away . " I hope that sigh be from the heart , and that you repent of ever have be the occasion of discomfort to you excellent benefactress . " " Benefactress ! benefactress ! " say I inwardly : " they all call Mrs . re my benefactress ; if so , a benefactress be a disagreeable thing . " " do you say you prayer night and morning ? " continue my interrogator . " yes , sir . " " do you read you ? " " sometimes . " " with pleasure ? be you fond of it ? " " I like Revelation , and the book of , and and , and a little bit of , and some part of kings and Chronicles , and and . " " and the Psalm ? I hope you like they ? " " no , sir . " " no ? oh , shocke ! I have a little boy , younger than you , who know six Psalm by heart : and when you ask he which he would rather have , a gingerbread - nut to eat or a verse of a to learn , he say : 'Oh ! the verse of a Psalm ! angel se Psalms ;' say he , 'I wish to be a little angel here below ;' he then get two nut in recompense for he infant piety . " " Psalm be not interesting , " I remarke . " that prove you have a wicked heart ; and you must pray to to change it : to give you a new and clean one : to take away you heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh . " I be about to propound a question , touch the manner in which that operation of change my heart be to be perform , when . re interpose , tell I to sit down ; she then proceed to carry on the conversation herself . " , I believe I intimate
intimate in the letter which I write to you three week ago , that this little girl have not quite the character and disposition I could wish : should you admit she into Lowood school , I should be glad if the superintendent and teacher be request to keep a strict eye on she , and , above all , to guard against she worst fault , a tendency to deceit . I mention this in you hearing , , that you may not attempt to impose on . " well might I dread , well might I dislike . re ; for it be she nature to wound I cruelly ; never be I happy in she presence ; however carefully I obey , however strenuously I strove to please she , my effort be still repulse and repay by such sentence as the above . now , utter before a stranger , the accusation cut I to the heart ; I dimly perceive that she be already obliterate hope from the new phase of existence which she destin I to enter ; I feel , though I could not have express the feeling , that she be sow aversion and unkindness along my future path ; I see myself transform under 's eye into a artful , noxious child , and what could I do to remedy the injury ? " nothing , indeed , " think I , as I struggle to repress a sob , and hastily wip away some tear , the impotent evidence of my anguish . " be , indeed , a sad fault in a child , " say ; " it be akin to falsehand , and all liar will have they portion in the lake burn with fire and brimstone ; she shall , however , be watch , . I will speak to and the teacher . " " I should wish she to be bring up in a manner suite she prospect , " continue my benefactress ; " to be make useful , to be keep humble : as for the vacation , she will , with you permission , spend they always at . " " you decision be perfectly judicious , madam , " return . " Humility be a , and one peculiarly appropriate to the pupil of ; I , therefore , direct that especial care shall be bestow on its cultivation amongst they . I have study how best to mortify in they the worldly sentiment of pride ; and , only the other day , I have a pleasing proof of my success . my second daughter , , go with she mama to visit the school , and on she return she exclaim : 'Oh , dear papa , how quiet and plain all the girl at , with they hair comb behind they ear , and they long pinafore , and those little holland pocket outside they frock -- they be almost like poor people 's child ! and , ' say she , ' they look at my dress and mama 's , as if they have never see a silk gown before . ' " " this be the state of thing I quite approve , " return ; " have I seek all over , I could scarcely have find a system more exactly fit a child like . consistency , my dear ; I advocate consistency in all thing . " " consistency , madam , be the first of duty ; and it have be observe in every arrangement connect with the establishment of : plain fare , simple attire , unsophisticated accommodation , hardy and active habit ; such be the order of the day in the house and its inhabitant . " " quite right , sir . I may then depend upon this child be receive as a pupil at , and there be train in conformity to she position and prospect ? " " madam , you may : she shall be place in that nursery of chosen plant , and I trust she will show herself grateful for the inestimable privilege of she election . " " I will send she , then , as soon as possible , ; for , I assure you , I feel anxious to be relieve of a responsibility that be become too irksome . " " no doubt , no doubt , madam ; and now I wish you good morning . I shall return to in the course of a week or two : my good friend , the , will not permit I to leave he sooner . I shall send notice that she be to expect a new girl , so that there will he no difficulty about receive she . good - bye . " " good - bye , ; remember I to and , and to and , and . " " I will , madam . little girl , here be a book entitle the ' child 's guide , ' read it with prayer , especially that part contain ' a account of the awfully sudden death of -, a naughty child addict to falsehood and deceit . ' " with these word put into my hand a thin pamphlet sewn in a cover , and have rung for he carriage , he depart . and I be leave alone : some minute pass in silence ; she be sew , I be watch she . . might be at that time some six or seven and thirty ; she be a woman of robust frame , square - shouldered and strong - limbed , not tall , and , though stout , not obese : she have a somewhat large face , the under jaw be much developed and very solid ; she brow be low , she ching large and prominent , mouth
mouth and nose sufficiently regular ; under she light eyebrow glimmer a eye devoid of ruth ; she skin be dark and opaque , she hair nearly flaxen ; she constitution be sound as a bell -- illness never come near she ; she be a exact , clever manager ; she household and tenantry be thoroughly under she control ; she child only at time defy she authority and laugh it to scorn ; she dress well , and have a presence and port calculate to set off handsome attire . sit on a low stool , a few yard from she arm - chair , I examine she figure ; I peruse she feature . in my hand I hold the tract contain the sudden death of the , to which narrative my attention have be point as to a appropriate warning . what have just pass ; what . have say concern I to ; the whole tenor of they conversation , be recent , raw , and stinge in my mind ; I have feel every word as acutely as I have hear it plainly , and a passion of resentment foment now within I . . look up from she work ; she eye settle on mine , she finger at the same time suspend they nimble movement . " go out of the room ; return to the nursery , " be she mandate . my look or something else must have struck she as offensive , for she speak with extreme though suppress irritation . I get up , I go to the door ; I come back again ; I walk to the window , across the room , then close up to she . I must : I have be trode on severely , and must turn : but how ? what strength have I to dart retaliation at my antagonist ? I gather my energie and launch they in this blunt sentence - " I be not deceitful : if i be , I should say I love you ; but I declare I do not love you : I dislike you the worst of anybody in the world except ; and this book about the liar , you may give to you girl , , for it be she who tell lie , and not I . " 's hand still lay on she work inactive : she eye of ice continue to dwell freezingly on mine . " what more have you to say ? " she ask , rather in the tone in which a person might address a opponent of adult age than such as be ordinarily use to a child . that eye of hers , that stir every antipathy I have . Shak from head to foot , thrill with ungovernable excitement , I continue - " I be glad you be no relation of mine : I will never call you aunt again as long as I live . I will never come to see you when I be grow up ; and if any one ask I how I like you , and how you treat I , I will say the very thought of you make I sick , and that you treat I with miserable cruelty . " " how dare you affirm that , ? " " how dare I , ? how dare I ? because it be the Truth . you think I have no feeling , and that I can do without one bit of love or kindness ; but I can not live so : and you have no pity . I shall remember how you thrust I back -- roughly and violently thrust I back -- into the red -room , and lock I up there , to my die day ; though I be in agony ; though I cry out , while suffocat with distress , ' have mercy ! have mercy , ! ' and that punishment you make I suffer because you wick boy strike I -- knock I down for nothing . I will tell anybody who ask I question , this exact tale . people think you a good woman , but you be bad , hard - hear . you be deceitful ! " Ere I have finish this reply , my soul begin to expand , to exult , with the strangest sense of freedom , of triumph , I ever feel . it seem as if a invisible bond have burst , and that I have struggle out into unhoped - for liberty . not without cause be this sentiment : . look frightened ; she work have slipp from she knee ; she be lift up she hand , rock herself to and fro , and even twist she face as if she would cry . " , you be under a mistake : what be the matter with you ? why do you tremble so violently ? would you like to drink some water ? " " no , . " " be there anything else you wish for , ? I assure you , I desire to be you friend . " " not you . you tell I have a bad character , a deceitful disposition ; and I will let everybody at know what you be , and what you have do . " " , you do not understand these thing : child must be correcte for they fault . " " be not my fault ! " I cry out in a savage , high voice . " but you be passionate , , that you must allow : and now return to the nursery -- there be a dear -- and lie down a little . " " I be not you dear ; I can not lie down : send I to school soon , , for
for I hate to live here . " " I will indeed send she to school soon , " murmure . re sottoo voce ; and gather up she work , she abruptly quit the apartment . I be leave there alone -- winner of the field . it be the hardest battle I have fight , and the first victory I have gain : I stand awhile on the rug , where have stood , and I enjoy my conqueror 's solitude . first , I smile to myself and feel elate ; but this fierce pleasure subsid in I as fast as do the accelerate throb of my pulse . a child can not quarrel with its elder , as I have do ; can not give its furious feeling uncontrolled play , as I have give mine , without experience afterwards the pang of remorse and the chill of reaction . a ridge of lighted heath , alive , glancing , devouring , would have be a meet emblem of my mind when I accuse and menace Mrs . re : the same ridge , black and blast after the flame be dead , would have represent as meetly my subsequent condition , when half - a - hour 's silence and reflection have show I the madness of my conduct , and the dreariness of my hate and hate position . something of vengeance I have taste for the first time ; as aromatic wine it seem , on swallowing , warm and racy : its after-flavour , metallic and corroding , give I a sensation as if I have be poisone . willingly would I now have go and ask 's pardon ; but I know , partly from experience and partly from instinct , that be the way to make she repulse I with double scorn , thereby re-excit every turbulent impulse of my nature . I would fain exercise some better faculty than that of fierce speak ; afain find nourishment for some less fiendish feeling than that of sombre indignation . I take a book -- some Arabian tale ; I sit down and endeavoure to read . I could make no sense of the subject ; my own thought swam always between I and the page I have usually find fascinating . I open the glass - door in the breakfast - room : the shrubbery be quite still : the black frost reign , unbroken by sun or breeze , through the grounds . I cover my head and arm with the skirt of my frock , and go out to walk in a part of the plantation which be quite sequestrate ; but I find no pleasure in the silent tree , the fall fir - cone , the congeal relic of autumn , russet leave , sweep by past wind in heap , and now stiffen together . I lean against a gate , and look into a empty field where no sheep be feed , where the short grass be nip and blanch . it be a very grey day ; a most opaque sky , " ond on snaw , " canopy all ; thence flake feel it interval , which settle on the hard path and on the hoary lea without melte . I stand , a wretch child enough , whisper to myself over and over again , " what shall I do ? -- what shall I do ? " all at once I hear a clear voice call , " ! where be you ? come to lunch ! " it be , I know well enough ; but I do not stir ; she light step come trippe down the path . " you naughty little thing ! " she say . " why do not you come when you be call ? " 's presence , compare with the thought over which I have be brood , seem cheerful ; even though , as usual , she be somewhat cross . the fact be , after my conflict with and victory over Mrs . Reed , I be not dispose to care much for the nursemaid 's transitory anger ; and I be dispose to bask in she youthful lightness of heart . I just put my two arm round she and say , " come , ! do not scold . " the action be more frank and fearless than any I be habituate to indulge in : somehow it pleas she . " you be a strange child , , " she say , as she look down at I ; " a little roving , solitary thing : and you be go to school , I suppose ? " I nod . " and will not you be sorry to leave poor ? " " what do care for I ? she be always scolde I . " " because you be such a queer , frightened , shy little thing . you should be bolder . " " what ! to get more knock ? " " Nonsense ! but you be rather put upon , that be certain . my mother say , when she come to see I last week , that she would not like a little one of she own to be in you place . -- now , come in , and I have some good news for you . " " I do not think you have , . " " child ! what do you mean ? what sorrowful eye you fix on I ! well , but and the young lady and be go out to tea this afternoon , and you shall have tea with I . I will ask cook to bake you a little cake , and then you shall help I to look over you drawer ; for I be soon to pack you trunk
trunk . intend you to leave in a day or two , and you shall choose what toy you like to take with you . " " , you must promise not to scold I any more till I go . " " well , I will ; but mind you be a very good girl , and do not be afraid of I . do not start when I chance to speak rather sharply ; it be so provoke . " " I do not think I shall ever be afraid of you again , , because I have get used to you , and I shall soon have another set of people to dread . " " if you dread they they will dislike you . " " as you do , ? " " I do not dislike you , ; I believe I be fonder of you than of all the other . " " you do not show it . " " you little sharp thing ! you have get quite a new way of talk . what make you so venturesome and hardy ? " " why , I shall soon be away from you , and besides " -- I be go to say something about what have pass between I and re , but on second thought I consider it better to remain silent on that head . " and so you be glad to leave I ? " " not at all , ; indeed , just now I be rather sorry . " " just now ! and rather ! how coolly my little lady say it ! I dare say now if I be to ask you for a kiss you would not give it I : you would say you would rather not . " " I will kiss you and welcome : bend you head down . " stoop ; we mutually embrace , and I follow she into the house quite comfort . that afternoon lapse in peace and harmony ; and in the evening tell I some of she most enchant story , and sang I some of she sweetest song . even for I life have it be gleam of sunshine . five o'clock have hardly struck on the morning of the 19th of , when bring a candle into my closet and find I already up and nearly dress . I have risen half - a - hour before she entrance , and have wash my face , and put on my clothes by the light of a half - moon just set , whose ray stream through the narrow window near my crib . I be to leave Gateshead that day by a coach which pass the lodge gate at six a.m . be the only person yet risen ; she have lit a fire in the nursery , where she now proceed to make my breakfast . few child can eat when excited with the thought of a journey ; nor could I . , have press I in vain to take a few spoonful of the boiled milk and bread she have prepare for I , wrap up some biscuit in a paper and put they into my bag ; then she help I on with my pelisse and bonnet , and wrap herself in a shawl , she and I leave the nursery . as we pass 's bedroom , she say , " will you go in and bid good - bye ? " " no , : she come to my crib last night when you be go down to supper , and say I need not disturb she in the morning , or my cousin either ; and she tell I to remember that she have always be my best friend , and to speak of she and be grateful to she accordingly . " " what do you say , ? " " nothing : I cover my face with the bedclothes , and turn from she to the wall . " " that be wrong , . " " it be quite right , . you have not be my friend : she have be my foe . " " of ! do not say so ! " " good - bye to ! " cry I , as we pass through the hall and go out at the front door . the moon be set , and it be very dark ; carry a lantern , whose light glance on wet step and gravel road sodden by a recent thaw . and chill be the winter morning : my tooth chatter as I hasten down the drive . there be a light in the porter 's lodge : when we reach it , we find the porter 's wife just kindl she fire : my trunk , which have be carry down the evening before , stand cord at the door . it want but a few minute of six , and shortly after that hour have struck , the distant roll of wheel announce the come coach ; I go to the door and watch it be lamps approach rapidly through the gloom . " be she go by herself ? " ask the porter 's wife . " yes . " " and how far be it ? " " fifty miles . " " what a long way ! I wonder . be not afraid to trust she so far alone . " the coach draw up ; there it be at the gate with its four horse and its top laden with passengers : the guard and coachman loudly urge haste ; my trunk be hoist up ; I be take from 's neck , to which I cling with kiss . " be sure and take good care of she , " cry she to the guard , as
as he lift I into the inside . " ay , ay ! " be the answer : the door be slap to , a voice exclaim " all right , " and on we drive . thus be I sever from and ; thus whir away to unknown , and , as I then deem , remote and mysterious region . I remember but little of the journey ; I only know that the day seem to I of a preternatural length , and that we appear to travel over hundred of mile of road . we pass through several town , and in one , a very large one , the coach stop ; the horse be take out , and the passenger alight to dine . I be carry into a inn , where the guard want I to have some dinner ; but , as I have no appetite , he leave I in a immense room with a fireplace at each end , a chandelier pendent from the ceiling , and a little red gallery high up against the wall fill with musical instrument . here I walk about for a long time , feel very strange , and mortally apprehensive of some one come in and kidnap I ; for I believe in kidnapper , they exploit have frequently figure in 's fireside chronicle . at last the guard return ; once more I be stow away in the coach , my protector mount he own seat , sound he hollow horn , and away we rattle over the " stony street " of - . the afternoon come on wet and somewhat misty : as it wane into dusk , I begin to feel that we be get very far indeed from : we cease to pass through town ; the country change ; great grey hill heav up round the horizon : as twilight deepen , we descende a valley , dark with wood , and long after night have overcloude the prospect , I hear a wild wind rush amongst tree . Lull by the sound , I at last drop asleep ; I have not long slumber when the sudden cessation of motion awoke I ; the coach - door be open , and a person like a servant be stand at it : I see she face and dress by the light of the lamps . " be there a little girl call here ? " she ask . I answer " yes , " and be then lift out ; my trunk be hand down , and the coach instantly drive away . I be stiff with long sitting , and bewilder with the noise and motion of the coach : gather my faculty , I look about I . , wind , and darkness fill the air ; nevertheless , I dimly discern a wall before I and a door open in it ; through this door I pass with my new guide : she shut and lock it behind she . there be now visible a house or house -- for the building spread far -- with many window , and light burn in some ; we go up a broad pebbly path , splash wet , and be admit at a door ; then the servant lead I through a passage into a room with a fire , where she leave I alone . I stand and warm my numbed finger over the blaze , then I look round ; there be no candle , but the uncertain light from the hearth show , by interval , papere wall , carpet , curtain , shine mahogany furniture : it be a parlour , not so spacious or splendid as the drawing - room at , but comfortable enough . I be puzzl to make out the subject of a picture on the wall , when the door open , and a individual carry a light enter ; another follow close behind . the first be a tall lady with dark hair , dark eye , and a pale and large forehead ; she figure be partly envelo in a shawl , she countenance be grave , she bear erect . " the child be very young to be send alone , " say she , put she candle down on the table . she consider I attentively for a minute or two , then further add - " she have better be put to be soon ; she look tired : be you tired ? " she ask , place she hand on my shoulder . " a little , ma'am . " " and hungry too , no doubt : let she have some supper before she go to be , . be this the first time you have leave you parent to come to school , my little girl ? " I explain to she that I have no parent . she inquire how long they have be dead : then how old I be , what be my name , whether I could read , write , and sow a little : then she touch my cheek gently with she forefinger , and say , " she hope I should be a good child , " dismiss I along with . the lady I have leave might be about twenty - nine ; the one who go with I appear some year younger : the first impress I by she voice , look , and air . be more ordinary ; ruddy in complexion , though of a careworn countenance ; hurry in gait and action , like one who have always a multiplicity of task on hand : she look , indeed , what I afterwards find she really be , a under - teacher . lead by she , I pass from compartment to compartment , from passage to passage ,
, of a large and irregular building ; till , emerge from the total and somewhat dreary silence pervad that portion of the house we have traverse , we come upon the hum of many voice , and presently enter a wide , long room , with great deal table , two at each end , on each of which burn a pair of candle , and seate all round on bench , a congregation of girl of every age , from nine or ten to twenty . see by the dim light of the dip , they number to I appear countless , though not in reality exceed eighty ; they be uniformly dress in brown stuff frock of quaint fashion , and long holland pinafore . it be the hour of study ; they be engage in conning over they to - morrow 's task , and the hum I have hear be the combine result of they whispered repetition . sign to I to sit on a bench near the door , then walk up to the top of the long room she cry out - " Monitor , collect the lesson - book and put they away ! four tall girl arise from different table , and go round , gather the book and remove they . again give the word of command - " Monitor , fetch the supper - tray ! " the tall girl go out and return presently , each bear a tray , with portion of something , I know not what , arrange thereon , and a pitcher of water and mug in the middle of each tray . the portion be hand round ; those who like take a dratch of the water , the mug be common to all . when it come to my turn , I drank , for I be thirsty , but do not touch the food , excitement and fatigue render I incapable of eat : I now see , however , that it be a thin oaten cake shave into fragment . the meal over , prayer be read by , and the class file off , two and two , upstairs . Overpower by this time with weariness , I scarcely notice what sort of a place the bedroom be , except that , like the schoolroom , I see it be very long . to - night I be to be 's bed - fellow ; she help I to undress : when lay down I glance at the long row of bed , each of which be quickly fill with two occupant ; in ten minute the single light be extinguished , and amidst silence and complete darkness I fall asleep . the night pass rapidly . I be too tired even to dream ; I only once awoke to hear the wind rave in furious gust , and the rain fall in torrent , and to be sensible that have take she place by my side . when I again unclose my eye , a loud bell be ring ; the girl be up and dressing ; day have not yet begin to daw , and a rushlight or two burn in the room . I too rise reluctantly ; it be bitter cold , and I dress as well as I could for shivering , and wash when there be a basin at liberty , which do not occur soon , as there be but one basin to six girl , on the stand down the middle of the room . again the bell rang : all form in file , two and two , and in that order descende the stair and enter the cold and dimly lit schoolroom : here prayer be read by ; afterwards she call out - " form class ! " a great tumult succeed for some minute , during which repeatedly exclaim , " Silence ! " and " order ! " when it subside , I see they all draw up in four semicircle , before four chair , place at the four table ; all hold book in they hand , and a great book , like a , lay on each table , before the vacant seat . a pause of some seconds succeed , fill up by the low , vague hum of number ; walk from class to class , hush this indefinite sound . a distant bell tinkle : immediately three lady enter the room , each walk to a table and take she seat . assume the fourth vacant chair , which be that nearest the door , and around which the smallest of the child be assemble : to this inferior class I be call , and place at the bottom of it . now begin , the day 's collect be repeat , then certain text of Scripture be say , and to these succeed a protract reading of chapter in the , which last a hour . by the time that exercise be terminate , day have fully dawned . the indefatigable bell now sound for the fourth time : the class be marshall and march into another room to breakfast : how glad I be to behold a prospect of get something to eat ! I be now nearly sick from inanition , have take so little the day before . the refectory be a great , low - ceile , gloomy room ; on two long table smoke basin of something hot , which , however , to my dismay , send forth a odour far from inviting . I see a universal manifestation of discontent when the fume of the repast meet the nostril of those destin to swallow it ; from the van of the procession , the tall girl of the first class , rise the whispered word - " ! the porridge be burnt again
again ! " " Silence ! " ejaculate a voice ; not that of , but one of the upper teacher , a little and dark personage , smartly dress , but of somewhat morose aspect , who install herself at the top of one table , while a more buxom lady preside at the other . I look in vain for she I have first see the night before ; she be not visible : occupy the foot of the table where I sit , and a strange , foreign - look , elderly lady , the french teacher , as I afterwards find , take the corresponding seat at the other board . a long grace be say and a hymn sung ; then a servant bring in some tea for the teacher , and the meal begin . , and now very faint , I devoure a spoonful or two of my portion without think of its taste ; but the first edge of hunger blunt , I perceive I have get in hand a nauseous mess ; burnt porridge be almost as bad as rotten potatoe ; famine itself soon sicken over it . the spoon be move slowly : I see each girl taste she food and try to swallow it ; but in most case the effort be soon relinquish . Breakfast be over , and none have breakfaste . thanks be return for what we have not get , and a second hymn chant , the refectory be evacuate for the schoolroom . I be one of the last to go out , and in pass the table , I see one teacher take a basin of the porridge and taste it ; she look at the other ; all they countenance express displeasure , and one of they , the stout one , whisper - " Abominable stuff ! how shameful ! " a quarter of a hour pass before lesson again begin , during which the schoolroom be in a glorious tumult ; for that space of time it seem to be permit to talk loud and more freely , and they use they privilege . the whole conversation run on the breakfast , which one and all abuse roundly . poor thing ! it be the sole consolation they have . be now the only teacher in the room : a group of great girl stand about she spoke with serious and sullen gesture . I hear the name of pronounce by some lip ; at which shook she head disapprovingly ; but she make no great effort to cheek the general wrath ; doubtless she share in it . a clock in the schoolroom struck nine ; leave she circle , and stand in the middle of the room , cry - " Silence ! to you seat ! " prevail : in five minute the confused throng be resolve into order , and comparative silence quell the clamour of tongue . the upper teacher now punctually resume they post : but still , all seem to wait . Range on benche down the side of the room , the eighty girl sit motionless and erect ; a quaint assemblage they appear , all with plain lock comb from they face , not a curl visible ; in brown dress , make high and surround by a narrow tucker about the throat , with little pocket of holland ( shape something like a 's purse ) tie in front of they frock , and destin to serve the purpose of a work - bag : all , too , wear woollen stocking and country - make shoe , fasten with brass buckle . above twenty of those clad in this costume be full - grow girl , or rather young woman ; it suit they ill , and give a air of oddity even to the prettiest . I be still look at they , and also at interval examine the teacher -- none of whom precisely please I ; for the stout one be a little coarse , the dark one not a little fierce , the foreigner harsh and grotesque , and , poor thing ! look purple , weather - beaten , and over-worked -- when , as my eye wander from face to face , the whole school rise simultaneously , as if move by a common spring . what be the matter ? I have hear no order give : I be puzzl . Ere I have gather my wit , the class be again seate : but as all eye be now turn to one point , mine follow the general direction , and encounter the personage who have receive I last night . she stand at the bottom of the long room , on the hearth ; for there be a fire at each end ; she survey the two row of girl silently and gravely . approach , seem to ask she a question , and have receive she answer , go back to she place , and say aloud - " monitor of the first class , fetch the glob ! " while the direction be be execute , the lady consult move slowly up the room . I suppose I have a considerable organ of veneration , for I retain yet the sense of admiring awe with which my eye trace she step . see now , in broad daylight , she look tall , fair , and shapely ; brown eye with a benignant light in they iris , and a fine pencilling of long lash round , relieve the whiteness of she large front ; on each of she temple she hair , of a very dark brown , be cluster in round curl , accord to the fashion of those time , when neither smooth band nor long ringlet be in vogue ; she dress , also
also in the mode of the day , be of purple cloth , relieve by a sort of spanish trimming of black velvet ; a gold watch ( watch be not so common then as now ) shone at she girdle . let the reader add , to complete the picture , refin feature ; a complexion , if pale , clear ; and a stately air and carriage , and he will have , at least , as clearly as word can give it , a correct idea of the exterior of -- , as I afterwards see the name write in a prayer - book intrust to I to carry to church . the superintendent of ( for such be this lady ) have take she seat before a pair of glob place on one of the table , summon the first class round she , and commence give a lesson on geography ; the lower class be call by the teacher : repetition in history , grammar , & c. , go on for a hour ; writing and arithmetic succeed , and music lesson be give by to some of the elder girl . the duration of each lesson be measure by the clock , which at last struck twelve . the superintendent rose - " I have a word to address to the pupil , " say she . the tumult of cessation from lesson be already break forth , but it sank at she voice . she go on - " you have this morning a breakfast which you could not eat ; you must be hungry : -- I have order that a lunch of bread and cheese shall be serve to all . " the teacher look at she with a sort of surprise . " it be to be do on my responsibility , " she add , in a explanatory tone to they , and immediately afterwards leave the room . the bread and cheese be presently bring in and distribute , to the high delight and refreshment of the whole school . the order be now give " to the garden ! " each put on a coarse straw bonnet , with string of coloured calico , and a cloak of grey frieze . I be similarly equip , and , follow the stream , I make my way into the open air . the garden be a wide inclosure , surround with wall so high as to exclude every glimpse of prospect ; a cover verandah run down one side , and broad walk bordere a middle space divide into score of little bed : these bed be assign as garden for the pupil to cultivate , and each bed have a owner . when full of flower they would doubtless look pretty ; but now , at the latter end of , all be wintry blight and brown decay . I shudder as I stand and look round I : it be a inclement day for outdoor exercise ; not positively rainy , but darken by a drizzling yellow fog ; all under foot be still soak wet with the flood of yesterday . the stronger among the girl run about and engage in active game , but sundry pale and thin one herd together for shelter and warmth in the verandah ; and amongst these , as the dense mist penetrat to they shivering frame , I hear frequently the sound of a hollow cough . as yet I have speak to no one , nor do anybody seem to take notice of I ; I stand lonely enough : but to that feeling of isolation I be accustom ; it do not oppress I much . I lean against a pillar of the verandah , draw my grey mantle close about I , and , try to forget the cold which nip I without , and the unsatisfied hunger which gnaw I within , deliver myself up to the employment of watch and think . my reflection be too undefined and fragmentary to merit record : I hardly yet know where I be ; Gateshead and my past life seem float away to a immeasurable distance ; the present be vague and strange , and of the future I could form no conjecture . I look round the convent - like garden , and then up at the house -- a large building , half of which seem grey and old , the other half quite new . the new part , contain the schoolroom and dormitory , be light by mullioned and latticed window , which give it a church - like aspect ; a stone tablet over the door bear this inscription :- " . -- this portion be rebuild -- , by , of , in this county . " " let you light so shine before man , that they may see you good work , and glorify you Father which be in heaven . " -- . v. 16 . I read these word over and over again : I feel that a explanation belong to they , and be unable fully to penetrate they import . I be still ponder the signification of " Institution , " and endeavour to make out a connection between the first word and the verse of , when the sound of a cough close behind I make I turn my head . I see a girl sit on a stone bench near ; she be bend over a book , on the perusal of which she see intent : from where I stand I could see the title -- it be " Rassela ; " a name that strike I as strange , and consequently attractive . in turn a leaf she happen to look up , and I say to she directly - " be you book interes ? " I have already
already form the intention of ask she to lend it to I some day . " I like it , " she answer , after a pause of a second or two , during which she examine I . " what be it about ? " I continue . I hardly know where I find the hardihood thus to open a conversation with a stranger ; the step be contrary to my nature and habit : but I think she occupation touch a chord of sympathy somewhere ; for I too like reading , though of a frivolous and childish kind ; I could not digest or comprehend the serious or substantial . " you may look at it , " reply the girl , offer I the book . I do so ; a brief examination convince I that the contents be less take than the title : " " look dull to my trifling taste ; I see nothing about fairy , nothing about genii ; no bright variety seem spread over the closely - print page . I return it to she ; she receive it quietly , and without say anything she be about to relapse into she former studious mood : again I venture to disturb she - " can you tell I what the writing on that stone over the door mean ? what be ? " " this house where you be come to live . " " and why do they call it Institution ? be it in any way different from other school ? " " it be partly a charity - school : you and I , and all the rest of we , be charity - child . I suppose you be a orphan : be not either you father or you mother dead ? " " both die before I can remember . " " well , all the girl here have lose either one or both parent , and this be call a institution for educate orphan . " " do we pay no money ? do they keep we for nothing ? " " we pay , or we friend pay , fifteen pound a year for each . " " then why do they call we charity - child ? " " because fifteen pound be not enough for board and teaching , and the deficiency be supply by subscription . " " who subscribe ? " " different benevolent - minded lady and gentleman in this neighbourhood and in . " " who be ? " " the lady who build the new part of this house as that tablet record , and whose son overlook and direct everything here . " " why ? " " because he be treasurer and manager of the establishment . " " then this house do not belong to that tall lady who wear a watch , and who say we be to have some bread and cheese ? " " to ? oh , no ! I wish it do : she have to answer to for all she do . buy all we food and all we clothe . " " do he live here ? " " no -- two mile off , at a large hall . " " be he a good man ? " " he be a clergyman , and be say to do a great deal of good . " " do you say that tall lady be call ? " " yes . " " and what be the other teacher call ? " " the one with red cheek be call ; she attend to the work , and cut out -- for we make we own clothes , we frock , and peliss , and everything ; the little one with black hair be ; she teach history and grammar , and hear the second class repetition ; and the one who wear a shawl , and have a pocket - handkerchief tie to she side with a yellow ribband , be : she come from , in , and teach french . " " do you like the teacher ? " " well enough . " " do you like the little black one , and the Madame -? -- I can not pronounce she name as you do . " " be hasty -- you must take care not to offend she ; be not a bad sort of person . " " but be the best -- be not she ? " " miss Temple be very good and very clever ; she be above the rest , because she know far more than they do . " " have you be long here ? " " two year . " " be you a orphan ? " " my mother be dead . " " be you happy here ? " " you ask rather too many question . I have give you answer enough for the present : now I want to read . " but at that moment the summon sound for dinner ; all re-enter the house . the odour which now fill the refectory be scarcely more appetising than that which have regal we nostril at breakfast : the dinner be serve in two huge tin - plate vessel , whence rise a strong steam redolent of rancid fat . I find the mess to consist of indifferent potatoe and strange shred of rusty meat , mix and cook together . of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful be apportion to each pupil . I eat what I could , and wonder within myself whether every day 's fare would be like this . after dinner , we immediately adjourn to the schoolroom : lesson recommence , and be continue till five o'clock . the only mark event of the afternoon be , that I see the girl with
with whom I have converse in the verandah dismiss in disgrace by from a history class , and send to stand in the middle of the large schoolroom . the punishment seem to I in a high degree ignominious , especially for so great a girl -- she look thirteen or upward . I expect she would show sign of great distress and shame ; but to my surprise she neither wept nor blush : compose , though grave , she stand , the central mark of all eyes . " how can she bear it so quietly -- so firmly ? " I ask of myself . " be I in she place , it seem to I I should wish the earth to open and swallow I up . she look as if she be think of something beyond she punishment -- beyond she situation : of something not round she nor before she . I have hear of day - dream -- be she in a day - dream now ? she eye be fix on the floor , but I be sure they do not see it -- she sight seem turn in , go down into she heart : she be look at what she can remember , I believe ; not at what be really present . I wonder what sort of a girl she be -- whether good or naughty . " after five p.m. we have another meal , consist of a small mug of coffee , and half - a - slice of brown bread . I devoure my bread and drank my coffee with relish ; but I should have be glad of as much more -- I be still hungry . half - a - hour 's recreation succeed , then study ; then the glass of water and the piece of oat - cake , prayer , and bed . be my first day at . the next day commence as before , get up and dress by rushlight ; but this morning we be oblige to dispense with the ceremony of wash ; the water in the pitcher be freeze . a change have take place in the weather the preceding evening , and a keen north - east wind , whistl through the crevice of we bedroom window all night long , have make we shiver in we bed , and turn the contents of the ewer to ice . before the long hour and a half of prayer and Bible - reading be over , I feel ready to perish with cold . Breakfast - time come at last , and this mor the porridge be not burn ; the quality be eatable , the quantity small . how small my portion seem ! I wish it have be double . in the course of the day I be enrol a member of the fourth class , and regular task and occupations be assign I : hithertoo , I have onlly be a spectator of the proceeding at ; I be now to become a actor therein . at first , be little accustom to learn by heart , the lesson appear to I both long and difficult ; the frequent change from task to task , too , bewilder I ; and I be glad when , about three o'clock in the afternoon , put into my hand a border of muslin two yard long , together with needle , thimble , & c. , and send I to sit in a quiet corner of the schoolroom , with direction to hem the same . at that hour most of the other be sew likewise ; but one class still stand round 's chair read , and as all be quiet , the subject of they lesson could be hear , together with the manner in which each girl acquit herself , and the animadversion or commendation of on the performance . it be English history : among the reader I observ my acquaintance of the verandah : at the commencement of the lesson , she place have be at the top of the class , but for some error of pronunciation , or some inattention to stop , she be suddenly send to the very bottom . even in that obscure position , continue to make she a object of constant notice : she be continually address to she such phrasis as the follow :- " burn " ( such it seem be she name : the girl here be all call by they surname , as boy be elsewhere ) , " , you be stand on the side of you shoe ; turn you toe out immediately . " " burn , you peak you ching most unpleasantly ; draw it in . " " burn , I insist on you hold you head up ; I will not have you before I in that attitude , " &c . &c . a chapter have be read through twice , the book be close and the girl examine . the lesson have comprise part of the reign of , and there be sundry question about tonnage and poundage and ship - money , which most of they appear unable to answer ; still , every little difficulty be solve instantly when it reach : she memory seem to have retain the substance of the whole lesson , and she be ready with answer on every point . I keep expect that would praise she attention ; but , instead of that , she suddenly cry out - " you dirty , disagreeable girl ! you have never clean you nail this morning ! " burns make no answer : I wonder at she silence . " why , " think I , " do she not explain that she could neither clean she nail nor wash she face , as the water
water be freeze ? " my attention be now call off by desire I to hold a skein of thread : while she be win it , she talk to I from time to time , ask whether I have ever be at school before , whether I could mark , stitch , knit , & c. ; till she dismiss I , I could not pursue my observation on 's movement . when I return to my seat , that lady be just deliver a order of which I do not catch the import ; but immediately leave the class , and go into the small inner room where the book be keep , return in half a minute , carry in she hand a bundle of twig tie together at one end . this ominous tool she present to with a respectful curtesy ; then she quietly , and without be tell , unloose she pinafore , and the teacher instantly and sharply inflict on she neck a dozen strokes with the bunch of twig . not a tear rise to 's eye ; and , while I pause from my sewing , because my finger quiver at this spectacle with a sentiment of unavailing and impotent anger , not a feature of she pensive face alte its ordinary expression . " Harden girl ! " exclaim ; " nothing can correct you of you slatternly habit : carry the rod away . " obey : I look at she narrowly as she emerge from the book - closet ; she be just put back she handkerchief into she pocket , and the trace of a tear glisten on she thin cheek . the play - hour in the evening I think the pleasantest fraction of the day at : the bit of bread , the dratch of coffee swallow at five o'clock have revive vitality , if it have not satisfied hunger : the long restraint of the day be slacken ; the schoolroom feel warmer than in the morning -- it be fire be allow to burn a little more brightly , to supply , in some measure , the place of candle , not yet introduce : the ruddy gloam , the license uproar , the confusion of many voice give one a welcome sense of liberty . on the evening of the day on which i have see flog she pupil , , I wander as usual among the form and table and laugh group without a companion , yet not feel lonely : when I pass the window , I now and then lift a blind , and look out ; it snow fast , a drift be already form against the lower pane ; put my ear close to the window , I could distinguish from the gleeful tumult within , the disconsolate moan of the wind outside . probably , if I have lately leave a good home and kind parent , this would have be the hour when I should most keenly have regret the separation ; that wind would then have sadden my heart ; this obscure chaos would have disturb my peace ! as it be , I derive from both a strange excitement , and reckless and feverish , I wish the wind to howl more wildly , the gloom to deepen to darkness , and the confusion to rise to clamour . jump over form , and creepe under table , I make my way to one of the fire - place ; there , knee by the high wire fender , I find , absorb , silent , abstract from all round she by the companionship of a book , which she read by the dim glare of the ember . " be it still ' ' ? " I ask , come behind she . " yes , " she say , " and I have just finish it . " and in five minute more she shut it up . I be glad of this . " now , " think I , " I can perhaps get she to talk . " I sit down by she on the floor . " what be you name besides ? " " . " " do you come a long way from here ? " " I come from a place farther north , quite on the border of . " " will you ever go back ? " " I hope so ; but nobody can be sure of the future . " " you must wish to leave ? " " no ! why should I ? I be send to Lowood to get a education ; and it would be of no use go away until I have attaine that object . " " but that teacher , , be so cruel to you ? " " ? not at all ! she be severe : she dislike my fault . " " and if I be in you place I should dislike she ; I should resist she . if she struck I with that rod , I should get it from she hand ; I should break it under she nose . " " probably you would do nothing of the sort : but if you do , would expel you from the school ; that would be a great grief to you relation . it be far better to endure patiently a smart which nobody feel but yourself , than to commit a hasty action whose evil consequence will extend to all connect with you ; and besides , the Bible bid we return good for evil . " " but then it seem disgraceful to be flog , and to be send to stand in the middle of a room full of people ; and you be such a great girl : I be far younger than you
you , and I could not bear it . " " yet it would be you duty to bear it , if you could not avoid it : it be weak and silly to say you can not bear what it be you fate to be require to bear . " I hear she with wonder : I could not comprehend this doctrine of endurance ; and still less could I understand or sympathise with the forbearance she express for she chastiser . still I feel that consider thing by a light invisible to my eye . I suspect she might be right and I wrong ; but I would not ponder the matter deeply ; like , I put it off to a more convenient season . " you say you have fault , : what be they ? to I you seem very good . " " then learn from I , not to judge by appearances : I be , as say , slatternly ; I seldom put , and never keep , thing , in order ; I be careless ; I forget rule ; I read when I should learn my lesson ; I have no method ; and sometimes I say , like you , I cannot bear to be subject to systematic arrangement . this be all very provoke to , who be naturally neat , punctual , and particular . " " and cross and cruel , " I add ; but would not admit my addition : she keep silence . " be as severe to you as ? " at the utterance of 's name , a soft smile flit over she grave face . " be full of goodness ; it pain she to be severe to any one , even the worst in the school : she see my error , and tell I of they gently ; and , if I do anything worthy of praise , she give I my meed liberally . one strong proof of my wretchedly defective nature be , that even she expostulation , so mild , so rational , have not influence to cure I of my fault ; and even she praise , though I value it most highly , can not stimulate I to continue care and foresight . " " that be curious , " say I , " it be so easy to be careful . " " for you I have no doubt it be . I observ you in you class this morning , and see you be closely attentive : you thought never seem to wander while explain the lesson and question you . now , mine continually rove away ; when I should be listen to , and collect all she say with assiduity , often I lose the very sound of she voice ; I fall into a sort of dream . sometimes I think I be in , and that the noise I hear round I be the bubbling of a little brook which run through , near we house ; -- then , when it come to my turn to reply , I have to be awaken ; and have hear nothing of what be read for listen to the visionary brook , I have no answer ready . " " yet how well you reply this afternoon . " " it be mere chance ; the subject on which we have be read have interest I . this afternoon , instead of dreaming of , I be wonder how a man who wish to do right could act so unjustly and unwisely as the sometimes do ; and I think what a pity it be that , with he integrity and conscientiousness , he could see no farther than the prerogative of the crown . if he have but be able to look to a distance , and see how what they call the spirit of the age be ten ! still , I like Charles -- I respect he -- I pity he , poor murder king ! yes , he enemy be the worst : they she blood they have no right to shed . how dared they kill he ! " be talk to herself now : she have forget I could not very well understand she -- that I be ignorant , or nearly so , of the subject she discuss . I recall she to my level . " and when teach you , do you thought wander then ? " " no , certainly , not often ; because have generally something to say which be newer than my own reflection ; she language be singularly agreeable to I , and the information she communicate be often just what I wish to gain . " " well , then , with you be good ? " " yes , in a passive way : I make no effort ; I follow as inclination guide I . there be no merit in such goodness . " " a great deal : you be good to those who be good to you . it be all I ever desire to be . if people be always kind and obedient to those who be cruel and unjust , the wicked people would have it all they own way : they would never feel afraid , and so they would never alter , but would grow worse and worse . when we be strike at without a reason , we should strike back again very hard ; I be sure we should -- so hard as to teach the person who strike we never to do it again . " " you will change you mind , I hope , when you grow older : as yet you be but a little untatch girl . " " but I feel this , Helen ; I must dislike those
those who , whatever I do to please they , persist in dislik I ; I must resist those who punish I unjustly . it be as natural as that I should love those who show I affection , or submit to punishment when I feel it be deserv . " " Heathen and savage tribe hold that doctrine , but and civilised nation disow it . " " how ? I do not understand . " " it be not violence that best overcom hate -- nor vengeance that must certainly heals injury . " " what then ? " " read the testament , and observe what say , and how he act ; make he word you rule , and he conduct you example . " " what do he say ? " " love you enemy ; bless they that curse you ; do good to they that hate you and despitefully use you . " " then I should love , which I can not do ; I should bless she son , which be impossible . " in she turn , ask I to explain , and I proceed forthwith to pour out , in my own way , the tale of my suffering and resentment . bitter and truculent when excited , I speak as I feel , without reserve or softening . hear I patiently to the end : I expect she would then make a remark , but she say nothing . " well , " I ask impatiently , " be not Reed a hard - hear , bad woman ? " " she have be unkind to you , no doubt ; because you see , she dislike you cast of character , as do mine ; but how minutely you remember all she have do and say to you ! what a singularly deep impression she injustice seem to have make on you heart ! no ill - usage so brand its record on my feeling . would you not be happier if you try to forget she severity , together with the passionate emotion it excit ? life appear to I too short to be spend in nursing animosity or register wrong . we be , and must be , one and all , burdene with faults in this world : but the time will soon come when , I trust , we shall put they off in put off we corruptible body ; when debasement and sin will fall from we with this cumbrous frame of flesh , and only the spark of the spirit will remain , -- the impalpable principle of light and thought , pure as when it leave the Creator to inspire the creature : whence it come it will return ; perhaps again to be communicate to some be higher than man -- perhaps to pass through gradation of glory , from the pale human soul to brighten to the seraph ! surely it will never , on the contrary , be suffer to degenerate from man to fiend ? no ; I can not believe that : I hold another creed : which no one ever teach I , and which I seldom mention ; but in which I delight , and to which I cling : for it extend hope to all : it make a rest -- a mighty home , not a terror and a abyss . besides , with this creed , I can so clearly distinguish between the criminal and he crime ; I can so sincerely forgive the first while I abhor the last : with this creed revenge never worry my heart , degradation never too deeply disgust I , injustice never crush I too low : I live in calm , look to the end . " 's head , always droop , sank a little lower as she finish this sentence . I see by she look she wish no longer to talk to I , but rather to converse with she own thought . she be not allow much time for meditation : a monitor , a great rough girl , presently come up , exclaim in a strong accent - " , if you do not go and put you drawer in order , and fold up you work this minute , I will tell to come and look at it ! " sigh as she reverie fle , and get up , obey the monitor without reply as without delay . my first quarter at see a age ; and not the golden age either ; it comprise a irksome struggle with difficulty in habituat myself to new rule and unwonted task . the fear of failure in these point harass I worse than the physical hardship of my lot ; though these be no trifle . during , , and part of , the deep snow , and , after they melting , the almost impassable roads , prevent we stirring beyond the garden wall , except to go to church ; but within these limit we have to pass a hour every day in the open air . we clothing be insufficient to protect we from the severe cold : we have no boot , the snow get into we shoe and melte there : we ungloved hand become numbed and cover with chilblain , as be we foot : I remember well the distracting irritation I endure from this cause every evening , when my foot inflam ; and the torture of thrust the swelled , raw , and stiff toe into my shoe in the morning . then the scanty supply of food be distresse : with the keen appetite of grow child , we have scarcely sufficient to keep alive a delicate invalid . from this deficiency of nourishment result a abuse , which press hardly on the younger pupil : whenever the famished
famished great girl have a opportunity , they would coax or menace the little one out of they portion . many a time I have share between two claimant the precious morsel of brown bread distribute at tea - time ; and after relinquish to a third half the contents of my mug of coffee , I have swallow the remainder with a accompaniment of secret tear , force from I by the exigency of hunger . Sundays be dreary day in that wintry season . we have to walk two mile to , where we patron officiate . we set out cold , we arrive at church colder : during the morning service we become almost paralysed . it be too far to return to dinner , and a allowance of cold meat and bread , in the same penurious proportion observe in we ordinary meal , be serve round between the service . at the close of the afternoon service we return by a exposed and hilly road , where the bitter winter wind , blow over a range of snowy summit to the north , almost flay the skin from we face . I can remember walk lightly and rapidly along we droop line , she play cloak , which the frosty wind flutter , gather close about she , and encourage we , by precept and example , to keep up we spirit , and march forward , as she say , " like stalwart soldier . " the other teacher , poor thing , be generally themselve too much deject to attempt the task of cheer other . how we longe for the light and heat of a blaze fire when we get back ! but , to the little one at least , this be deny : each hearth in the schoolroom be immediately surround by a double row of great girl , and behind they the younger child crouch in group , wrap they starve arm in they pinafore . a little solace come at tea - time , in the shape of a double ration of bread -- a whole , instead of a half , slice -- with the delicious addition of a thin scrape of butter : it be the hebdomadal treat to which we all look forward from to . I generally contrive to reserve a moiety of this bounteous repast for myself ; but the remainder I be invariably oblige to part with . the evening be spend in repeating , by heart , the , and the fifth , sixth , and seventh chapter of ; and in listening to a long sermon , read by , whose irrepressible yawn attest she weariness . a frequent interlude of these performance be the enactment of the part of by some half - dozen of little girl , who , overpower with sleep , would fall down , if not out of the third loft , yet off the fourth form , and be take up half dead . the remedy be , to thrust they forward into the centre of the schoolroom , and oblige they to stand there till the sermon be finish . sometimes they foot fail they , and they sank together in a heap ; they be then propp up with the monitor 's high stool . I have not yet allude to the visit of ; and indeed that gentleman be from home during the greater part of the first month after my arrival ; perhaps prolonge he stay with he friend the archdeacon : he absence be a relief to I . I need not say that I have my own reason for dreading he come : but come he do at last . one afternoon ( I have then be three week at ) , as I be sit with a slate in my hand , puzzl over a sum in long division , my eye , raise in abstraction to the window , catch sight of a figure just pass : I recognise almost instinctively that gaunt outline ; and when , two minute after , all the school , teacher include , rise en masse , it be not necessary for I to look up in order to ascertain whose entrance they thus greet . a long stride measure the schoolroom , and presently beside , who herself have risen , stand the same black column which have frown on I so ominously from the hearthrug of . I now glance sideway at this piece of architecture . yes , I be right : it be , buttone up in a surtout , and look longer , narrower , and more rigid than ever . I have my own reason for be dismaye at this apparition ; too well I remember the perfidious hint give by about my disposition , & c. ; the promise pledge by to apprise and the teacher of my vicious nature . all along I have be dread the fulfilment of this promise , -- I have be look out daily for the " come man , " whose information respect my past life and conversation be to brand I as a bad child for ever : now there he be . he stand at 's side ; he be speak low in she ear : I do not doubt he be make disclosure of my villainy ; and I watch she eye with painful anxiety , expect every moment to see it be dark orb turn on I a glance of repugnance and contempt . I listen too ; and as I happen to be seat quite at the top of the room , I catch most of what he say : it be import relieve I from immediate apprehension . " I suppose , , the thread I buy at will do ; it strike I that it would be just of the
the quality for the calico chemise , and I sorte the needle to match . you may tell Smith that I forget to make a memorandum of the darning needle , but she shall have some papers send in next week ; and she be not , on any account , to give out more than one at a time to each pupil : if they have more , they be apt to be careless and lose they . and , of ma 'am ! I wish the woollen stocking be better look to ! -- when I be here last , I go into the kitchen - garden and examine the clothes dry on the line ; there be a quantity of black hose in a very bad state of repair : from the size of the hole in they I be sure they have not be well mende from time to time . " he pause . " you direction shall be attend to , sir , " say . " and , ma 'am , " he continue , " the laundress tell I some of the girl have two clean tucker in the week : it be too much ; the rule limit they to one . " " I think I can explain that circumstance , sir . and be invite to take tea with some friend at last , and I give they leave to put on clean tucker for the occasion . " nod . " well , for once it may pass ; but please not to let the circumstance occur too often . and there be another thing which surprise I ; I find , in settling account with the housekeeper , that a lunch , consist of bread and cheese , have twice be serve out to the girl during the past fortnight . how be this ? I look over the regulation , and I find no such meal as lunch mention . who introduce this innovation ? and by what authority ? " " I must be responsible for the circumstance , sir , " reply : " the breakfast be so ill prepare that the pupil could not possibly eat it ; and I da not allow they to remain fasting till dinner - time . " " madam , allow I a instant . you be aware that my plan in bring up these girl be , not to accustom they to habits of luxury and indulgence , but to render they hardy , patient , self - deny . should any little accidental disappointment of the appetite occur , such as the spoiling of a meal , the under or the over dressing of a dish , the incident ought not to be neutralise by replace with something more delicate the comfort lose , thus pamper the body and obviat the aim of this institution ; it ought to be improve to the spiritual edification of the pupil , by encourage they to evince fortitude under temporary privation . a brief address on those occasion would not be mistim , wherein a judicious instructor would take the opportunity of refer to the suffering of the primitive ; to the torment of martyr ; to the exhortation of we bless himself , call upon he disciple to take up they cross and follow ; to he warning that man shall not live by bread alone , but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of ; to he divine consolation , " if ye suffer hunger or thirst for my sake , happy be ye . " oh , madam , when you put bread and cheese , instead of burnt porridge , into these child 's mouth , you may indeed feed they vile body , but you little think how you starve they immortal soul ! " again pause -- perhaps overcome by he feeling . have look down when he first begin to speak to she ; but she now gaze straight before she , and she face , naturally pale as marble , appear to be assume also the coldness and fixity of that material ; especially she mouth , close as if it would have require a sculptor 's chisel to open it , and she brow settle gradually into petrified severity . , , stand on the hearth with he hand behind he back , majestically survey the whole school . suddenly he eye give a blink , as if it have meet something that either dazzl or shock its pupil ; turn , he say in more rapid accent than he have hitherto use - " , , what -- what be that girl with curled hair ? re hair , ma 'am , curl -- curl all over ? " and extend he cane he point to the awful object , he hand shak as he do so . " it be , " reply , very quietly . " , ! and why have she , or any other , curled hair ? why , in defiance of every precept and principle of this house , do she conform to the world so openly -- here in a evangelical , charitable establishment -- as to wear she hair one mass of curl ? " " 's hair curl naturally , " return , still more quietly . " naturally ! yes , but we be not to conform to nature ; I wish these girl to be the child of : and why that abundance ? I have again and again intimate that I desire the hair to be arrange closely , modestly , plainly . , that girl 's hair must be cut off entirely ; I will send a barber to - morrow : and I see other who have far too much of the excrescence -- that tall girl , tell she to
to turn round . tell all the first form to rise up and direct they face to the wall . " pass she handkerchief over she lip , as if to smooth away the involuntary smile that curl they ; she give the order , however , and when the first class could take in what be require of they , they obey . lean a little back on my bench , I could see the look and grimace with which they comment on this manoeuvre : it be a pity could not see they too ; he would perhaps have felt that , whatever he might do with the outside of the cup and platter , the inside be further beyond he interference than he imagine . he scrutinise the reverse of these liive medal some five minute , then pronounce sentence . these word fall like the knell of doom - " all those top - knot must be cut off . " seem to remonstrate . " madam , " he pursue , " I have a master to serve whose kingdom be not of this world : my mission be to mortify in these girl the lust of the flesh ; to teach they to clothe themselves with shame - facedness and sobriety , not with braided hair and costly apparel ; and each of the young person before we have a string of hair twist in plait which vanity itself might have woven ; these , I repeat , must be cut off ; think of the time waste , of -- " be here interrupt : three other visitor , lady , now enter the room . they ought to have come a little sooner to have hear he lecture on dress , for they be splendidly attire in velvet , silk , and fur . the two younger of the trio ( fine girl of sixteen and seventeen ) have grey beaver hat , then in fashion , shade with ostrich plume , and from under the brim of this graceful head - dress fall a profusion of light tress , elaborately curl ; the elder lady be envelope in a costly velvet shawl , trim with ermine , and she wear a false front of french curl . these lady be deferentially receive by , as and the , and conduct to seat of honour at the top of the room . it seem they have come in the carriage with they reverend relative , and have be conduct a rummage scrutiny of the room upstairs , while he transact business with the housekeeper , question the laundress , and lecture the superintendent . they now proceed to address diver remark and reproof to , who be charge with the care of the linen and the inspection of the dormitory : but i have no time to listen to what they say ; other matter call off and enchant my attention . , while gather up the discourse of and , I have not , at the same time , neglect precaution to secure my personal safety ; which I think would be effect , if I could only elude observation . to this end , I have sit well back on the form , and while seem to be busy with my sum , have hold my slate in such a manner as to conceal my face : I might have escape notice , have not my treacherous slate somehow happen to slip from my hand , and fall with a obtrusive crash , directly draw every eye upon I ; I know it be all over now , and , as I stoop to pick up the two fragment of slate , I rally my force for the worst . it come . " a careless girl ! " say , and immediately after -- " it be the new pupil , I perceive . " and before I could draw breath , " I must not forget I have a word to say respect she . " then aloud : how lould it seem to I ! " let the child who break she slate come forward ! " of my own accord I could not have stir ; I be paralyse : but the two great girl who sit on each side of I , set I on my leg and push I towards the dread judge , and then gently assist I to he very foot , and I catch she whispered counsel - " do not be afraid , , I see it be a accident ; you shall not be punish . " the kind whisper go to my heart like a dagger . " another minute , and she will despise I for a hypocrite , " think I ; and a impulse of fury against , , and bounde in my pulse at the conviction . I be no . " fetch that stool , " say , point to a very high one from which a monitor have just risen : it be bring . " place the child upon it . " and I be place there , by whom I do not know : I be in no condition to note particular ; I be only aware that they have hoist I up to the height of 's nose , that he be within a yard of I , and that a spread of shot orange and purple silk peliss and a cloud of silvery plumage extend and wave below I . hem . " lady , " say he , turn to he family , " , teacher , and child , you all see this girl ? " of course they do ; for I feel they eye direct like burning - glass against my scorched skin . " you see she be yet young ; you observe she
she possess the ordinary form of childhood ; have graciously give she the shape that he have give to all of we ; no signal deformity point she out as a mark character . who would think that the one have already find a servant and agent in she ? yet such , I grieve to say , be the case . " a pause -- in which I begin to steady the palsy of my nerve , and to feel that the be pass ; and that the trial , no longer to be shirk , must be firmly sustain . " my dear child , " pursue the black marble clergyman , with patho , " this be a sad , a melancholy occasion ; for it become my duty to warn you , that this girl , who might be one of 's own lamb , be a little castaway : not a member of the true flock , but evidently a interloper and a alien . you must be on you guard against she ; you must shin she example ; if necessary , avoid she company , exclude she from you sport , and shut she out from you converse . teacher , you must watch she : keep you eye on she movement , weigh well she word , scrutinise she action , punish she body to save she soul : if , indeed , such salvation be possible , for ( my tongue falter while I tell it ) this girl , this child , the native of a land , worse than many a little heathen who say its prayer to and kneel before -- this girl be -- a liar ! " now come a pause of ten minute , during which I , by this time in perfect possession of my wit , observe all the female produce they pocket -handkerchief and apply they to they optic , while the elderly lady sway herself to and fro , and the two younger one whisper , " how shocke ! " resume . " this I learn from she benefactress ; from the pious and charitable lady who adopt she in she orphan state , rear she as she own daughter , and whose kindness , whose generosity the unhappy girl repay by a ingratitude so bad , so dreadful , that at last she excellent patroness be obliged to separate she from she own young one , fearful lest she vicious example should contaminate they purity : she have send she here to be heale , even as the of old send they disease to the trouble pool of ; and , teacher , superintendent , I beg of you not to allow the water to stagnate round she . " with this sublime conclusion , adjust the top button of he surtout , mutter something to he family , who rise , bow to , and then all the great people sail in state from the room . turn at the door , my judge say - " let she stand half - a - hour longer on that stool , and let no one speak to she during the remainder of the day . " there be I , then , mount aloft ; I , who have say I could not bear the shame of stand on my natural foot in the middle of the room , be now expose to general view on a pedestal of infamy . what my sensation be no language can describe ; but just as they all rise , stifle my breath and constrict my throat , a girl come up and pass I : in passing , she lift she eye . what a strange light inspire they ! what a extraordinary sensation that ray send through I ! how the new feeling bear I up ! it be as if a martyr , a hero , have pass a slave or victim , and impart strength in the transit . I master the rise hysteria , lifte up my head , and take a firm stand on the stool . ask some slight question about she work of , be chidden for the triviality of the inquiry , return to she place , and smile at I as she again go by . what a smile ! I remember it now , and I know that it be the effluence of fine intellect , of true courage ; it light up she mark lineament , she thin face , she sunke grey eye , like a reflection from the aspect of a angel . yet at that moment wear on she arm " the untidy badge ; " scarcely a hour ago I have hear she condemn by to a dinner of bread and water on the morrow because she have blot a exercise in copy it out . be the imperfect nature of man ! such spot be there on the disc of the clearest planet ; and eye like 's can only see those minute defects , and be blind to the full brightness of the orb . Ere the half - hour end , five o'clock struck ; school be dismiss , and all be go into the refectory to tea . I now venture to descmend : it be deep dusk ; I retire into a corner and sit down on the floor . the spell by which i have be so far support begin to dissolve ; reaction take place , and soon , so overwhelming be the grief that seize I , I sank prostrate with my face to the ground . now I weep : be not here ; nothing sustain I ; leave to myself I abandon myself , and my tear water the board . I have mean to be so good , and to do so much at Lowood :
: to make so many friend , to earn respect and win affection . already I have make visible progress : that very morning I have reach the head of my class ; have praise I warmly ; have smile approbation ; she have promise to teach I draw , and to let I learn french , if I continue to make similar improvement two month longer : and then I be well receive by my fellow - pupil ; treat as a equal by those of my own age , and not molest by any ; now , here I lay again crush and trode on ; and could I ever rise more ? " never , " I think ; and ardently I wish to die . while sobb out this wish in broken accent , some one approach : I start up -- again be near I ; the fad fire just show she come up the long , vacant room ; she bring my coffee and bread . " come , eat something , " she say ; but I put both away from I , feel as if a drop or a crumb would have chok I in my present condition . regard I , probably with surprise : I could not now abate my agitation , though I try hard ; I continue to weep aloud . she sit down on the ground near I , embrace she knee with she arm , and rest she head upon they ; in that attitude she remain silent as a indian . I be the first who speak - " Helen , why do you stay with a girl whom everybody believe to be a liar ? " " everybody , ? why , there be only eighty people who have hear you call so , and the world contain hundred of million . " " but what have I to do with million ? the eighty , I know , despise I . " " , you be mistaken : probably not one in the school either despise or dislike you : many , I be sure , pity you much . " " how can they pity I after what have say ? " " be not a god : nor be he even a great and admired man : he be little like here ; he never take step to make himself like . have he treat you as a especial favourite , you would have find enemy , declare or covert , all around you ; as it be , the greater number would offer you sympathy if they da . teacher and pupil may look coldly on you for a day or two , but friendly feeling be conceal in they heart ; and if you persevere in do well , these feeling will ere long appear so much the more evidently for they temporary suppression . besides , " -- she pause . " well , ? " say I , put my hand into hers : she chaf my finger gently to warm they , and go on - " if all the world hate you , and believe you wick , while you own conscience approve you , and absolve you from guilt , you would not be without friend . " " no ; I know I should think well of myself ; but that be not enough : if other do not love I I would rather die than live -- I can not bear to be solitary and hate , . look here ; to gain some real affection from you , or , or any other whom I truly love , I would willingly submit to have the bone of my arm break , or to let a bull toss I , or to stand behind a kicking horse , and let it dash it be hoof at my chest -- " " Hush , ! you think too much of the love of human being ; you be too impulsive , too vehement ; the sovereign hand that create you frame , and put life into it , have provide you with other resource than you feeble self , or than creature feeble as you . besides this earth , and besides the race of man , there be a invisible world and a kingdom of spirit : that world be round we , for it be everywhere ; and those spirit watch we , for they be commission to guard we ; and if we be die in pain and shame , if scorn smote we on all side , and hatre crush we , angels see we torture , recognise we innocence ( if innocent we be : as I know you be of this charge which have weakly and pompously repeat at second - hand from ; for I read a sincere nature in you ardent eye and on you clear front ) , and wait 's only the separation of spirit from flesh to cry we with a full reward . why , then , should we ever sink overwhelm with distress , when life be so soon over , and death be so certain a entrance to happiness -- to glory ? " I be silent ; have calme I ; but in the tranquillity she impart there be a alloy of inexpressible sadness . I feel the impression of woe as she speak , but I could not tell whence it come ; and when , have do speak , she breathe a little fast and cough a short cough , I momentarily forget my own sorrow to yield to a vague concern for she . rest my head on 's shoulder , I put my arm round she waist ; she draw I to she , and we repose in silence . we have not sit long
long thus , when another person come in . some heavy cloud , sweep from the sky by a rise wind , have leave the moon bare ; and she light , stream in through a window near , shone full both on we and on the approaching figure , which we at once recognise as . " I come on purpose to find you , , " say she ; " I want you in my room ; and as be with you , she may come too . " we go ; follow the superintendent 's guidance , we have to thread some intricate passage , and mount a staircase before we reach she apartment ; it contain a good fire , and look cheerful . tell to be seat in a low arm - chair on one side of the hearth , and herself take another , she call I to she side . " be it all over ? " she ask , look down at my face . " have you cry you grief away ? " " I be afraid I never shall do that . " " why ? " " because I have be wrongly accuse ; and you , ma 'am , and everybody else , will now think I wick . " " we shall think you what you prove yourself to be , my child . continue to act as a good girl , and you will satisfy we . " " shall I , ? " " you will , " say she , pass she arm round I . " and now tell I who be the lady whom call you benefactress ? " " . , my uncle 's wife . my uncle be dead , and he leave I to she care . " " do she not , then , adopt you of she own accord ? " " no , ma 'am ; she be sorry to have to do it : but my uncle , as I have often hear the servants say , get she to promise before he die that she would always keep I . " " well now , , you know , or at least I will tell you , that when a criminal be accuse , he be always allow to speak in he own defence . you have be charge with falsehood ; defend yourself to I as well as you can . say whatever you memory suggest be true ; but add nothing and exaggerate nothing . " I resolve , in the depth of my heart , that I would be most moderate -- most correct ; and , have reflecte a few minute in order to arrange coherently what I have to say , I tell she all the story of my sad childhood . exhaust by emotion , my language be more subdued than it generally be when it develop that sad theme ; and mindful of 's warning against the indulgence of resentment , I infus into the narrative far less of gall and wormwood than ordinary . thus restrain and simplify , it sound more credible : I feel as I go on that fully believe I . in the course of the tale I have mention as have come to see I after the fit : for I never forget the , to I , frightful episode of the red -room : in detailing which , my excitement be sure , in some degree , to break bounds ; for nothing could soften in my recollection the spasm of agony which clutch my heart when . spur my wild supplication for pardon , and lock I a second time in the dark and haunt chamber . I have finish : regard I a few minute in silence ; she then say - " I know something of ; I shall write to he ; if he reply agree with you statement , you shall be publicly clear from every imputation ; to I , , you be clear now . " she kiss I , and still keep I at she side ( where I be well contente to stand , for I derive a child 's pleasure from the contemplation of she face , she dress , she one or two ornament , she white forehead , she cluster and shine curl , and beam dark eye ) , she proceed to address . " how be you to - night , ? have you coughe much to - day ? " " not quite so much , I think , ma 'am . " " and the pain in you chest ? " " it be a little better . " Temple get up , take she hand and examine she pulse ; then she return to she own seat : as she resume it , I hear she sigh low . she be pensive a few minute , then rouse herself , she say cheerfully - " but you two be my visitor to - night ; I must treat you as such . " she ring she bell . " , " she say to the servant who answer it , " I have not yet have tea ; bring the tray and place cup for these two young lady . " and a tray be soon bring . how pretty , to my eyes , do the china cup and bright teapot look , place on the little round table near the fire ! how fragrant be the steam of the beverage , and the scent of the toast ! of which , however , I , to my dismay ( for I be begin to be hungry ) discern only a very small portion : discern it too . " , " say she , " can you not bring a little more
more bread and butter ? there be not enough for three . " go out : she return soon - " madam , say she have send up the usual quantity . " , be it observ , be the housekeeper : a woman after 's own heart , make up of equal part of whalebone and iron . " oh , very well ! " return ; " we must make it do , , I suppose . " and as the girl withdraw she add , smile , " fortunately , I have it in my power to supply deficiency for this once . " have invite and I to approach the table , and place before each of we a cup of tea with one delicious but thin morsel of toast , she get up , unlock a drawer , and take from it a parcel wrap in paper , disclose presently to we eye a good - size seed - cake . " I mean to give each of you some of this to take with you , " say she , " but as there be so little toast , you must have it now , " and she proceed to cut slice with a generous hand . we feast that even as on nectar and ambrosia ; and not the least delight of the entertainment be the smile of gratification with which we hostess regard we , as we satisfy we famished appetite on the delicate fare she liberally supply . tea over and the tray remove , she again summon we to the fire ; we sit one on each side of she , and now a conversation follow between she and , which it be indeed a privilege to be admit to hear . have always something of serenity in she air , of state in she mien , of refin propriety in she language , which preclude deviation into the ardent , the excited , the eager : something which chasten the pleasure of those who look on she and listen to she , by a control sense of awe ; and such be my feeling now : but as to , I be strike with wonder . the refresh meal , the brilliant fire , the presence and kindness of she beloved instructress , or , perhaps , more than all these , something in she own unique mind , have rouse she power within she . they wake , they kindle : first , they glow in the bright tint of she cheek , which till this hour I have never see but pale and bloodless ; then they shone in the liquid lustre of she eye , which have suddenly acquire a beauty more singular than that of 's -- a beauty neither of fine colour nor long eyelash , nor pencil brow , but of meaning , of movement , of radiance . then she soul sit on she lip , and language flow , from what source I can not tell . have a girl of fourteen a heart large enough , vigorous enough , to hold the swelling spring of pure , full , fervid eloquence ? such be the characteristic of 's discourse on that , to I , memorable evening ; she spirit seem hasten to live within a very brief span as much as many live during a protract existence . they converse of thing I have never hear of ; of nation and time past ; of country far away ; of secret of nature discover or guess at : they speak of book : how many they have read ! what store of knowledge they possess ! then they seem so familiar with french name and french author : but my amazement reach its climax when ask if she sometimes snatch a moment to recall the she father have teach she , and take a book from a shelf , bay she read and construe a page of ; and obey , my organ of veneration expand at every sounding line . she have scarcely finish ere the bell announce bedtime ! no delay could be admit ; embrace we both , say , as she draw we to she heart - " bless you , my child ! " Hel she hold a little longer than I : she let she go more reluctantly ; it be Hel she eye follow to the door ; it be for she she a second time breathe a sad sigh ; for she she wip a tear from she cheek . on reach the bedroom , we hear the voice of : she be examine drawer ; she have just pull out 's , and when we enter be greet with a sharp reprimand , and tell that to - morrow she should have half - a - dozen of untidily fold article pin to she shoulder . " my thing be indeed in shameful disorder , " murmure to I , in a low voice : " I intend to have arrange they , but I forgot . " next morning , write in conspicuous character on a piece of pasteboard the word " Slattern , " and bound it like a phylactery round 's large , mild , intelligent , and benign - look forehead . she wear it till evening , patient , unresentful , regard it as a deserve punishment . the moment withdraw after afternoon school , I run to , tore it off , and thrust it into the fire : the fury of which she be incapable have be burn in my soul all day , and tear , hot and large , have continually be scald my cheek ; for the spectacle of she sad resignation give I a intolerable pain at the heart . about a week subsequently to the incident above narrate ,
, , who have write to , receive he answer : it appear that what he say go to corroborate my account . , have assemble the whole school , announce that inquiry have be make into the charge allege against , and that she be most happy to be able to pronounce she completely clear from every imputation . the teacher then shook hand with I and kiss I , and a murmur of pleasure run through the rank of my companion . thus relieved of a grievous load , I from that hour set to work afresh , resolve to pioneer my way through every difficulty : I toil hard , and my success be proportionate to my effort ; my memory , not naturally tenacious , improve with practice ; exercise sharpen my wit ; in a few week I be promote to a higher class ; in less than two month I be allow to commence French and draw . I learn the first two tense of the , and sketch my first cottage ( whose wall , by - the - bye , outrivall in slope those of the lean tower of ) , on the same day . that night , on go to be , I forget to prepare in imagination the supper of hot roast potatoe , or white bread and new milk , with which I be will not to amuse my inward craving : I feast instead on the spectacle of ideal drawing , which I see in the dark ; all the work of my own hand : freely pencil house and tree , picturesque rock and ruin , Cuyp - like group of cattle , sweet painting of butterfly hover over unblown rose , of bird pick at ripe cherry , of wren 's nests enclose pearl - like egg , wreathe about with young ivy spray . I examine , too , in thought , the possibility of my ever be able to translate currently a certain little french story which have that day show I ; nor be that problem solve to my satisfaction ere I fall sweetly asleep . well have say -- " be a dinner of herb where love be , than a stall ox and hatre therewith . " I would not now have exchange Lowood with all its privation for and its daily luxuries . but the privation , or rather the hardship , of lessen . spring draw on : she be indeed already come ; the frost of winter have cease ; its snow be melte , it be cut wind ameliorate . my wretch foot , flay and swoll to lameness by the sharp air of , begin to heal and subside under the gentler breathings of ; the night and morning no longer by they canadian temperature froze the very blood in we vein ; we could now endure the play - hour pass in the garden : sometimes on a sunny day it begin even to be pleasant and genial , and a greenness grow over those brown bed , which , freshen daily , suggest the thought that traverse they at night , and leave each morning brighter trace of she step . Flowers pee out amongst the leave ; snow - drop , crocuse , purple auricula , and golden - eyed pansy . on afternoon ( half - holiday ) we now take walk , and find still sweeter flower open by the wayside , under the hedge . I discover , too , that a great pleasure , a enjoyment which the horizon only bound , lay all outside the high and spike - guard wall of we garden : this pleasure consist in prospect of noble summit girdl a great hill - hollow , rich in verdure and shadow ; in a bright beck , full of dark stone and sparkl eddy . how different have this scene look when I view it lay out beneath the iron sky of winter , stiffen in frost , shroude with snow ! -- when mist as chill as death wandere to the impulse of east wind along those purple peak , and roll down " ing " and holm till they blend with the frozen fog of the beck ! that beck itself be then a torrent , turbid and curbless : it tore asunder the wood , and send a raving sound through the air , often thicken with wild rain or whir sleet ; and for the forest on its bank , that show only rank of skeleton . advanc to : a bright serene it be ; day of blue sky , placid sunshine , and soft western or southern gale fill up its duration . and now vegetation matur with vigour ; shook loose it be tress ; it become all green , all flowery ; it be great elm , ash , and oak skeleton be restore to majestic life ; woodland plant spring up profusely in its recess ; unnumbered variety of moss fill it be hollow , and it make a strange ground - sunshine out of the wealth of its wild primrose plant : I have see they pale gold gleam in overshadowed spot like scattering of the sweetest lustre . all this I enjoy often and fully , free , unwatched , and almost alone : for this unwonted liberty and pleasure there be a cause , to which it now become my task to advert . have I not describe a pleasant site for a dwelling , when I speak of it as bosom in hill and wood , and rise from the verge of a stream ? Assuredly , pleasant enough : but whether healthy or not be another question . that forest - dell , where lay , be the cradle of fog and fog - breed pestilence ; which , quicken
quicken with the quickening spring , crept into the , breathe typhus through its crowded schoolroom and dormitory , and , ere may arrive , transform the seminary into a hospital . Semi-starvation and neglect colds have predispose most of the pupil to receive infection : forty - five out of the eighty girl lay ill at one time . class be break up , rule relaxed . the few who continue well be allow almost unlimited license ; because the medical attendent insiste on the necessity of frequent exercise to keep they in health : and have it be otherwise , no one have leisure to watch or restrain they . 's whole attention be absorb by the patient : she live in the sick - room , never quit it except to snatch a few hour ' rest at night . the teacher be fully occupy with packing up and make other necessary preparation for the departure of those girl who be fortunate enough to have friend and relation able and willing to remove they from the seat of contagion . many , already smite , go home only to die : some die at the school , and be bury quietly and quickly , the nature of the malady forbid delay . while disease have thus become a inhabitant of , and death its frequent visitor ; while there be gloom and fear within its wall ; while its room and passage steam with hospital smell , the drug and the pastille strive vainly to overcome the effluvia of mortality , that bright shone uncloude over the bold hill and beautiful woodland out of door . it be garden , too , glow with flower : hollyhock have spring up tall as tree , lily have open , tulip and rose be in bloom ; the border of the little bed be gay with pink thrift and crimson double daisie ; the sweetbriar give out , morning and evening , they scent of spice and apple ; and these fragrant treasure be all useless for most of the inmate of , except to furnish now and then a handful of herb and blossom to put in a coffin . but I , and the rest who continue well , enjoy fully the beauty of the scene and season ; they let we ramble in the wood , like gipsy , from morning till night ; we do what we like , go where we like : we liv better too . and he family never come near now : household matter be not scrutinise into ; the cross housekeeper be gone , drive away by the fear of infection ; she successor , who have be matron at the , unused to the way of she new abode , provide with comparative liberality . besides , there be fewer to feed ; the sick could eat little ; we breakfast - basin be better fill ; when there be no time to prepare a regular dinner , which often happen , she would give we a large piece of cold pie , or a thick slice of bread and cheese , and this we carry away with we to the wood , where we each choose the spot we like best , and dine sumptuously . my favourite seat be a smooth and broad stone , rise white and dry from the very middle of the beck , and only to be get at by wad through the water ; a feat I accomplish barefoot . the stone be just broad enough to accommodate , comfortably , another girl and I , at that time my chosen comrade -- one ; a shrewd , observant personage , whose society I take pleasure in , partly because she be witty and original , and partly because she have a manner which set I at my ease . some year older than I , she know more of the world , and could tell I many thing I like to hear : with she my curiosity find gratification : to my fault 's also she give ample indulgence , never impos curb or rein on anything I say . she have a turn for narrative , I for analysis ; she like to inform , I to question ; so we get on swimmingly together , derive much entertainment , if not much improvement , from we mutual intercourse . and where , meantime , be ? why do I not spend these sweet day of liberty with she ? have I forget she ? or be I so worthless as to have grow tired of she pure society ? surely the I have mention be inferior to my first acquaintance : she could only tell I amuse story , and reciprocate any racy and pungent gossip I choose to indulge in ; while , if I have speak truth of , she be qualified to give those who enjoy the privilege of she converse a taste of far higher thing . true , reader ; and I know and feel this : and though I be a defective being , with many fault and few redeeming point , yet I never ti of ; nor ever cease to cherish for she a sentiment of attachment , as strong , tender , and respectful as any that ever animate my heart . how could it be otherwise , when Helen , at all time and under all circumstance , evince for I a quiet and faithful friendship , which ill - humwe never sour , nor irritation never trouble ? but be ill at present : for some week she have be remove from my sight to I know not what room upstairs . she be not , I be tell , in the hospital portion of the house with the fever patient ; for she complaint be consumption ,
, not typhus : and by consumption I , in my ignorance , understand something mild , which time and care would be sure to alleviate . I be confirm in this idea by the fact of she once or twice come downstairs on very warm sunny afternoon , and be take by into the garden ; but , on these occasion , I be not allow to go and speak to she ; I only see she from the schoolroom window , and then not distinctly ; for she be much wrap up , and sit at a distance under the verandah . one evening , in the beginning of , I have stay out very late with in the wood ; we have , as usual , separate ourselves from the other , and have wander far ; so far that we lose we way , and have to ask it at a lonely cottage , where a man and woman liv , who look after a herd of half - wild swine that feed on the mast in the wood . when we get back , it be after moonrise : a pony , which we know to be the surgeon 's , be stand at the garden door . remark that she suppose some one must be very ill , as have be send for at that time of the evening . she go into the house ; I stay behind a few minute to plant in my garden a handful of root I have dug up in the forest , and which I fear would wither if I leave they till the morning . this do , I linger yet a little longer : the flower smelt so sweet as the dew fall ; it be such a pleasant evening , so serene , so warm ; the still glow west promise so fairly another fine day on the morrow ; the moon rise with such majesty in the grave east . I be not these thing and enjoy they as a child might , when it enter my mind as it have never do before :- " how sad to be lie now on a sick bed , and to be in danger of dying ! this world be pleasant -- it would be dreary to be call from it , and to have to go who know where ? " and then my mind make it be first earnest effort to comprehend what have be infus into it concern heaven and hell ; and for the first time it recoil , baffle ; and for the first time glance behind , on each side , and before it , it see all round a unfathomed gulf : it feel the one point where it stand -- the present ; all the rest be formless cloud and vacant depth ; and it shudder at the thought of tottering , and plunge amid that chaos . while ponder this new idea , I hear the front door open ; come out , and with he be a nurse . after she have see he mount he horse and depart , she be about to close the door , but I run up to she . " how be ? " " very poorly , " be the answer . " be it she have be to see ? " " yes . " " and what do he say about she ? " " he say she will not be here long . " this phrase , uttere in my hearing yesterday , would have only convey the notion that she be about to be remove to , to she own home . I should not have suspect that it mean she be die ; but I know instantly now ! it open clear on my comprehension that be number she last day in this world , and that she be go to be take to the region of spirit , if such region there be . I experience a shock of horror , then a strong thrill of grief , then a desire -- a necessity to see she ; and I ask in what room she lay . " she be in 's room , " say the nurse . " may I go up and speak to she ? " " oh no , child ! it be not likely ; and now it be time for you to come in ; you will catch the fever if you stop out when the dew be fall . " the nurse close the front door ; I go in by the side entrance which lead to the schoolroom : I be just in time ; it be nine o'clock , and be call the pupil to go to bed . it might be two hour later , probably near eleven , when I -- not have be able to fall asleep , and deem , from the perfect silence of the dormitory , that my companion be all wrapt in profound repose -- rise softly , put on my frock over my night - dress , and , without shoe , crept from the apartment , and set off in quest of 's room . it be quite at the other end of the house ; but I know my way ; and the light of the unclouded summer moon , enter here and there at passage window , enable I to find it without difficulty . a odour of camphor and burnt vinegar warn I when I come near the fever room : and I pass it be door quickly , fearful lest the nurse who sit up all night should hear I . I dread be discover and send back ; for I must see , -- I must embrace she before she die , -- I must give she one last
last kiss , exchange with she one last word . have descend a staircase , traverse a portion of the house below , and succeed in opening and shutting , without noise , two door , I reach another flight of step ; these I mount , and then just opposite to I be 's room . a light shone through the keyhole and from under the door ; a profound stillness pervad the vicinity . come near , I find the door slightly ajar ; probably to admit some fresh air into the close abode of sickness . Indispose to hesitate , and full of impatient impulse -- soul and sense quiver with keen throe -- I put it back and look in . my eye seek , and fear to find death . close by 's bed , and half cover with its white curtain , there stand a little crib . I see the outline of a form under the clothes , but the face be hide by the hanging : the nurse I have speak to in the garden sit in a easy - chair asleep ; a unsnuffed candle bur not dimly on the table . be not to be see : I know afterwards that she have be call to a delirious patient in the fever - room . I advance ; then pause by the crib side : my hand be on the curtain , but I prefer speak before I withdraw it . I still recoile at the dread of see a corpse . " ! " I whisper softly , " be you awake ? " she stir herself , put back the curtain , and I see she face , pale , waste , but quite compose : she look so little change that my fear be instantly dissipate . " can it be you , ? " she ask , in she own gentle voice . " oh ! " I think , " she be not go to die ; they be mistake : she could not speak and look so calmly if she be . " I get on to she crib and kiss she : she forehead be cold , and she cheek both cold and thin , and so be she hand and wrist ; but she smile as of old . " why be you come here , ? it be past eleven o'clock : I hear it strike some minute since . " " I come to see you , : I hear you be very ill , and I could not sleep till I have speak to you . " " you come to bid I good - bye , then : you be just in time probably . " " be you go somewhere , ? be you go home ? " " yes ; to my long home -- my last home . " " no , no , ! " I stop , distress . while I try to deavor my tear , a fit of coughing seize ; it do not , however , wake the nurse ; when it be over , she lay some minute exhaust ; then she whisper - " , you little foot be bear ; lie down and cover yourself with my quilt . " I do so : she put she arm over I , and I nestle close to she . after a long silence , she resume , still whisper - " I be very happy , ; and when you hear that I be dead , you must be sure and not grieve : there be nothing to grieve about . we all must die one day , and the illness which be remove I be not painful ; it be gentle and gradual : my mind be at rest . I leave no one to regret I much : I have only a father ; and he be lately married , and will not miss I . by die young , I shall escape great suffering . I have not quality or talents to make my way very well in the world : I should have be continually at fault . " " but where be you go to , ? can you see ? do you know ? " " I believe ; I have faith : I be go to . " " where be ? what be ? " " my and yours , who will never destroy what he create . I rely implicitly on he power , and confide wholly in he goodness : I count the hour till that eventful one arrive which shall restore I to , reveal to I . " " you be sure , then , , that there be such a place as heaven , and that we soul can get to it when we die ? " " I be sure there be a future state ; I believe be good ; I can resign my immortal part to he without any misgiving . be my father ; be my friend : I love ; I believe he love I . " " and shall I see you again , , when I die ? " " you will come to the same region of happiness : be receive by the same mighty , universal parent , no doubt , dear . " again I question , but this time only in thought . " where be that region ? do it exist ? " and I clasp my arm closer round ; she seem dearer to I than ever ; I feel as if I could not let she go ; I lay with my face hide on she neck . presently she say , in the sweetest tone - " how comfortable I be ! that last fit of coughing have tire I a
a little ; I feel as if I could sleep : but do not leave I , ; I like to have you near I . " " I will stay with you , : no one shall take I away . " " be you warm , darl ? " " yes . " " good - night , . " " good - night , . " she kiss I , and I she , and we both soon slumber . when I awoke it be day : a unusual movement rouse I ; I look up ; I be in somebody 's arm ; the nurse hold I ; she be carry I through the passage back to the dormitory . I be not reprimand for leave my bed ; people have something else to think about ; no explanation be afforde then to my many question ; but a day or two afterwards I learn that , on return to she own room at dawn , have find I laid in the little crib ; my face against 's shoulder , my arm round she neck . I be asleep , and be -- dead . she grave be in churchyard : for fifteen year after she death it be only cover by a grassy mound ; but now a grey marble tablet mark the spot , inscribe with she name , and the word " . " I have record in detail the event of my insignificant existence : to the first ten year of my life I have give almost as many chapter . but this be not to be a regular autobiography . I be only bound to invoke where I know she response will possess some degree of interest ; therefore I now pass a space of eight year almost in silence : a few line only be necessary to keep up the link of connection . when the typhus fever have fulfil its mission of devastation at , it gradually disappear from thence ; but not till its virulence and the number of its victim have draw public attention on the school . be make into the origin of the scourge , and by degree various fact come out which excit public indignation in a high degree . the unhealthy nature of the site ; the quantity and quality of the child 's food ; the brackish , fetid water use in its preparation ; the pupil ' wretch clothing and accommodation -- all these thing be discover , and the discovery produce a result mortify to , but beneficial to the institution . several wealthy and benevolent individual in the county subscribe largely for the erection of a more convenient building in a better situation ; new regulation be make ; improvement in diet and clothing introduce ; the fund of the school be intrust to the management of a committee . , who , from he wealth and family connection , could not be overlook , still retain the post of treasurer ; but he be aid in the discharge of he duty by gentleman of rather more enlarge and sympathise mind : he office of inspector , too , be share by those who know how to combine reason with strictness , comfort with economy , compassion with uprightness . the school , thus improve , become in time a truly useful and noble institution . I remain a inmate of its wall , after its regeneration , for eight year : six as pupil , and two as teacher ; and in both capacity I bear my testimony to its value and importance . during these eight year my life be uniform : but not unhappy , because it be not inactive . I have the means of a excellent education place within my reach ; a fondness for some of my study , and a desire to excel in all , together with a great delight in please my teacher , especially such as I love , urge I on : I avail myself fully of the advantages offer I . in time I rise to be the first girl of the first class ; then I be invest with the office of teacher ; which I dischar with zeal for two year : but at the end of that time I alte . , through all change , have thus far continue superintendent of the seminary : to she instruction I owe the best part of my acquirement ; she friendship and society have be my continual solace ; she have stand I in the stead of mother , governess , and , latterly , companion . at this period she marry , remove with she husband ( a clergyman , a excellent man , almost worthy of such a wife ) to a distant county , and consequently be lose to I . from the day she leave I be no longer the same : with she be go every settled feeling , every association that have make in some degree a home to I . I have imbibe from she something of she nature and much of she habits : more harmonious thought : what seem better regulate feeling have become the inmate of my mind . I have give in allegiance to duty and order ; I be quiet ; I believe I be content : to the eyes of other , usually even to my own , I appear a discipline and subdue character . but destiny , in the shape of the , come between I and : I see she in she travelling dress step into a post-chaise , shortly after the marriage ceremony ; I watch the chaise mount the hill and disappear beyond its brow ; and then retire to my own room , and there spend in solitude the greatest part of the half - holiday grant
grant in honour of the occasion . I walk about the chamber most of the time . I imagine myself only to be regret my loss , and think how to repair it ; but when my reflection be conclude , and I look up and find that the afternoon be gone , and evene far advanced , another discovery dawn on I , namely , that in the interval I have undergone a transform process ; that my mind have put off all it have borrowed of -- or rather that she have take with she the serene atmosphere I have be breathe in she vicinity -- and that now I be leave in my natural element , and begin to feel the stirring of old emotion . it do not seem as if a prop be withdrawn , but rather as if a motive be go : it be not the power to be tranquil which have fail I , but the reason for tranquillity be no more . my world have for some year be in Lowood : my experience have be of its rule and system ; now I remember that the real world be wide , and that a varied field of hope and fear , of sensation and excitement , await those who have courage to go forth into its expanse , to seek real knowledge of life amidst it be peril . I go to my window , open it , and look out . there be the two wing of the building ; there be the garden ; there be the skirt of Lowood ; there be the hilly horizon . my eye pass all other object to rest on those most remote , the blue peak ; it be those I long to surmount ; all within they boundary of rock and heath seem prison - ground , exile limit . I trace the white road win round the base of one mountain , and vanish in a gorge between two ; how I longe to follow it farther ! I recall the time when I have travel that very road in a coach ; I remember descende that hill at twilight ; a age seem to have elapse since the day which bring I first to , and I have never quit it since . my vacations have all be spend at school : . have never send for I to ; neither she nor any of she family have ever be to visit I . I have have no communication by letter or message with the outer world : school - rule , school - duty , school - habit and notion , and voice , and face , and phrase , and costume , and preference , and antipathy -- such be what I know of existence . and now I feel that it be not enough ; I ti of the routine of eight year in one afternoon . I desire liberty ; for liberty I gas ; for liberty I uttere a prayer ; it seem scatter on the wind then faintly blow . I abandon it and fram a humbler supplication ; for change , stimulus : that petition , too , seem sweep off into vague space : " then , " I cry , half desperate , " grant I at least a new servitude ! " here a bell , ring the hour of supper , call I downstairs . I be not free to resume the interrupted chain of my reflection till bedtime : even then a teacher who occupy the same room with I keep I from the subject to which I long to recur , by a prolonge effusion of small talk . how I wish sleep would silence she . it seem as if , could I but go back to the idea which have last enter my mind as I stand at the window , some inventive suggestion would rise for my relief . snor at last ; she be a heavy , and till now she habitual nasal strain have never be regard by I in any other light than as a nuisance ; to - night I haile the first deep note with satisfaction ; I be debarrass of interruption ; my half - effaced thought instantly revive . " a new servitude ! there be something in that , " I soliloquise ( mentally , be it understand ; I do not talk aloud ) , " I know there be , because it do not sound too sweet ; it be not like such word as , Excitement , enjoyment : delightful sound truly ; but no more than sound for I ; and so hollow and fleete that it be mere waste of time to listen to they . but Servitude ! that must be matter of fact . any one may serve : I have serve here eight year ; now all I want be to serve elsewhere . can I not get so much of my own will ? be not the thing feasible ? yes -- yes -- the end be not so difficult ; if I have only a brain active enough to ferret out the means of attaine it . " I sit up in bed by way of arousing this say brain : it be a chilly night ; I cover my shoulders with a shawl , and then I proceed to think again with all my might . " what do I want ? a new place , in a new house , amongst new face , under new circumstance : I want this because it be of no use want anything better . how do people do to get a new place ? they apply to friend , I suppose : I have no friends . there be many other who have no friend ,
, who must look about for themselves and be they own helper ; and what be they resource ? " I could not tell : nothing answer I ; I then order my brain to find a response , and quickly . it work and work faster : I feel the pulse throb in my head and temple ; but for nearly a hour it work in chaos ; and no result come of its effort . Feverish with vain labour , I get up and take a turn in the room ; undraw the curtain , note a star or two , shiver with cold , and again crept to bed . a kind fairy , in my absence , have surely drop the require suggestion on my pillow ; for as I lay down , it come quietly and naturally to my mind . -- " those who want situation advertise ; you must advertise in the - shire Herald . " " how ? I know nothing about advertising . " reply rise smooth and prompt now :- " you must enclose the advertisement and the money to pay for it under a cover direct to the editor of the Herald ; you must put it , the first opportunity you have , into the post at ; answer must be address to , at the post-office there ; you can go and inquire in about a week after you send you letter , if any be come , and act accordingly . " this scheme I go over twice , thrice ; it be then digest in my mind ; I have it in a clear practical form : I feel satisfied , and fall asleep . with earliest day , I be up : I have my advertisement write , enclose , and direct before the bell ring to rouse the school ; it run thus :- " a young lady accustom to tuition " ( have I not be a teacher two year ? ) " be desirous of meet with a situation in a private family where the child be under fourteen ( I think that as I be barely eighteen , it would not do to undertake the guidance of pupil nearer my own age ) . she be qualified to teach the usual branch of a good English education , together with , , and " ( in those day , reader , this now narrow catalogue of accomplishment , would have be hold tolerably comprehensive ) . " , , -office , , - shire . " this document remain lock in my drawer all day : after tea , I ask leave of the new superintendent to go to , in order to perform some small commission for myself and one or two of my fellow - teacher ; permission be readily grant ; I go . it be a walk of two miles , and the evening be wet , but the day be still long ; I visit a shop or two , slipp the letter into the post-office , and come back through heavy rain , with stream garment , but with a relieved heart . the succeeding week seem long : it come to a end at last , however , like all sublunary thing , and once more , towards the close of a pleasant autumn day , I find myself afoot on the road to . a picturesque track it be , by the way ; lie along the side of the beck and through the sweetest curve of the dale : but that day I think more of the letter , that might or might not be await I at the little burgh whither I be bound , than of the charms of lea and water . my ostensible errand on this occasion be to get measure for a pair of shoe ; so I discharge that business first , and when it be do , I step across the clean and quiet little street from the shoemaker 's to the post-office : it be keep by a old dame , who wear horn spectacle on she nose , and black mitten on she hand . " be there any letter for J.e.? " I ask . she peer at I over she spectacle , and then she open a drawer and fumble among its contents for a long time , so long that my hope begin to falter . at last , have hold a document before she glass for nearly five minute , she present it across the counter , accompany the act by another inquisitive and mistrustful glance -- it be for . " be there only one ? " I demand . " there be no more , " say she ; and I put it in my pocket and turn my face homeward : I could not open it then ; rule oblige I to be back by eight , and it be already half - past seven . various duty await I on my arrival . I have to sit with the girl during they hour of study ; then it be my turn to read prayer ; to see they to be : afterwards I sup with the other teacher . even when we finally retire for the night , the inevitable be still my companion : we have only a short end of candle in we candlestick , and I dread lest she should talk till it be all burn out ; fortunately , however , the heavy supper she have eat produce a soporific effect : she be already snor before I have finish undressing . there still remain a inch of candle : I now take out my letter ; the seal be a initial F. ; I break it ; the contents be brief . " if , who advertise in the
the - shire Herald of last , possess the acquirement mention , and if she be in a position to give satisfactory reference as to character and competency , a situation can be offer she where there be but one pupil , a little girl , under ten year of age ; and where the salary be thirty pound per annum . be request to send references , name , address , and all particular to the direction :- " , , near , - shire . " I examine the document long : the writing be old - fashioned and rather uncertain , like that of a elderly lady . this circumstance be satisfactory : a private fear have haunt I , that in thus acting for myself , and by my own guidance , I run the risk of get into some scrape ; and , above all thing , I wish the result of my endeavour to be respectable , proper , en regle . I now feel that a elderly lady be no bad ingredient in the business I have on hand . ! I see she in a black gown and widow 's cap ; frigid , perhaps , but not uncivil : a model of elderly English respectability . ! that , doubtless , be the name of she house : a neat orderly spot , I be sure ; though I fail in my effort to conceive a correct plan of the premise . , - shire ; I brush up my recollection of the map of , yes , I see it ; both the shire and the town . - shire be seventy mile nearer than the remote county where I now reside : that be a recommendation to I . I longe to go where there be life and movement : be a large manufacturing town on the bank of the a -; a busy place enough , doubtless : so much the better ; it would be a complete change at least . not that my fancy be much captivate by the idea of long chimney and clouds of smoke -- " but , " I argue , " will , probably , be a good way from the town . " here the socket of the candle drop , and the wick go out . next day new step be to be take ; my plan could no longer be confine to my own breast ; I must impart they in order to achieve they success . have seek and obtain a audience of the superintendent during the noontide recreation , I tell she I have a prospect of get a new situation where the salary would be double what I now receive ( for at Lowood I only get 15 pound per annum ) ; and request she would break the matter for I to , or some of the committee , and ascertain whether they would permit I to mention they as reference . she obligingly consent to act as mediatrix in the matter . the next day she lay the affair before , who say that . Reed must be write to , as she be my natural guardian . a note be accordingly address to that lady , who return for answer , that " I might do as I please : she have long relinquish all interference in my affair . " this note go the round of the committee , and at last , after what appear to I most tedious delay , formal leave be give I to better my condition if I could ; and a assurance add , that as I have always conduct myself well , both as teacher and pupil , at , a testimonial of character and capacity , sign by the inspector of that institution , should forthwith be furnish I . this testimonial I accordingly receive in about a month , forward a copy of it to , and get that lady 's reply , state that she be satisfied , and fix that day fortnight as the period for my assume the post of governess in she house . I now busy myself in preparation : the fortnight pass rapidly . I have not a very large wardrobe , though it be adequate to my want ; and the last day suffice to pack my trunk , -- the same I have bring with I eight year ago from . the box be cord , the card nail on . in half - a - hour the carrier be to call for it to take it to , whither I myself be to repair at a early hour the next morning to meet the coach . I have brush my black stuff travelling - dress , prepare my bonnet , glove , and muff ; seek in all my drawer to see that no article be leave behind ; and now have nothing more to do , I sit down and try to rest . I could not ; though I have be on foot all day , I could not now repose a instant ; I be too much excited . a phase of my life be close to - night , a new one open to - morrow : impossible to slumber in the interval ; I must watch feverishly while the change be be accomplish . " , " say a servant who meet I in the lobby , where I be wander like a troubled spirit , " a person below wish to see you . " " the carrier , no doubt , " I think , and run downstair without inquiry . I be pass the back - parlour or teacher ' sitting - room , the door of which be half open , to go to the kitchen , when some one run out - " it
it be she , I be sure ! -- I could have tell she anywhere ! " cry the individual who stop my progress and take my hand . I look : I see a woman attire like a well - dress servant , matronly , yet still young ; very good - look , with black hair and eye , and lively complexion . " well , who be it ? " she ask , in a and with a smile I half recognise ; " you have not quite forget I , I think , ? " in another second I be embrace and kiss she rapturously : " ! ! ! " that be all I say ; whereat she half laugh , half cry , and we both go into the parlour . by the fire stand a little fellow of three year old , in plaid frock and trousers . " that be my little boy , " say directly . " then you be married , ? " " yes ; nearly five year since to , the coachman ; and I have a little girl besides there , that I have christen . " " and you do not live at ? " " I live at the lodge : the old porter have leave . " " well , and how do they all get on ? tell I everything about they , : but sit down first ; and , , come and sit on my knee , will you ? " but prefer sidling over to he mother . " you be not grow so very tall , , nor so very stout , " continue . " I dare say they have not keep you too well at school : be the head and shoulders taller than you be ; and would make two of you in breadth . " " be handsome , I suppose , ? " " very . she go up to last winter with she mama , and there everybody admire she , and a young lord fall in love with she : but he relation be against the match ; and -- what do you think ? -- he and make it up to run away ; but they be find out and stop . it be that find they out : I believe she be envious ; and now she and she sister lead a cat and dog life together ; they be always quarrell -- " " well , and what of ? " " oh , he be not do so well as he mama could wish . he go to college , and he get -- pluck , I think they call it : and then he uncle want he to be a barrister , and study the law : but he be such a dissipate young man , they will never make much of he , I think . " " what do he look like ? " " he be very tall : some people call he a fine - look young man ; but he have such thick lip . " " and ? " " Missis look stout and well enough in the face , but I think she be not quite easy in she mind : 's conduct do not please she - - he spend a deal of money . " " do she send you here , ? " " no , indeed : but I have long want to see you , and when I hear that there have be a letter from you , and that you be go to another part of the country , I think I would just set off , and get a look at you before you be quite out of my reach . " " I be afraid you be disappointed in I , . " I say this laugh : I perceive that 's glance , though it express regard , do in no shape denote admiration . " no , , not exactly : you be genteel enough ; you look like a lady , and it be as much as ever I expect of you : you be no beauty as a child . " I smile at 's frank answer : I feel that it be correct , but I confess I be not quite indifferent to its import : at eighteen most people wish to please , and the conviction that they have not a exterior likely to second that desire bring anything but gratification . " I dare say you be clever , though , " continue , by way of solace . " what can you do ? can you play on the piano ? " " a little . " there be one in the room ; go and open it , and then ask I to sit down and give she a tune : I play a waltz or two , and she be char . " the could not play as well ! " say she exultingly . " I always say you would surpass they in learn : and can you draw ? " " that be one of my painting over the chimney - piece . " it be a landscape in water colours , of which I have make a present to the superintendent , in acknowledgment of she obliging mediation with the committee on my behalf , and which she have fram and glaze . " well , that be beautiful , ! it be as fine a picture as any 's drawing - master could paint , let alone the young lady themselves , who could not come near it : and have you learn french ? " " yes , , I can both read it and speak it . " " and you can work on muslin and
and canva ? " " I can . " " oh , you be quite a lady , ! I know you would be : you will get on whether you relation notice you or not . there be something I want to ask you . have you ever hear anything from you father 's kinsfolk , the Eyre ? " " never in my life . " " well , you know always say they be poor and quite despicable : and they may be poor ; but I believe they be as much gentry as the Reed be ; for one day , nearly seven year ago , a come to and want to see you ; say you be it school fifty mile off ; he seem so much disappointed , for he could not stay : he be go on a voyage to a foreign country , and the ship be to sail from in a day or two . he look quite a gentleman , and I believe he be you father 's brother . " " what foreign country be he go to , ? " " a island thousand of mile off , where they make wine -- the butler do tell I -- " " ? " I suggest . " yes , that be it -- that be the very word . " " so he go ? " " yes ; he do not stay many minute in the house : be very high with he ; she call he afterwards a ' sneaking tradesman . ' my believe he be a wine - merchant . " " very likely , " I return ; " or perhaps clerk or agent to a wine - merchant . " and I converse about old time a hour longer , and then she be obliged to leave I : I see she again for a few minute the next morning at , while I be wait for the coach . we parte finally at the door of the arm there : each go she separate way ; she set off for the brow of to meet the conveyance which be to take she back to , I mount the vehicle which be to bear I to new duty and a new life in the unknown environ of . a new chapter in a novel be something like a new scene in a play ; and when I draw up the curtain this time , reader , you must fancy you see a room in the at , with such large figure papering on the wall as inn room have ; such a carpet , such furniture , such ornament on the mantelpiece , such print , include a portrait of the , and another of the of , and a representation of the death of . all this be visible to you by the light of a oil lamp hang from the ceiling , and by that of a excellent fire , near which I sit in my cloak and bonnet ; my muff and umbrella lie on the table , and I be warm away the numbness and chill contract by sixteen hour ' exposure to the rawness of a day : I leave at four o'clock a.m. , and the Millcote town clock be now just strike eight . reader , though I look comfortably accommodate , I be not very tranquil in my mind . I think when the coach stop here there would be some one to meet I ; I look anxiously round as I descende the wooden step the " boot " place for my convenience , expect to hear my name pronounce , and to see some description of carriage wait to convey I to Thornfield . nothing of the sort be visible ; and when I ask a waiter if any one have be to inquire after a , I be answer in the negative : so I have no resource but to request to be show into a private room : and here I be wait , while all sort of doubt and fear be trouble my thought . it be a very strange sensation to inexperienc youth to feel itself quite alone in the world , cut adrift from every connection , uncertain whether the port to which it be bound can be reach , and prevent by many impediment from return to that it have quit . the charm of adventure sweeten that sensation , the glow of pride warm it ; but then the throb of fear disturb it ; and fear with I become predominant when half - a - hour elapsed and still I be alone . I bethotch myself to ring the bell . " be there a place in this neighbourhood call ? " I ask of the waiter who answer the summon . " ? I do not know , ma 'am ; I will inquire at the bar . " he vanish , but reappear instantly - " be you name , ? " " yes . " " person here wait for you . " I jump up , take my muff and umbrella , and hasten into the inn - passage : a man be stand by the open door , and in the lamp - lit street I dimly see a one - horse conveyance . " this will be you luggage , I suppose ? " say the man rather abruptly when he see I , point to my trunk in the passage . " yes . " he hoist it on to the vehicle , which be a sort of car , and then I get in ; before he shut I up , I ask he how far it be to . " a matter of six miles . " " how long shall we be before we get
get there ? " " happen a hour and a half . " he fasten the car door , climb to he own seat outside , and we set off . we progress be leisurely , and give I ample time to reflect ; I be content to be at length so near the end of my journey ; and as I lean back in the comfortable though not elegant conveyance , I meditate much at my ease . " I suppose , " think I , " judge from the plainness of the servant and carriage , be not a very dashing person : so much the better ; I never live amongst fine people but once , and I be very miserable with they . I wonder if she live alone except this little girl ; if so , and if she be in any degree amiable , I shall surely be able to get on with she ; I will do my best ; it be a pity that do one be best do not always answer . at , indeed , I take that resolution , keep it , and succeed in pleasing ; but with , I remember my best be always spur with scorn . I pray may not turn out a second Mr . re ; but if she do , I be not bound to stay with she ! let the worst come to the worst , I can advertise again . how far be we on we road now , I wonder ? " I let down the window and look out ; be behind we ; judge by the number of its light , it seem a place of considerable magnitude , much larger than . we be now , as far as I could see , on a sort of common ; but there be house scatter all over the district ; I feel we be in a different region to , more populious , less picturesque ; more stirring , less romantic . the roads be heavy , the night misty ; my conductor let he horse walk all the way , and the hour and a half extend , I verily believe , to two hour ; at last he turn in he seat and say - " you be noan so far fro' Thornfield now . " again I look out : we be pass a church ; I see it be low broad tower against the sky , and it be bell be toll a quarter ; I see a narrow galaxy of light too , on a hillside , mark a village or hamlet . about ten minute after , the driver get down and open a pair of gate : we pass through , and they clashed to behind we . we now slowly ascend a drive , and come upon the long front of a house : candlelight gleam from one curtain bow - window ; all the rest be dark . the car stop at the front door ; it be open by a maid - servant ; I alight and go in . " will you walk this way , ma 'am ? " say the girl ; and I follow she across a square hall with high door all round : she usher I into a room whose double illumination of fire and candle at first dazzl I , contrast as it do with the darkness to which my eye have be for two hour inure ; when I could see , however , a cosy and agreeable picture present itself to my view . a snug small room ; a round table by a cheerful fire ; a arm -chair high - back and old - fashioned , wherein sit the neatest imaginable little elderly lady , in widow 's cap , black silk gown , and snowy muslin apron ; exactly like what I have fancie , only less stately and milder look . she be occupy in knitting ; a large cat sit demurely at she foot ; nothing in short be want to complete the beau - ideal of domestic comfort . a more reassuring introduction for a new governess could scarcely be conceived ; there be no grandeur to overwhelm , no stateliness to embarrass ; and then , as I enter , the old lady get up and promptly and kindly come forward to meet I . " how do you do , my dear ? I be afraid you have have a tedious ride ; drive so slowly ; you must be cold , come to the fire . " " Fairfax , I suppose ? " say I . " yes , you be right : do sit down . " she conduct I to she own chair , and then begin to remove my shawl and untire my bonnet - string ; I beg she would not give herself so much trouble . " oh , it be no trouble ; I dare say you own hand be almost numb with cold . Leah , make a little hot negus and cut a sandwich or two : here be the key of the storeroom . " and she produce from she pocket a most housewifely bunch of key , and deliver they to the servant . " now , then , draw nearer to the fire , " she continue . " you have bring you luggage with you , have not you , my dear ? " " yes , ma 'am . " " I will see it carry into you room , " she say , and bust out . " she treat I like a visitor , " think I . " I little expect such a reception ; I anticipate only coldness and stiffness : this be not like what I have hear of the treatment
treatment of governess ; but I must not exult too soon . " she return ; with she own hand clear she knitt apparatus and a book or two from the table , to make room for the tray which now bring , and then herself hand I the refreshment . I feel rather confused at be the object of more attention than I have ever before receive , and , that too , show by my employer and superior ; but as she do not herself seem to consider she be do anything out of she place , I think it better to take she civility quietly . " shall I have the pleasure of see to - night ? " I ask , when I have partaken of what she offer I . " what do you say , my dear ? I be a little deaf , " return the good lady , approach she ear to my mouth . I repeat the question more distinctly . " ? oh , you mean ! Varens be the name of you future pupil . " " indeed ! then she be not you daughter ? " " no , -- I have no family . " I should have follow up my first inquiry , by ask in what way be connect with she ; but I recollect it be not polite to ask too many question : beside , I be sure to hear in time . " I be so glad , " she continue , as she sit down opposite to I , and take the cat on she knee ; " I be so glad you be come ; it will be quite pleasant live here now with a companion . to be sure it be pleasant at any time ; for be a fine old hall , rather neglect of late year perhaps , but still it be a respectable place ; yet you know in winter - time one feel dreary quite alone in the best quarter . I say alone -- be a nice girl to be sure , and and he wife be very decent people ; but then you see they be only servants , and one can not converse with they on term of equality : one must keep they at due distance , for fear of lose one 's authority . I be sure last winter ( it be a very severe one , if you recollect , and when it do not snow , it rain and blow ) , not a creature but the butcher and postman come to the house , from till ; and I really get quite melancholy with sit night after night alone ; I have in to read to I sometimes ; but I do not think the poor girl like the task much : she feel it confin . in spring and summer one get on better : sunshine and long day make such a difference ; and then , just at the commencement of this autumn , little come and she nurse : a child make a house alive all at once ; and now you be here I shall be quite gay . " my heart really warm to the worthy lady as I hear she talk ; and I draw my chair a little nearer to she , and express my sincere wish that she might find my company as agreeable as she anticipat . " but I will not keep you sit up late to - night , " say she ; " it be on the stroke of twelve now , and you have be travel all day : you must feel tired . if you have get you foot well warm , I will show you you bedroom . I have have the room next to mine prepare for you ; it be only a small apartment , but I think you would like it better than one of the large front chamber : to be sure they have finer furniture , but they be so dreary and solitary , I never sleep in they myself . " I thank she for she considerate choice , and as I really feel fatigue with my long journey , express my readiness to retire . she take she candle , and I follow she from the room . first she go to see if the hall - door be fasten ; have take the key from the lock , she lead the way upstairs . the step and banister be of oak ; the staircase window be high and latticed ; both it and the long gallery into which the bedroom door open look as if they belong to a church rather than a house . a very chill and vault - like air pervad the stair and gallery , suggest cheerless idea of space and solitude ; and I be glad , when finally usher into my chamber , to find it of small dimension , and furnish in ordinary , modern style . when have bide I a kind good - night , and I have fasten my door , gaze leisurely round , and in some measure efface the eerie impression make by that wide hall , that dark and spacious staircase , and that long , cold gallery , by the livelier aspect of my little room , I remember that , after a day of bodily fatigue and mental anxiety , I be now at last in safe haven . the impulse of gratitude swell my heart , and I knelt down at the bedside , and offer up thanks where thanks be due ; not forget , ere I rise , to implore aid on my further path , and the power of merit the kindness which see so frankly offer I before it be earn . my couch have
have no thorn in it that night ; my solitary room no fear . at once weary and content , I sleep soon and soundly : when I awoke it be broad day . the chamber look such a bright little place to I as the sun shone in between the gay blue chintz window curtain , show papere wall and a carpet floor , so unlike the bare plank and stain plaster of , that my spirit rise at the view . Externals have a great effect on the young : I think that a fairer era of life be begin for I , one that be to have its flower and pleasure , as well as its thorn and toil . my faculty , rouse by the change of scene , the new field offer to hope , seem all astir . I can not precisely define what they expect , but it be something pleasant : not perhaps that day or that month , but at a indefinite future period . I rise ; I dress myself with care : oblige to be plain -- for I have no article of attire that be not make with extreme simplicity -- I be still by nature solicitous to be neat . it be not my habit to be disregardful of appearance or careless of the impression I make : on the contrary , I ever wish to look as well as I could , and to please as much as my want of beauty would permit . I sometimes regrett that I be not handsomer ; I sometimes wish to have rosy cheek , a straight nose , and small cherry mouth ; I desire to be tall , stately , and finely develop in figure ; I feel it a misfortune that I be so little , so pale , and have feature so irregular and so mark . and why have I these aspiration and these regret ? it would be difficult to say : I could not then distinctly say it to myself ; yet I have a reason , and a logical , natural reason too . however , when I have brush my hair very smooth , and put on my black frock -- which , Quakerlike as it be , at least have the merit of fitting to a nicety -- and adjust my clean white tucker , I think I should do respectably enough to appear before , and that my new pupil would not at least recoil from I with antipathy . have open my chamber window , and see that I leave all thing straight and neat on the toilet table , I venture forth . Traverse the long and mat gallery , I descende the slippery step of oak ; then I gain the hall : I halt there a minute ; I look at some picture on the wall ( one , I remember , represent a grim man in a cuirass , and one a lady with powdered hair and a pearl necklace ) , at a bronze lamp pendent from the ceiling , at a great clock whose case be of oak curiously carve , and ebon black with time and rub . everything appear very stately and impos to I ; but then I be so little accustom to grandeur . the hall - door , which be half of glass , stood open ; I step over the threshold . it be a fine autumn morning ; the early sun shone serenely on embrowned grove and still green field ; advanc on to the lawn , I look up and survey the front of the mansion . it be three storey high , of proportion not vast , though considerable : a gentleman 's manor - house , not a nobleman 's seat : battlement round the top give it a picturesque look . it be grey front stood out well from the background of a rookery , whose caw tenant be now on the wing : they fly over the lawn and grounds to alight in a great meadow , from which these be separate by a sunk fence , and where a array of mighty old thorn tree , strong , knotty , and broad as oak , at once explain the etymology of the mansion 's designation . Farther off be hill : not so lofy as those round , nor so craggy , nor so like barriers of separation from the living world ; but yet quiet and lonely hill enough , and seem to embrace with a seclusion I have not expect to find existent so near the stirring locality of . a little hamlet , whose roof be blent with tree , straggle up the side of one of these hill ; the church of the district stand nearer : it be old tower - top look over a knoll between the house and gate . I be yet enjoy the calm prospect and pleasant fresh air , yet listen with delight to the cawing of the rook , yet survey the wide , hoary front of the hall , and think what a great place it be for one lonely little dame like to inhabit , when that lady appear at the door . " what ! out already ? " say she . " I see you be a early riser . " I go up to she , and be receive with a affable kiss and shake of the hand . " how do you like ? " she ask . I tell she I like it very much . " yes , " she say , " it be a pretty place ; but I fear it will be get out of order , unless should take it into he head to come and reside here permanently ; or , at least , visit
visit it rather oftener : great house and fine grounds require the presence of the proprietor . " " ! " I exclaim . " who be he ? " " the owner of , " she respond quietly . " do you not know he be call ? " of course I do not -- I have never hear of he before ; but the old lady seem to regard he existence as a universally understood fact , with which everybody must be acquaint by instinct . " I think , " I continue , " belong to you . " " to I ? bless you , child ; what a idea ! to I ! I be only the housekeeper -- the manager . to be sure I be distantly related to the Rochester by the mother 's side , or at least my husband be ; he be a clergyman , incumbent of -- that little village yonder on the hill -- and that church near the gate be he . the present 's mother be a Fairfax , and second cousin to my husband : but I never presume on the connection -- in fact , it be nothing to I ; I consider myself quite in the light of a ordinary housekeeper : my employer be always civil , and I expect nothing more . " " and the little girl -- my pupil ! " " she be 's ward ; he commission I to find a governess for she . he intend to have she bring up in - shire , I believe . here she come , with she ' bonne , ' as she call she nurse . " the enigma then be explain : this affable and kind little widow be no great dame ; but a dependent like myself . I do not like she the worse for that ; on the contrary , I feel better pleased than ever . the equality between she and I be real ; not the mere result of condescension on she part : so much the better -- my position be all the freer . as I be meditat on this discovery , a little girl , follow by she attendant , come run up the lawn . I look at my pupil , who do not at first appear to notice I : she be quite a child , perhaps seven or eight year old , slightly build , with a pale , small - featured face , and a redundancy of hair fall in curl to she waist . " good morning , , " say . " come and speak to the lady who be to teach you , and to make you a clever woman some day . " she approach . " C' est le ma gouverante ! " say she , point to I , and address she nurse ; who answer - " oui , certainement . " " be they foreigner ? " I inquire , amaze at hear the french language . " the nurse be a foreigner , and be bear on the continent ; and , I believe , never leave it till within six month ago . when she first come here she could speak no English ; now she can make shift to talk it a little : I do not understand she , she mix it so with ; but you will make out she mean very well , I dare say . " fortunately I have have the advantage of be teach french by a french lady ; and as I have always make a point of conversing with as often as I could , and have besides , during the last seven year , lear not a portion of french by heart daily -- apply myself to take pain with my accent , and imitat as closely as possible the pronunciation of my teacher , I have acquire a certain degree of readiness and correctness in the language , and be not likely to be much at a loss with . she come and shake hand with I when she hear that I be she governess ; and as I lead she in to breakfast , I address some phrase to she in she own tongue : she reply briefly at first , but after we be seat at the table , and she have examine I some ten minute with she large hazel eye , she suddenly commence chatter fluently . " ah ! " cry she , in french , " you speak my language as well as do : I can talk to you as I can to he , and so can . she will be glad : nobody here understand she : Madame Fairfax be all English . be my nurse ; she come with I over the sea in a great ship with a chimney that smoke -- how it do smoke ! -- and I be sick , and so be , and so be . lay down on a sofa in a pretty room call the salon , and and I have little bed in another place . I nearly fall out of mine ; it be like a shelf . and -- what be you name ? " " -- . " " ? Bah ! I can not say it . well , we ship stop in the morning , before it be quite daylight , at a great city -- a huge city , with very dark house and all smoky ; not at all like the pretty clean town I come from ; and carry I in he arm over a plank to the land , and come after , and we all get into a coach , which take we to a beautiful large house , larger than this and finer , call
call a hotel . we stay there nearly a week : I and use to walk every day in a great green place full of tree , call the ; and there be many child there beside I , and a pond with beautiful bird in it , that I feed with crumb . " " can you understand she when she run on so fast ? " ask . I understand she very well , for I have be accustom to the fluent tongue of . " I wish , " continue the good lady , " you would ask she a question or two about she parent : I wonder if she remember they ? " " , " I inquire , " with whom do you live when you be in that pretty clean town you speak of ? " " I live long ago with mama ; but she be go to the . mama use to teach I to dance and s , and to say verse . a great many gentleman and lady come to see mama , and I use to dance before they , or to sit on they knee and s to they : I like it . shall I let you hear I s now ? " she have finish she breakfast , so I permit she to give a specimen of she accomplishment . Descend from she chair , she come and place herself on my knee ; then , fold she little hand demurely before she , shak back she curl and lifte she eye to the ceiling , she commence singe a song from some opera . it be the strain of a forsaken lady , who , after bewail the perfidy of she lover , call pride to she aid ; desire she attendant to deck she in she brightest jewel and richest rob , and resolve to meet the false one that night at a ball , and prove to he , by the gaiety of she demeanour , how little he desertion have affect she . the subject seem strangely chosen for a infant singer ; but I suppose the point of the exhibition lay in hear the note of love and jealousy warble with the lisp of childhood ; and in very bad taste that point be : at least I think so . Adele sang the canzonette tunefully enough , and with the naivete of she age . this achieve , she jump from my knee and say , " now , , I will repeat you some poetry . " assume a attitude , she begin , " des rat : fable . " she then declaim the little piece with a attention to punctuation and emphasis , a flexibility of voice and a appropriateness of gesture , very unusual indeed at she age , and which prove she have be carefully train . " be it you mama who teach you that piece ? " I ask . " yes , and she just use to say it in this way : ' ' avez vous donc ? lui dit un de ce rat ; parlez ! ' she make I lift my hand -- so -- to remind I to raise my voice at the question . now shall I dance for you ? " " no , that will do : but after you mama go to the , as you say , with whom do you live then ? " " with and she husband : she take care of I , but she be nothing related to I . I think she be poor , for she have not so fine a house as mama . I be not long there . ask I if I would like to go and live with he in , and I say yes ; for I know before I know , and he be always kind to I and give I pretty dress and toy : but you see he have not keep he word , for he have bring I to , and now he be go back again himself , and I never see he . " after breakfast , and I withdraw to the library , which room , it appear , have direct should be use as the schoolroom . most of the book be lock up behind glass door ; but there be one bookcase leave open containing everything that could be need in the way of elementary work , and several volume of light literature , poetry , biography , travels , a few romance , &c . I suppose he have consider that these be all the governess would require for she private perusal ; and , indeed , they contente I amply for the present ; compare with the scanty pickings I have now and then be able to glean at , they seem to offer a abundant harvest of entertainment and information . in this room , too , there be a cabinet piano , quite new as of superior tone ; also a easel for pain and a pair of glob . I find my pupil sufficientely docile , though disinclin to apply : she have not be use to regular occupation of any kind . I feel it would be injudicious to confine she too much at first ; so , when I have talk to she a great deal , and get she to learn a little , and when the morning have advanc to noon , I allow she to return to she nurse . I then propose to occupy myself till dinner - time in draw some little sketch for she use . as I be go upstairs to fetch my portfolio and pencil , call to I : " you morning school - hour be over now , I suppose , " say she .
. she be in a room the fold - door of which stand open : I go in when she address I . it be a large , stately apartment , with purple chair and curtain , a carpet , walnut - panell wall , one vast window rich in slanted glass , and a lofty ceiling , nobly mould . be duste some vase of fine purple spar , which stand on a sideboard . " what a beautiful room ! " I exclaim , as I look round ; for I have never before see any half so imposing . " yes ; this be the dining - room . I have just open the window , to let in a little air and sunshine ; for everything get so damp in apartment that be seldom inhabit ; the drawing - room yonder feel like a vault . " she point to a wide arch correspond to the window , and hang like it with a Tyrian - dye curtain , now loope up . mount to it by two broad step , and look through , I think I catch a glimpse of a fairy place , so bright to my novice - eye appear the view beyond . yet it be merely a very pretty draw - room , and within it a boudoir , both spread with white carpets , on which seem laid brilliant garland of flower ; both ceil with snowy moulding of white grape and vine - leave , beneath which glow in rich contrast crimson couch and ottoman ; while the ornament on the pale parisian mantelpiece be of sparkling Bohemian glass , ruby red ; and between the window large mirror repeat the general blending of snow and fire . " in what order you keep these room , ! " say I . " no dust , no canva coverings : except that the air feel chilly , one would think they be inhabit daily . " " why , , though 's visit here be rare , they be always sudden and unexpected ; and as I observ that it put he out to find everything swath up , and to have a bustle of arrangement on he arrival , I think it best to keep the room in readiness . " " be a exacting , fastidious sort of man ? " " not particularly so ; but he have a gentleman 's taste and habit , and he expect to have thing manage in conformity to they . " " do you like he ? be he generally like ? " " oh , yes ; the family have always be respecte here . almost all the land in this neighbourhood , as far as you can see , have belong to the time out of mind . " " well , but , leave he land out of the question , do you like he ? be he like for himself ? " " I have no cause to do otherwise than like he ; and I believe he be consider a just and liberal landlord by he tenant : but he have never liv much amongst they . " " but have he no peculiarity ? what , in short , be he character ? " " oh ! he character be unimpeachable , I suppose . he be rather peculiar , perhaps : he have travel a great deal , and see a great deal of the world , I should think . I dare say he be clever , but I never have much conversation with he . " " in what way be he peculiar ? " " I do not know -- it be not easy to describe -- nothing strike , but you feel it when he speak to you ; you can not be always sure whether he be in jest or earnest , whether he be pleased or the contrary ; you do not thoroughly understand he , in short -- at least , I do not : but it be of no consequence , he be a very good master . " this be all the account I get from of she employer and mine . there be people who seem to have no notion of sketching a character , or observe and describe salient point , either in person or thing : the good lady evidently belong to this class ; my querie puzzl , but do not draw she out . be in she eyes ; a gentleman , a landed proprietor -- nothing more : she inquire and search no further , and evidently wonder at my wish to gain a more definite notion of he identity . when we leave the dining - room , she propose to show I over the rest of the house ; and I follow she upstair and downstair , admir as I go ; for all be well arrange and handsome . the large front chamber I think especially grand : and some of the third - storey room , though dark and low , be interesting from they air of antiquity . the furniture once appropriate to the lower apartment have from time to time be remove here , as fashions change : and the imperfect light enter by they narrow casement show bedstead of a hundred year old ; chest in oak or walnut , look , with they strange carving of palm branch and cherub ' head , like type of the ark ; row of venerable chair , high - backed and narrow ; stool still more antiquated , on whose cushioned top be yet apparent trace of half - effaced embroidery , wrotch by finger that for two generation have be coffin- dust . all these relic give to the third storey of the aspect of a home of the past :
: a shrine of memory . I like the hush , the gloom , the quaintness of these retreat in the day ; but I by no means covet a night 's repose on one of those wide and heavy bed : shut in , some of they , with door of oak ; shade , other , with wrotch old hanging crust with thick work , portray effigy of strange flowers , and stranger bird , and strangest human being , -- all which would have look strange , indeed , by the pallid gleam of moonlight . " do the servant sleep in these room ? " I ask . " no ; they occupy a range of smaller apartment to the back ; no one ever sleep here : one would almost say that , if there be a ghost at , this would be its haunt . " " so I think : you have no ghost , then ? " " none that I ever hear of , " return , smile . " nor any traditions of one ? no legend or ghost story ? " " I believe not . and yet it be say the Rochester have be rather a violent than a quiet race in they time : perhaps , though , that be the reason they rest tranquilly in they grave now . " " yes -- ' after life 's fitful fever they sleep well , ' " I mutter . " where be you go now , ? " for she be move away . " on to the lead ; will you come and see the view from thence ? " I follow still , up a very narrow staircase to the attic , and thence by a ladder and through a trap - door to the roof of the hall . I be now on a level with the crow colony , and could see into they nests . lean over the battlement and look far down , I survey the grounds lay out like a map : the bright and velvet lawn closely girdl the grey base of the mansion ; the field , wide as a park , dot with its ancient timber ; the wood , dun and sere , divide by a path visibly overgrown , greener with moss than the tree be with foliage ; the church at the gate , the road , the tranquil hill , all repose in the autumn day 's sun ; the horizon bound by a propitious sky , azure , marble with pearly white . no feature in the scene be extraordinary , but all be pleasing . when I turn from it and repass the trap - door , I could scarcely see my way down the ladder ; the attic seem black as a vault compare with that arch of blue air to which i have be look up , and to that sunlit scene of grove , pasture , and green hill , of which the hall be the centre , and over which i have be gaze with delight . stay behind a moment to fasten the trap - door ; I , by drift of groping , find the outlet from the attic , and proceed to descmend the narrow garret staircase . I linger in the long passage to which this lead , separa the front and back room of the third storey : narrow , low , and dim , with only one little window at the far end , and look , with its two row of small black door all shut , like a corridor in some 's castle . while I pace softly on , the last sound I expect to hear in so still a region , a laugh , strike my ear . it be a curious laugh ; distinct , formal , mirthless . I stop : the sound cease , only for a instant ; it begin again , louder : for at first , though distinct , it be very low . it pass off in a clamorous peal that seem to wake a echo in every lonely chamber ; though it originate but in one , and I could have point out the door whence the accent issue . " ! " I call out : for I now hear she descende the great stair . " do you hear that lould laugh ? who be it ? " " some of the servant , very likely , " she answer : " perhaps . " " do you hear it ? " I again inquire . " yes , plainly : I often hear she : she sew in one of these room . sometimes be with she ; they be frequently noisy together . " the laugh be repeat in its low , syllabic tone , and terminate in a odd murmur . " ! " exclaim . I really do not expect any to answer ; for the laugh be as tragic , as preternatural a laugh as any I ever hear ; and , but that it be high noon , and that no circumstance of ghostliness accompany the curiious cachinnation ; but that neither scene nor season favour fear , I should have be superstitiously afraid . however , the event show I I be a fool for entertain a sense even of surprise . the door nearest I open , and a servant come out , -- a woman of between thirty and forty ; a set , square - make figure , red - hair , and with a hard , plain face : any apparition less romantic or less ghostly could scarcely be conceive . " too much noise , , " say . " remember direction ! " curtsey silently and go in . " she be a person we
we have to sow and assist in she housemaid 's work , " continue the widow ; " not altogether unobjectionable in some point , but she do well enough . by - the - bye , how have you get on with you new pupil this morning ? " the conversation , thus turn on , continue till we reach the light and cheerful region below . come run to meet we in the hall , exclaim - " Mesdame , vous ete servie ! " add , " J'ai bien faim , moi ! " we find dinner ready , and wait for we in 's room . the promise of a smooth career , which my first calm introduction to seem to , be not bely on a longer acquaintance with the place and its inmate . turn out to be what she appear , a placid - tempere , kind - natured woman , of competent education and average intelligence . my pupil be a lively child , who have be spoil and indulge , and therefore be sometimes wayward ; but as she be commit entirely to my care , and no injudicious interference from any quarter ever thwart my plan for she improvement , she soon forget she little freak , and become obedient and teachable . she have no great talents , no mark trait of character , no peculiar development of feeling or taste which raise she one inch above the ordinary level of childhood ; but neither have she any deficiency or vice which sink she below it . she make reasonable progress , entertain for I a vivacious , though perhaps not very profound , affection ; and by she simplicity , gay prattle , and effort to please , inspire I , in return , with a degree of attachment sufficient to make we both content in each other 's society . this , par parenthese , will be think cool language by person who entertain solemn doctrine about the angelic nature of child , and the duty of those charge with they education to conceive for they a idolatrous devotion : but I be not write to flatter parental egotism , to echo cant , or prop up humbug ; I be merely tell the truth . I feel a conscientious solicitude for 's welfare and progress , and a quiet liking for she little self : just as I cherish towards a thankfulness for she kindness , and a pleasure in she society proportionate to the tranquil regard she have for I , and the moderation of she mind and character . anybody may blame I who like , when I add further , that , now and then , when I take a walk by myself in the grounds ; when I go down to the gate and look through they along the road ; or when , while play with she nurse , and make jelly in the storeroom , I climb the three staircase , raise the trap - door of the attic , and have reach the lead , look out afar over sequester field and hill , and along dim sky - line -- that then I longe for a power of vision which might overpass that limit ; which might reach the busy world , town , region full of life I have hear of but never see -- that then I desire more of practical experience than I possess ; more of intercourse with my kind , of acquaintance with variety of character , than be here within my reach . I value what be good in , and what be good in ; but I believe in the existence of other and more vivid kind of goodness , and what I believe in I wish to behold . who blame I ? many , no doubt ; and I shall be call discontented . I could not help it : the restlessness be in my nature ; it agitate I to pain sometimes . then my sole relief be to walk along the corridor of the third storey , backward and forwards , safe in the silence and solitude of the spot , and allow my mind 's eye to dwell on whatever bright vision rise before it -- and , certainly , they be many and glow ; to let my heart be heav by the exultant movement , which , while it swell it in trouble , expand it with life ; and , best of all , to open my inward ear to a tale that be never end -- a tale my imagination create , and narrate continuously ; quicken with all of incident , life , fire , feel , that I desire and have not in my actual existence . it be in vain to say human being ought to be satisfied with tranquillity : they must have action ; and they will make it if they can not find it . million be condemne to a stiller doom than mine , and million be in silent revolt against they lot . nobody know how many rebellions besides political rebellions ferment in the mass of life which people earth . woman be suppose to be very calm generally : but woman feel just as man feel ; they need exercise for they faculty , and a field for they effort , as much as they brother do ; they suffer from too rigid a restraint , too absolute a stagnation , precisely as man would suffer ; and it be narrow - minded in they more privileged fellow - creature to say that they ought to confine themselves to make pudding and knitt stocking , to play on the piano and embroidering bag . it be thoughtless to condemn they , or laugh at they , if they seek to do more or learn
learn more than custom have pronounce necessary for they sex . when thus alone , I not unfrequently hear 's laugh : the same peal , the same low , slow ha ! ha ! which , when first heard , have thrill I : I hear , too , she eccentric murmur ; stranger than she laugh . there be day when she be quite silent ; but there be other when I could not account for the sound she make . sometimes I see she : she would come out of she room with a basin , or a plate , or a tray in she hand , go down to the kitchen and shortly return , generally ( oh , romantic reader , forgive I for tell the plain truth ! ) bear a pot of porter . she appearance always act as a damper to the curiosity raise by she oral oddity : hard - featured and staid , she have no point to which interest could attach . I make some attempt to draw she into conversation , but she seem a person of few word : a monosyllabic reply usually cut short every effort of that sort . the other member of the household , viz. , and he wife , Leah the housemaid , and Sophile the french nurse , be decent people ; but in no respect remarkable ; with I use to talk , and sometimes I ask she question about she native country ; but she be not of a descriptive or narrative turn , and generally give such vapid and confused answer as be calculate rather to check than encourage inquiry . , , pass away . one afternoon in , have beg a holiday for , because she have a cold ; and , as second the request with a ardour that remind I how precious occasional holiday have be to I in my own childhood , I accord it , deem that I do well in show pliability on the point . it be a fine , calm day , though very cold ; I be tired of sit still in the library through a whole long morning : have just write a letter which be wait to be post , so I put on my bonnet and cloak and volunteer to carry it to ; the distance , two mile , would be a pleasant winter afternoon walk . have see Adele comfortably seat in she little chair by 's parlour fireside , and give she she best wax doll ( which I usually keep envelope in silver paper in a drawer ) to play with , and a story - book for change of amusement ; and have reply to she " Revenez bientot , ma bonne amie , ma chere Mdlle . , " with a kiss I set out . the ground be hard , the air be still , my road be lonely ; I walk fast till I get warm , and then I walk slowly to enjoy and analyse the species of pleasure brood for I in the hour and situation . it be three o'clock ; the church bell toll as I pass under the belfry : the charm of the hour lay in its approaching dimness , in the low - gliding and pale - beam sun . I be a mile from , in a lane note for wild ros in summer , for nut and blackberry in autumn , and even now possesse a few coral treasure in hip and haw , but whose best winter delight lay in its utter solitude and leafless repose . if a breath of air stir , it make no sound here ; for there be not a holly , not a evergreen to rustle , and the stripped hawthorn and hazel bushes be as still as the white , worn stone which causeway the middle of the path . far and wide , on each side , there be only field , where no cattle now browse ; and the little brown bird , which stir occasionally in the hedge , look like single russet leave that have forget to drop . this lane inclin up - hill all the way to ; have reach the middle , I sit down on a stile which lead thence into a field . gather my mantle about I , and shelter my hand in my muff , I do not feel the cold , though it froze keenly ; as be attest by a sheet of ice cover the causeway , where a little brooklet , now congeal , have overflow after a rapid thaw some day since . from my seat I could look down on : the grey and battlement hall be the principal object in the vale below I ; its wood and dark rookery rise against the west . I linger till the sun go down amongst the tree , and sank crimson and clear behind they . I then turn eastward . on the hill - top above I sit the rise moon ; pale yet as a cloud , but brighten momentarily , she look over , which , half lose in tree , send up a blue smoke from its few chimney : it be yet a mile distant , but in the absolute hush I could hear plainly its thin murmur of life . my ear , too , feel the flow of current ; in what dale and depth I could not tell : but there be many hill beyond , and doubtless many beck thread they pass . that evening calm betraye alike the tinkle of the nearest stream , the sough of the most remote . a rude noise break on these fine rippling and whispering , at once so far away and so clear : a positive tramp , tramp
tramp , a metallic clatter , which efface the soft wave - wandering ; as , in a picture , the solid mass of a crag , or the rough bole of a great oak , draw in dark and strong on the foreground , efface the aerial distance of azure hill , sunny horizon , and blend cloud where tint melts into tint . the din be on the causeway : a horse be come ; the windings of the lane yet hide it , but it approached . I be just leave the stile ; yet , as the path be narrow , I sit still to let it go by . in those day I be young , and all sort of fancie bright and dark tenant my mind : the memory of nursery story be there amongst other rubbish ; and when they recur , mature add to they a vigour and vividness beyond what childhood could give . as this horse approach , and as I watch for it to appear through the dusk , I remember certain of 's tale , wherein figure a - of - spirit call a " Gytrash , " which , in the form of horse , mule , or large dog , haunt solitary way , and sometimes come upon belated traveller , as this horse be now come upon I . it be very near , but not yet in sight ; when , in addition to the tramp , tramp , I hear a rush under the hedge , and close down by the hazel stem glide a great dog , whose black and white colour make he a distinct object against the tree . it be exactely one form of 's -- a lion - like creature with long hair and a huge head : it pass I , however , quietly enough ; not stay to look up , with strange pretercanine eye , in my face , as I half expect it would . the horse follow , -- a tall steed , and on its back a rider . the man , the human being , break the spell at once . nothing ever ride the : it be always alone ; and goblin , to my notion , though they might tenant the dumb carcass of beasts , could scarce covet shelter in the commonplace human form . no Gytrash be this , -- only a traveller take the short cut to . he pass , and I go on ; a few step , and I turn : a slide sound and a exclamation of " what the deuce be to do now ? " and a clattering tumble , arrest my attention . Man and horse be down ; they have slip on the sheet of ice which glaze the causeway . the dog come bounding back , and see he master in a predicament , and hear the horse groan , bark till the evening hill echo the sound , which be deep in proportion to he magnitude . he snuff round the prostrate group , and then he run up to I ; it be all he could do , -- there be no other help at hand to summon . I obey he , and walk down to the traveller , by this time struggle himself free of he steed . he effort be so vigorous , I think he could not be much hurt ; but I ask he the question - " be you injur , sir ? " I think he be swear , but be not certain ; however , he be pronounce some formula which prevent he from reply to I directly . " can I do anything ? " I ask again . " you must just stand on one side , " he answer as he rise , first to he knee , and then to he foot . I do ; whereupon begin a heaving , stamping , clattering process , accompany by a barking and baie which remove I effectually some yard ' distance ; but I would not be drive quite away till I see the event . this be finally fortunate ; the horse be re-establish , and the dog be silence with a " down , ! " the traveller now , stoop , feel he foot and leg , as if try whether they be sound ; apparently something ail they , for he halt to the stile whence I have just risen , and sit down . I be in the mood for be useful , or at least officious , I think , for I now draw near he again . " if you be hurt , and want help , sir , I can fetch some one either from or from . " " thank you : I shall do : I have no broken bone , -- only a sprain ; " and again he stand up and try he foot , but the result extort a involuntary " ugh ! " something of daylight still linger , and the moon be wax bright : I could see he plainly . he figure be envelo in a riding cloak , yofu collar and steel clasp ; it be detail be not apparent , but I trace the general point of middle height and considerable breadth of chest . he have a dark face , with stern feature and a heavy brow ; he eye and gather eyebrow look ireful and thwart just now ; he be past youth , but have not reach middle - age ; perhaps he might be thirty - five . I feel no fear of he , and but little shyness . have he be a handsome , heroic - look young gentleman , I should not have da to stand thus question he against
against he will , and offer my service unasked . I have hardly ever see a handsome youth ; never in my life speak to one . I have a theoretical reverence and homage for beauty , elegance , gallantry , fascination ; but have I meet those quality incarnate in masculine shape , I should have know instinctively that they neither have nor could have sympathy with anything in I , and should have shunn they as one would fire , light , or anything else that be bright but antipathetic . if even this stranger have smile and be good - humoure to I when I address he ; if he have put off my offer of assistance gaily and with thanks , I should have go on my way and not feel any vocation to renew inquiry : but the frown , the roughness of the traveller , set I at my ease : I retain my station when he wave to I to go , and announced - " I can not think of leave you , sir , at so late a hour , in this solitary lane , till I see you be fit to mount you horse . " he look at I when I say this ; he have hardly turn he eye in my direction before . " I should think you ought to be at home yourself , " say he , " if you have a home in this neighbourhood : where do you come from ? " " from just below ; and I be not at all afraid of be out late when it be moonlight : I will run over to for you with pleasure , if you wish it : indeed , I be go there to post a letter . " " you live just below -- do you mean at that house with the battlement ? " point to , on which the moon cast a hoary gleam , bring it out distinct and pale from the wood that , by contrast with the western sky , now see one mass of shadow . " yes , sir . " " whose house be it ? " " 's . " " do you know ? " " no , I have never see he . " " he be not resident , then ? " " no . " " can you tell I where he be ? " " I cannot . " " you be not a servant at the hall , of course . you be -- " he stop , run he eye over my dress , which , as usual , be quite simple : a black merino cloak , a black beaver bonnet ; neither of they half fine enough for a lady 's - maid . he seem puzzl to decide what I be ; I help he . " I be the governess . " " ah , the governess ! " he repeat ; " deuce take I , if I have not forget ! the governess ! " and again my raiment underwent scrutiny . in two minute he rise from the stile : he face express pain when he try to move . " I can not commission you to fetch help , " he say ; " but you may help I a little yourself , if you will be so kind . " " yes , sir . " " you have not a umbrella that I can use as a stick ? " " no . " " try to get hold of my horse 's bridle and lead he to I : you be not afraid ? " I should have be afraid to touch a horse when alone , but when tell to do it , I be dispose to obey . I put down my muff on the stile , and go up to the tall steed ; I endeavoure to catch the bridle , but it be a spirited thing , and would not let I come near it be head ; I make effort on effort , though in vain : meantime , I be mortally afraid of its trampling fore - foot . the traveller wait and watch for some time , and at last he laugh . " I see , " he say , " the mountain will never be bring to , so all you can do be to aid to go to the mountain ; I must beg of you to come here . " I come . " excuse I , " he continue : " necessity compel I to make you useful . " he lay a heavy hand on my shoulder , and lean on I with some stress , lim to he horse . have once catch the bridle , he mastere it directly and spring to he saddle ; grimace grimly as he make the effort , for it wrench he sprain . " now , " say he , release he under lip from a hard bite , " just hand I my whip ; it lie there under the hedge . " I seek it and find it . " thank you ; now make haste with the letter to , and return as fast as you can . " a touch of a spurred heel make he horse first start and rear , and then bound away ; the dog rush in he trace ; all three vanish , " like heath that , in the wilderness , the wild wind whirl away . " I take up my muff and walk on . the incident have occur and be go for I : it be a incident of no moment , no romance , no interest in a sense ; yet it mark with change one single hour of a
a monotonous life . my help have be need and claim ; I have give it : I be pleased to have do something ; trivial , transitory though the deed be , it be yet a active thing , and I be weary of a existence all passive . the new face , too , be like a new picture introduce to the gallery of memory ; and it be dissimilar to all the other hang there : firstly , because it be masculine ; and , secondly , because it be dark , strong , and stern . I have it still before I when I enter , and slipp the letter into the post - office ; I see it as I walk fast down - hill all the way home . when I come to the stile , I stop a minute , look round and listen , with a idea that a horse 's hoof might ring on the causeway again , and that a rider in a cloak , and a Gytrash - like dog , might be again apparent : I see only the hedge and a pollard willow before I , rise up still and straight to meet the moonbeam ; I hear only the faintest waft of wind roam fitful among the tree round , a mile distant ; and when I glance down in the direction of the murmur , my eye , traverse the hall - front , catch a light kindling in a window : it remind I that I be late , and I hurrie on . I do not like re-enter . to pass its threshold be to return to stagnation ; to cross the silent hall , to ascend the darksome staircase , to seek my own lonely little room , and then to meet tranquil , and spend the long winter evening with she , and she only , be to quell wholly the faint excitement wake by my walk , -- to slip again over my faculty the viewless fetter of a uniform and too still existence ; of a existence whose very privileges of security and ease I be become incapable of appreciating . what good it would have do I at that time to have be toss in the storm of a uncertain struggling life , and to have be teach by rough and bitter experience to long for the calm amidst which I now repin ! yes , just as much good as it would do a man tired of sit still in a " too easy chair " to take a long walk : and just as natural be the wish to stir , under my circumstance , as it would be under he . I linger at the gate ; I linger on the lawn ; I pace backwards and forward on the pavement ; the shutter of the glass door be close ; I could not see into the interior ; and both my eye and spirit seem draw from the gloomy house -- from the grey - hollow fill with rayless cell , as it appear to I -- to that sky expand before I , -- a blue sea absolve from taint of cloud ; the moon ascend it in solemn march ; she orb seem to look up as she leave the hill - top , from behind which she have come , far and farther below she , and aspire to the zenith , midnight dark in its fathomless depth and measureless distance ; and for those trembling star that follow she course ; they make my heart tremble , my vein glow when I view they . little thing recall we to earth ; the clock struck in the hall ; that suffice ; I turn from moon and star , open a side - door , and go in . the hall be not dark , nor yet be it lit , only by the high - hung bronze lamp ; a warm glow suffuse both it and the lower step of the oak staircase . this ruddy shine issue from the great dining - room , whose two - leave door stood open , and show a genial fire in the grate , glance on marble hearth and brass fire - iron , and reveal purple drapery and polish furniture , in the most pleasant radiance . it reveal , too , a group near the mantelpiece : I have scarcely catch it , and scarcely become aware of a cheerful mingling of voice , amongst which I seem to distinguish the tone of , when the door close . I hasten to 's room ; there be a fire there too , but no candle , and no . instead , all alone , sit upright on the rug , and gaze with gravity at the blaze , I beheld a great black and white long - haire dog , just like the of the lane . it be so like it that I go forward and say -- " " and the thing get up and come to I and snuff I . I caress he , and he wag he great tail ; but he look a eerie creature to be alone with , and I could not tell whence he have come . I ring the bell , for I want a candle ; and I want , too , to get a account of this visitant . enter . " what dog be this ? " " he come with master . " " with whom ? " " with master -- -- he be just arrive . " " indeed ! and be with he ? " " yes , and ; they be in the dining - room , and be go for a surgeon ; for master have have a accident ; he
he horse fell and he ankle be sprain . " " do the horse fall in ? " " yes , come down - hill ; it slipp on some ice . " " ah ! bring I a candle will you Leah ? " bring it ; she enter , follow by , who repeat the news ; add that the surgeon be come , and be now with : then she hurry out to give order about tea , and I go upstairs to take off my thing . , it seem , by the surgeon 's order , go to be early that night ; nor do he rise soon next morning . when he do come down , it be to attend to business : he agent and some of he tenant be arrive , and wait to speak with he . and I have now to vacate the library : it would be in daily requisition as a reception - room for caller . a fire be lit in a apartment upstairs , and there I carry we book , and arrange it for the future schoolroom . I discern in the course of the morning that be a change place : no longer silent as a church , it echo every hour or two to a knock at the door , or a clang of the bell ; step , too , often traverse the hall , and new voice spoke in different key below ; a rill from the outer world be flow through it ; it have a master : for my part , I like it better . be not easy to teach that day ; she could not apply : she keep run to the door and look over the banister to see if she could get a glimpse of ; then she coin pretext to go downstairs , in order , as I shrewdly suspect , to visit the library , where I know she be not want ; then , when I get a little angry , and make she sit still , she continue to talk incessantly of she " ami , , " as she dub he ( I have not before hear he prenomen ) , and to conjecture what present he have bring she : for it appear he have intimate the night before , that when he luggage come from , there would be find amongst it a little box in whose contents she have a interest . " et cela doit signifier , " say she , " qu 'il y aura le dedans un cadeau pour moi , et peut - etre pour vous aussi , mademoiselle . yoMonsieu a parle de vous : il m'a demande le nom de ma gouvernante , et si elle n'etait pa une petite personne , assez mince et un peu pale . dit qu'oui : car c'est vrai , n'est - ce pa , mademoiselle ? " I and my pupil dine as usual in 's parlour ; the afternoon be wild and snowy , and we pass it in the schoolroom . at dark I allow to put away book and work , and to run downstairs ; for , from the comparative silence below , and from the cessation of appeal to the door - bell , I conjecture that be now at liberty . leave alone , I walk to the window ; but nothing be to be see thence : twilight and snowflake together thicken the air , and hide the very shrub on the lawn . I let down the curtain and go back to the fireside . in the clear ember I be trace a view , not unlike a picture I remember to have seen of the castle of , on the , when Fairfax come in , break up by she entrance the fiery mosaic I have be pierce together , and scatter too some heavy unwelcome thought that be begin to throng on my solitude . " would be glad if you and you pupil would take tea with he in the drawing - room this evening , " say she : " he have be so much engage all day that he could not ask to see you before . " " when be he tea - time ? " I inquire . " oh , at six o'clock : he keep early hour in the country . you have better change you frock now ; I will go with you and fasten it . here be a candle . " " be it necessary to change my frock ? " " yes , you have better : I always dress for the evening when be here . " this additional ceremony seem somewhat stately ; however , I repair to my room , and , with 's aid , replace my black stuff dress by one of black silk ; the best and the only additional one I have , except one of light grey , which , in my Lowood notion of the toilette , I think too fine to be wear , except on first - rate occasion . " you want a brooch , " say . I have a single little pearl ornament which give I as a parting keepake : I put it on , and then we go downstairs . Unuse as I be to stranger , it be rather a trial to appear thus formally summon in 's presence . I let precede I into the dining - room , and keep in she shade as we cross that apartment ; and , pass the arch , whose curtain be now drop , enter the elegant recess beyond . two wax candles stood lighte on the table , and two on the mantelpiece ; bask in the light and heat of a superb fire , lay --
-- knelt near he . recline on a couch appear , he foot support by the cushion ; he be look at and the dog : the fire shone full on he face . I know my traveller with he broad and jetty eyebrow ; he square forehead , make squarer by the horizontal sweep of he black hair . I recognise he decisive nose , more remarkable for character than beauty ; he full nostril , denote , I think , choler ; he grim mouth , ching , and jaw -- yes , all three be very grim , and no mistake . he shape , now divest of cloak , I perceive harmonise in squareness with he physiognomy : I suppose it be a good figure in the athletic sense of the term -- broad chested and thin flank , though neither tall nor graceful . must have be aware of the entrance of and myself ; but it appear he be not in the mood to notice we , for he never lift he head as we approached . " here be , sir , " say , in she quiet way . he bow , still not take he eye from the group of the dog and child . " let be seat , " say he : and there be something in the force stiff bow , in the impatient yet formal tone , which seem further to express , " what the deuce be it to I whether be there or not ? at this moment I be not dispose to accost she . " I sit down quite disembarrass . a reception of finished politeness would probably have confuse I : I could not have return or repay it by answer and elegance on my part ; but harsh caprice lay I under no obligation ; on the contrary , a decent quiescence , under the freak of manner , give I the advantage . besides , the eccentricity of the proceeding be piquant : I feel interested to see how he would go on . he go on as a statue would , that be , he neither speak nor move . Fairfax seem to think it necessary that some one should be amiable , and she begin to talk . kindly , as usual -- and , as usual , rather trite -- she condol with he on the pressure of business he have have all day ; on the annoyance it must have be to he with that painful sprain : then she commend he patience and perseverance in go through with it . " madam , I should like some tea , " be the sole rejoinder she get . she hasten to ring the bell ; and when the tray come , she proceed to arrange the cup , spoon , & c. , with assiduous celerity . I and go to the table ; but the master do not leave he couch . " will you hand 's cup ? " say to I ; " Adele might perhaps spill it . " I do as request . as he take the cup from my hand , Adele , think the moment propitious for make a request in my favour , cry out - " N'est - ce pa , monsieur , qu'il y a un cadeau pour votre petit coffre ? " " who talk of cadeaux ? " say he grufinitely . " do you expect a present , ? be you fond of present ? " and he search my face with eye that I see be dark , irate , and piercing . " I hardly know , sir ; I have little experience of they : they be generally think pleasant thing . " " generally think ? but what do you think ? " " I should be oblige to take time , sir , before I could give you a answer worthy of you acceptance : a present have many face to it , have it not ? and one should consider all , before pronounce a opinion as to its nature . " " , you be not so unsophisticated as : she demand a ' cadeau , ' clamorously , the moment she see I : you beat about the bush . " " because I have less confidence in my desert than have : she can prefer the claim of old acquaintance , and the right too of custom ; for she say you have always be in the habit of give she plaything ; but if I have to make out a case I should be puzzl , since I be a stranger , and have do nothing to entitle I to a acknowledgment . " " oh , do not fall back on over-modesty ! I have examine , and find you have take great pain with she : she be not bright , she have no talents ; yet in a short time she have make much improvement . " " sir , you have now give I my ' cadeau ;' I be oblige to you : it be the meed teacher most covet -- praise of they pupil 's progress . " " Humph ! " say , and he take he tea in silence . " come to the fire , " say the master , when the tray be take away , and have settle into a corner with she knitt ; while be lead I by the hand round the room , show I the beautiful book and ornament on the consoles and chiffonniere . we obey , as in duty bound ; want to take a seat on my knee , but she be order to amuse herself with . " you have be resident in my house three month ? " " yes , sir . "
" " and you come from -- ? " " from school , in - shire . " " ah ! a charitable concern . how long be you there ? " " eight year . " " eight year ! you must be tenacious of life . I think half the time in such a place would have do up any constitution ! no wonder you have rather the look of another world . I marvell where you have get that sort of face . when you come on I in last night , I think unaccountably of fairy tale , and have half a mind to demand whether you have bewitch my horse : I be not sure yet . who be you parent ? " " I have none . " " ever have , I suppose : do you remember they ? " " no . " " I think not . and so you be wait for you people when you sit on that stile ? " " for whom , sir ? " " for the man in green : it be a proper moonlight evening for they . do I break through one of you ring , that you spread that damne ice on the causeway ? " I shook my head . " the man in green all forsook a hundred year ago , " say I , speak as seriously as he have do . " and not even in , or the field about it , could you find a trace of they . I do not think either summer or harvest , or winter moon , will ever shine on they revel more . " have drop she knitt , and , with raise eyebrow , see wonder what sort of talk this be . " well , " resume , " if you disow parent , you must have some sort of kinsfolk : uncle and aunt ? " " no ; none that I ever see . " " and you home ? " " I have none . " " where do you brother and sister live ? " " I have no brothers or sister . " " who recommend you to come here ? " " I advertise , and answer my advertisement . " " yes , " say the good lady , who now know what ground we be upon , " and I be daily thankful for the choice Providence lead I to make . have be a invaluable companion to I , and a kind and careful teacher to . " " do not trouble yourself to give she a character , " return : " eulogium will not bias I ; I shall judge for myself . she begin by felle my horse . " " ? " say . " I have to thank she for this sprain . " the widow look bewilder . " , have you ever live in a town ? " " no , sir . " " have you see much society ? " " none but the pupil and teacher of , and now the inmate of . " " have you read much ? " " only such boonks as come in my way ; and they have not be numerous or very learned . " " you have liv the life of a nun : no doubt you be well drill in religious form ; -- , who I understand direct Lowood , be a parson , be he not ? " " yes , sir . " " and you girl probably worship he , as a convent full of religieuse would worship they director . " " oh , no . " " you be very cool ! no ! what ! a novice not worship she priest ! that sound blasphemous . " " I dislike ; and I be not alone in the feeling . he be a harsh man ; at once pompous and meddl ; he cut off we hair ; and for economy 's sake buy we bad needle and thread , with which we could hardly sow . " " that be very false economy , " remark , who now again catch the drift of the dialogue . " and be that the head and front of he offend ? " demand . " he starve we when he have the sole superintendence of the provision department , before the committee be appoint ; and he bore we with long lecture once a week , and with evening reading from book of he own inditing , about sudden death and judgment , which make we afraid to go to bed . " " what age be you when you go to ? " " about ten . " " and you stay there eight year : you be now , then , eighteen ? " I assent . " , you see , be useful ; without its aid , I should hardly have be able to guess you age . it be a point difficult to fix where the feature and countenance be so much at variance as in you case . and now what do you learn at ? can you play ? " " a little . " " of course : that be the establish answer . go into the library -- I mean , if you please . -- ( excuse my tone of command ; I be use to say , ' do this , ' and it be do : I can not alter my customary habits for one new inmate . ) -- go , then , into the library ; take a candle with you ; leave the door open ; sit down to the piano , and play a tune . " I depart , obey he direction . " enough
enough ! " he call out in a few minute . " you play a little , I see ; like any other school - girl ; perhaps rather better than some , but not well . " I close the piano and return . continue -- " show I some sketch this morning , which she say be yours . I do not know whether they be entirely of you do ; probably a master aid you ? " " no , indeed ! " I interject . " ah ! that prick pride . well , fetch I you portfolio , if you can vouch for its contents be original ; but do not pass you word unless you be certain : I can recognise patchwork . " " then I will say nothing , and you shall judge for yourself , sir . " I bring the portfolio from the library . " approach the table , " say he ; and I wheel it to he couch . and draw near to see the picture . " no crowding , " say : " take the drawing from my hand as I finish with they ; but do not push you face up to mine . " he deliberately scrutinise each sketch and painting . he lay aside ; the other , when he have examine they , he sweep from he . " take they off to the other table , , " say he , " and look at they with ; -- you " ( glance at I ) " resume you seat , and answer my question . I perceive those picture be do by one hand : be that hand yours ? " " yes . " " and when do you find time to do they ? they have take much time , and some thought . " " I do they in the last two vacation I spend at , when I have no other occupation . " " where do you get you copy ? " " out of my head . " " that head I see now on you shoulders ? " " yes , sir . " " have it other furniture of the same kind within ? " " I should think it may have : I should hope -- better . " he spread the picture before he , and again survey they alternately . while he be so occupied , I will tell you , reader , what they be : and first , I must premise that they be nothing wonderful . the subjects have , indeed , risen vividly on my mind . as I see they with the spiritual eye , before I attempt to embody they , they be strike ; but my hand would not second my fancy , and in each case it have wrotch out but a pale portrait of the thing I have conceive . these picture be in water - colours . the first represent cloud low and livid , roll over a swollen sea : all the distance be in eclipse ; so , too , be the foreground ; or rather , the nearest billow , for there be no land . one gleam of light lift into relief a half - submerge mast , on which sit a cormorant , dark and large , with wing fleck with foam ; it be beak hold a gold bracelet set with gem , that I have touch with as brilliant tint as my palette could yield , and as glitter distinctness as my pencil could impart . sinke below the bird and mast , a drown corpse glance through the green water ; a fair arm be the only limb clearly visible , whence the bracelet have be wash or tear . the second picture contain for foreground only the dim peak of a hill , with grass and some leave slant as if by a breeze . and above spread a expanse of sky , dark blue as at twilight : rise into the sky be a woman 's shape to the bust , portray in tints as dusk and soft as I could combine . the dim forehead be crown with a star ; the lineament below be see as through the suffusion of vapour ; the eye shone dark and wild ; the hair stream shadowy , like a beamless cloud tear by storm or by electric travail . on the neck lay a pale reflection like moonlight ; the same faint lustre touch the train of thin clouds from which rise and bow this vision of the . the third show the pinnacle of a iceberg pierce a polar winter sky : a muster of northern light rear they dim lance , close serry , along the horizon . throw these into distance , rise , in the foreground , a head , -- a colossal head , inclin towards the iceberg , and rest against it . two thing hand , join under the forehead , and support it , draw up before the lower feature a sable veil , a brow quite bloodless , white as bone , and a eye hollow and fix , blank of meaning but for the glassiness of despair , alone be visible . above the temple , amidst wreathe turban fold of black drapery , vague in its character and consistency as cloud , gleam a ring of white flame , gem with sparkle of a more lurid tinge . this pale crescent be " the likeness of a kingly crown ; " what it diadem be " the shape which shape have none . " " be you happy when you paint these picture ? " ask presently . " I be absorb , sir : yes , and I be happy . to paint they , in short ,
, be to enjoy one of the keenest pleasure I have ever kny . " " that be not say much . you pleasur , by you own account , have be few ; but I daresay you do exist in a kind of artist 's dreamland while you blend and arrange these strange tint . do you sit at they long each day ? " " I have nothing else to do , because it be the vacation , and I sit at they from morning till noon , and from noon till night : the length of the midsummer day favour my inclination to apply . " " and you feel self - satisfied with the result of you ardent labour ? " " far from it . I be torment by the contrast between my idea and my handiwork : in each case I have imagine something which I be quite powerless to realise . " " not quite : you have secure the shadow of you thought ; but no more , probably . you have not enough of the artist 's skill and science to give it full being : yet the drawing be , for a school - girl , peculiar . as to the thought , they be elfish . these eyes in the you must have see in a dream . how could you make they look so clear , and yet not at all brilliant ? for the planet above quell they ray . and what mean be that in they solemn depth ? and who teach you to paint wind ? there be a high gale in that sky , and on this hill - top . where do you see ? for that be . there ! put the drawing away ! " I have scarce tie the string of the portfolio , when , look at he watch , he say abruptly - " it be nine o'clock : what be you about , , to let sit up so long ? take she to bed . " go to kiss he before quit the room : he endure the caress , but scarcely seem to relish it more than would have do , nor so much . " I wish you all good - night , now , " say he , make a movement of the hand towards the door , in token that he be tired of we company , and wish to dismiss we . fold up she knitt : I take my portfolio : we curtsey to he , receive a frigid bow in return , and so withdrew . " you say be not strikingly peculiar , , " I observ , when I rejoin she in she room , after put to bed . " well , be he ? " " I think so : he be very changeful and abrupt . " " true : no doubt he may appear so to a stranger , but I be so accustom to he manner , I never think of it ; and then , if he have peculiarity of temper , allowance should be make . " " why ? " " partly because it be he nature -- and we can none of we help we nature ; and partly because he have painful thought , no doubt , to harass he , and make he spirits unequal . " " what about ? " " family trouble , for one thing . " " but he have no family . " " not now , but he have have -- or , at least , relative . he lose he elder brother a few year since . " " he elder brother ? " " yes . the present have not be very long in possession of the property ; only about nine year . " " nine year be a tolerable time . be he so very fond of he brother as to be still inconsolable for he loss ? " " why , no -- perhaps not . I believe there be some misunderstanding between they . be not quite just to ; and perhaps he prejudice he father against he . the old gentleman be fond of money , and anxious to keep the family estate together . he do not like to diminish the property by division , and yet he be anxious that should have wealth , too , to keep up the consequence of the name ; and , soon after he be of age , some step be take that be not quite fair , and make a great deal of mischief . and combine to bring into what he consider a painful position , for the sake of make he fortune : what the precise nature of that position be I never clearly knew , but he spirit could not brook what he have to suffer in it . he be not very forgive : he break with he family , and now for many year he have lead a unsettled kind of life . I do not think he have ever be resident at for a fortnight together , since the death of he brother without a will leave he master of the estate ; and , indeed , no wonder he shun the old place . " " why should he shin it ? " " perhaps he think it gloomy . " the answer be evasive . I should have like something clearer ; but either could not , or would not , give I more explicit information of the origin and nature of 's trial . she averr they be a mystery to herself , and that what she know be chiefly from conjecture . it be evident , indeed , that she wish I to drop the subject , which I do accordingly . for several
several subsequent day I see little of . in the morning he seem much engage with business , and , in the afternoon , gentleman from or the neighbourhood call , and sometimes stay to dine with he . when he sprain be well enough to admit of horse exercise , he ride out a good deal ; probably to return these visit , as he generally do not come back till late at night . during this interval , even be seldom send for to he presence , and all my acquaintance with he be confine to a occasional rencontre in the hall , on the stair , or in the gallery , when he would sometimes pass I haughtily and coldly , just acknowledge my presence by a distant nod or a cool glance , and sometimes bow and smile with gentlemanlike affability . he change of mood do not offend I , because I see that I have nothing to do with they alternation ; the ebb and flow depend on cause quite disconnect with I . one day he have have company to dinner , and have send for my portfolio ; in order , doubtless , to exhibit its contents : the gentleman go away early , to attend a public meeting at , as inform I ; but the night be wet and inclement , do not accompany they . after they be go he ring the bell : a message come that I and be to go downstairs . I brush 's hair and make she neat , and have ascertain that I be myself in my usual Quaker trim , where there be nothing to retouch -- all be too close and plain , braided lock include , to admit of disarrangement -- we descende , Adele wonder whether the petit coffre be at length come ; for , owe to some mistake , its arrival have hithertoo be delay . she be gratify : there it stand , a little carton , on the table when we enter the dining - room . she appear to know it by instinct . " ma boite ! ma boite ! " exclaim she , run towards it . " yes , there be you ' boite ' at last : take it into a corner , you genuine daughter of , and amuse yourself with disembowell it , " say the deep and rather sarcastic voice of , proceed from the depth of a immense easy - chair at the fireside . " and mind , " he continue , " do not bother I with any detail of the anatomical process , or any notice of the condition of the entrail : let you operation be conduct in silence : tien - toi tranquille , enfant ; comprend - tu ? " seem scarcely to need the warning -- she have already retire to a sofa with she treasure , and be busy unty the cord which secure the lid . have remove this impediment , and lift certain silvery envelope of tissue paper , she merely exclaim - " oh ciel ! que c'est beau ! " and then remain absorb in ecstatic contemplation . " be there ? " now demand the master , half rise from he seat to look round to the door , near which I still stand . " ah ! well , come forward ; be seat here . " he draw a chair near he own . " I be not fond of the prattle of child , " he continue ; " for , old bachelor as I be , I have no pleasant associations connect with they lisp . it would be intolerable to I to pass a whole evening tete - e - tete with a brat . do not draw that chair farther off , ; sit down exactly where I place it -- if you please , that be . Confound these civility ! I continually forget they . nor do I particularly affect simple - minded old lady . by - the - bye , I must have mine in mind ; it will not do to neglect she ; she be a Fairfax , or we to one ; and blood be say to be thicker than water . " he ring , and despatch a invitation to , who soon arrive , knitt - basket in hand . " good evening , madam ; I send to you for a charitable purpose . I have forbidden to talk to I about she present , and she be burst with repletion : have the goodness to serve she as auditress and interlocutrice ; it will be one of the most benevolent act you ever perform . " , indeed , no sooner see , than she summon she to she sofa , and there quickly fill she lap with the porcelain , the ivory , the waxen contents of she " boite ; " pour out , meantime , explanations and rapture in such broken as she be mistress of . " now I have perform the part of a good host , " pursue , " put my guest into the way of amuse each other , I ought to be at liberty to attend to my own pleasure . , dree you chair still a little farther forward : you be yet too far back ; I can not see you without disturb my position in this comfortable chair , which I have no mind to do . " I do as I be bid , though I would much rather have remain somewhat in the shade ; but have such a direct way of give order , it seem a matter of course to obey he promptly . we be , as I have say , in the dining - room : the lustre ,
, which have be light for dinner , fill the room with a festal breadth of light ; the large fire be all red and clear ; the purple curtain hang rich and ample before the lofy window and loftier arch ; everything be still , save the subdue chat of ( she da not speak loud ) , and , fill up each pause , the beating of winter rain against the pane . , as he sit in he damask - cover chair , look different to what I have see he look before ; not quite so stern -- much less gloomy . there be a smile on he lip , and he eye sparkle , whether with wine or not , I be not sure ; but I think it very probable . he be , in short , in he after - dinner mood ; more expanded and genial , and also more self -indulgent than the frigid and rigid temper of the morning ; still he look preciously grim , cushion he massive head against the swelling back of he chair , and receive the light of the fire on he granite - hewn feature , and in he great , dark eye ; for he have great , dark eye , and very fine eye , too -- not without a certain change in they depth sometimes , which , if it be not softness , remind you , at least , of that feel . he have be look two minute at the fire , and I have be look the same length of time at he , when , turn suddenly , he catch my gaze fasten on he physiognomy . " you examine I , , " say he : " do you think I handsome ? " I should , if I have deliberate , have reply to this question by something conventionally vague and polite ; but the answer somehow slipp from my tongue before I be aware -- " no , sir . " " ah ! by my word ! there be something singular about you , " say he : " you have the air of a little nonnette ; quaint , quiet , grave , and simple , as you sit with you hand before you , and you eye generally bend on the carpet ( except , by - the - bye , when they be direct piercingly to my face ; as just now , for instance ) ; and when one ask you a question , or make a remark to which you be obliged to reply , you rap out a round rejoinder , which , if not blunt , be at least brusque . what do you mean by it ? " " Sir , I be too plain ; I beg you pardon . I ought to have reply that it be not easy to give a impromptu answer to a question about appearance ; that taste mostly differ ; and that beauty be of little consequence , or something of that sort . " " you ought to have reply no such thing . beauty of little consequence , indeed ! and so , under pretence of softene the previous outrage , of stroking and soothe I into placidity , you stick a sly penknife under my ear ! go on : what fault do you find with I , pray ? I suppose I have all my limb and all my feature like any other man ? " " , allow I to disow my first answer : I intend no point repartee : it be only a blunder . " " just so : I think so : and you shall be answerable for it . Criticise I : do my forehead not please you ? " he lift up the sable wave of hair which lay horizontally over he brow , and show a solid enough mass of intellectual organ , but a abrupt deficiency where the suave sign of benevolence should have risen . " now , ma 'am , be I a fool ? " " far from it , sir . you would , perhaps , think I rude if I inquire in return whether you be a philanthropist ? " " there again ! another stick of the penknife , when she pretend to pat my head : and that be because I say I do not like the society of child and old woman ( low be it speak ! ) . no , young lady , I be not a general philanthropist ; but I bear a conscience ; " and he point to the prominence which be say to indicate that faculty , and which , fortunately for he , be sufficiently conspicuous ; give , indeed , a mark breadth to the upper part of he head : " and , besides , I once have a kind of rude tenderness of heart . when I be as old as you , I be a feel fellow enough , partial to the unfledged , unfostered , and unlucky ; but have knock I about since : she have even knead I with she knuckle , and now I flatter myself I be hard and tough as a - rubber ball ; pervious , though , through a chink or two still , and with one sentient point in the middle of the lump . yes : do that leave hope for I ? " " hope of what , sir ? " " of my final re-transformation from - rubber back to flesh ? " " Decidedly he have have too much wine , " I think ; and I do not know what answer to make to he queer question : how could I tell whether he be capable of be re-transform ? " you look
look very much puzzl , ; and though you be not pretty any more than I be handsome , yet a puzzl air become you ; besides , it be convenient , for it keep those search eye of yours away from my physiognomy , and busy they with the worsted flower of the rug ; so puzzle on . young lady , I be dispose to be gregarious and communicative to - night . " with this announcement he rise from he chair , and stood , lean he arm on the marble mantelpiece : in that attitude he shape be see plainly as well as he face ; he unusual breadth of chest , disproportionate almost to he length of limb . I be sure most people would have think he a ugly man ; yet there be so much unconscious pride in he port ; so much ease in he demeanour ; such a look of complete indifference to he own external appearance ; so haughty a reliance on the power of other quality , intrinsic or adventitious , to ato for the lack of mere personal attractiveness , that , in look at he , one inevitably share the indifference , and , even in a blind , imperfect sense , put faith in the confidence . " I be dispose to be gregarious and communicative to - night , " he repeat , " and that be why I send for you : the fire and the chandelier be not sufficient company for I ; nor would have be , for none of these can talk . be a degree better , but still far below the mark ; ditto ; you , I be persuade , can suit I if you will : you puzzl I the first evening I invite you down here . I have almost forgote you since : other idea have drive yours from my head ; but to - night I be resolve to be at ease ; to dismiss what importune , and recall what pleasis . it would please I now to draw you out -- to learn more of you -- therefore speak . " instead of speak , I smile ; and not a very complacent or submissive smile either . " , " he urg . " what about , sir ? " " whatever you like . I leave both the choice of subject and the manner of treat it entirely to yourself . " accordingly I sit and say nothing : " if he expect I to talk for the mere sake of talk and show off , he will find he have address himself to the wrong person , " I think . " you be dumb , . " I be dumb still . he bend he head a little towards I , and with a single hasty glance seem to dive into my eye . " ? " he say , " and annoyed . ah ! it be consistent . I put my request in a absurd , almost insolent form . , I beg you pardon . the fact be , once for all , I do not wish to treat you like a inferior : that be " ( correcte himself ) , " I claim only such superiority as must result from twenty year ' difference in age and a century 's advance in experience . this be legitimate , et 'y tien , as would say ; and it be by virtue of this superiority , and this alone , that I desire you to have the goodness to talk to I a little now , and divert my thought , which be gall with dwelling on one point -- canker as a rusty nail . " he have deign a explanation , almost a apology , and I do not feel insensible to he condescension , and would not seem so . " I be willing to amuse you , if I can , sir -- quite willing ; but I can not introduce a topic , because how do I know what will interest you ? ask I question , and I will do my best to answer they . " " then , in the first place , do you agree with I that I have a right to be a little masterful , abrupt , perhaps exact , sometimes , on the grounds I state , namely , that I be old enough to be you father , and that I have battle through a varied experience with many man of many nation , and roam over half the globe , while you have liv quietly with one set of people in one house ? " " do as you please , sir . " " that be no answer ; or rather it be a very irritating , because a very evasive one . reply clearly . " " I do not think , sir , you have a right to command I , merely because you be older than I , or because you have see more of the world than I have ; you claim to superiority depend on the use you have make of you time and experience . " " Humph ! promptly speak . but I will not allow that , see that it would never suit my case , as I have make a indifferent , not to say a bad , use of both advantages . leave superiority out of the question , then , you must still agree to receive my order now and then , without be pique or hurt by the tone of command . will you ? " I smile : I think to myself be peculiar -- he seem to forget that he pay I 30 pound per annum for receive he order . " the smile be
be very well , " say he , catche instantly the pass expression ; " but speak too . " " I be think , sir , that very few master would trouble themselves to inquire whether or not they pay subordinate be pique and hurt by they order . " " pay subordinate ! what ! you be my pay subordinate , be you ? oh yes , I have forget the salary ! well then , on that mercenary ground , will you agree to let I hector a little ? " " no , sir , not on that ground ; but , on the ground that you do forget it , and that you care whether or not a dependent be comfortable in he dependency , I agree heartily . " " and will you consent to dispense with a great many conventional form and phrase , without think that the omission arise from insolence ? " " I be sure , sir , I should never mistake informality for insolence : one I rather like , the other nothing free - born would submit to , even for a salary . " " ! most thing free - bear will submit to anything for a salary ; therefore , keep to yourself , and do not venture on generality of which you be intensely ignorant . however , I mentally shake hand with you for you answer , despite its inaccuracy ; and as much for the manner in which it be say , as for the substance of the speech ; the manner be frank and sincere ; one do not often see such a manner : no , on the contrary , affectation , or coldness , or stupid , coarse - minde misapprehension of one 's meaning be the usual reward of candour . not three in three thousand raw school -girl - governess would have answer I as you have just do . but I do not mean to flatter you : if you be cast in a different mould to the majority , it be no merit of yours : do it . and then , after all , I go too fast in my conclusion : for what I yet know , you may be no better than the rest ; you may have intolerable defect to counterbalance you few good point . " " and so may you , " I think . my eye meet he as the idea cross my mind : he seem to read the glance , answer as if it be import have be speak as well as imagined - " yes , yes , you be right , " say he ; " I have plenty of fault of my own : I know it , and I do not wish to palliate they , I assure you . wot I need not be too severe about other ; I have a past existence , a series of deeds , a colour of life to contemplate within my own breast , which might well call my sneer and censure from my neighbour to myself . I start , or rather ( for like other defaulter , I like to lay half the blame on ill fortune and adverse circumstance ) be thrust on to a wrong tack at the age of one - and - twenty , and have never recover the right course since : but I might have be very different ; I might have be as good as you -- wiser -- almost as stainless . I envy you you peace of mind , you clean conscience , you unpolluted memory . little girl , a memory without blot or contamination must be a exquisite treasure -- a inexhaustible source of pure refreshment : be it not ? " " how be you memory when you be eighteen , sir ? " " all right then ; limpid , salubrious : no gush of bilge water have turn it to fetid puddle . I be you equal at eighteen -- quite you equal . mean I to be , on the whole , a good man , ; one of the better kind , and you see I be not so . you would say you do not see it ; at least I flatter myself I read as much in you eye ( beware , by - the - bye , what you express with that organ ; I be quick at interpret its language ) . then take my word for it , -- I be not a villain : you be not to suppose that -- not to attribute to I any such bad eminence ; but , owe , I verily believe , rather to circumstance than to my natural bent , I be a trite commonplace sinner , hackney in all the poor petty dissipation with which the rich and worthless try to put on life . do you wonder that I avow this to you ? know , that in the course of you future life you will often find yourself elect the involuntary confident of you acquaintance 's secret : people will instinctively find out , as I have do , that it be not you forte to tell of yourself , but to listen while other talk of themselves ; they will feel , too , that you listen with no malevolent scorn of they indiscretion , but with a kind of innate sympathy ; not the less comforting and encourage because it be very unobtrusive in its manifestation . " " how do you know ? -- how can you guess all this , sir ? " " I know it well ; therefore I proceed almost as freely as if I be write my thought in a diary . you would say , I should have be superior to circumstance
circumstance ; so I should -- so I should ; but you see I be not . when fate wronge I , I have not the wisdom to remain cool : I turn desperate ; then I degenerate . now , when any vicious simpleton excite my disgust by he paltry ribaldry , I can not flatter myself that I be better than he : I be force to confess that he and I be on a level . I wish I have stand firm -- know I do ! dread remorse when you be temp to err , ; remorse be the poison of life . " " Repentance be say to be its cure , sir . " " it be not its cure . Reformation may be its cure ; and I could reform -- I have strength yet for that -- if -- but where be the use of thinking of it , hamper , burden , curse as I be ? besides , since happiness be irrevocably deny I , I have a right to get pleasure out of life : and I will get it , cost what it may . " " then you will degenerate still more , sir . " " possibly : yet why should I , if I can get sweet , fresh pleasure ? and I may get it as sweet and fresh as the wild honey the bee gather on the moor . " " it will st -- it will taste bitter , sir . " " how do you know ? -- you never try it . how very serious -- how very solemn you look : and you be as ignorant of the matter as this cameo head " ( take one from the mantelpiece ) . " you have no right to preach to I , you neophyte , that have not pass the porch of life , and be absolutely unacquainted with its mystery . " " I only remind you of you own word , sir : you say error bring remorse , and you pronounce remorse the poison of existence . " " and who talk of error now ? I scarcely think the notion that flitter across my brain be a error . I believe it be a inspiration rather than a temptation : it be very genial , very soothing -- I know that . here it come again ! it be no devil , I assure you ; or if it be , it have put on the rob of a angel of light . I think I must admit so fair a guest when it ask entrance to my heart . " " Distrust it , sir ; it be not a true angel . " " once more , how do you know ? by what instinct do you pretend to distinguish between a fallen seraph of the abyss and a messenger from the eternal throne -- between a guide and a seducer ? " " I judge by you countenance , sir , which be trouble when you say the suggestion have return upon you . I feel sure it will work you more misery if you listen to it . " " not at all -- it bear the most gracious message in the world : for the rest , you be not my conscience - keeper , so do not make yourself uneasy . here , come in , bonny wanderer ! " he say this as if he speak to a vision , viewless to any eye but he own ; then , fold he arm , which he have half extended , on he chest , he seem to enclose in they embrace the invisible being . " now , " he continue , again address I , " I have receive the pilgrim -- a disguised deity , as I verily believe . already it have do I good : my heart be a sort of charnel ; it will now be a shrine . " " to speak truth , sir , I do not understand you at all : I can not keep up the conversation , because it have get out of my depth . only one thing , I know : you say you be not as good as you should like to be , and that you regret you own imperfection ; -- one thing I can comprehend : you intimate that to have a sullied memory be a perpetual bane . it seem to I , that if you try hard , you would in time find it possible to become what you yourself would approve ; and that if from this day you begin with resolution to correct you thought and action , you would in a few year have lay up a new and stainless store of recollection , to which you might revert with pleasure . " " Justly thought ; rightly say , ; and , at this moment , I be pave hell with energy . " " ? " " I be lay down good intention , which I believe durable as flint . certainly , my associate and pursuits shall be other than they have be . " " and better ? " " and better -- so much better as pure ore be than foul dross . you seem to doubt I ; I do not doubt myself : I know what my aim be , what my motives be ; and at this moment I pass a law , unalterable as that of the and , that both be right . " " they can not be , sir , if they require a new statute to legalise they . " " they be , , though they absolutely require a new statute : unheard - of combination of circumstance demand unheard - of rule
rule . " " that sound a dangerous maxim , sir ; because one can see at once that it be liable to abuse . " " Sententious sage ! so it be : but I swear by my household gods not to abuse it . " " you be human and fallible . " " I be : so be you -- what then ? " " the human and fallible should not arrogate a power with which the divine and perfect alone can be safely intrust . " " what power ? " " that have say of any strange , unsanctioned line of action , -- ' let it be right . ' " " ' let it be right ' -- the very word : you have pronounce they . " " May it be right then , " I say , as I rise , deem it useless to continue a discourse which be all darkness to I ; and , besides , sensible that the character of my interlocutor be beyond my penetration ; at least , beyond its present reach ; and feel the uncertainty , the vague sense of insecurity , which accompany a conviction of ignorance . " where be you go ? " " to put Adele to be : it be past she bedtime . " " you be afraid of I , because I talk like a Sphynx . " " you language be enigmatical , sir : but though I be bewilder , I be certainly not afraid . " " you be afraid -- you self - love dread a blunder . " " in that sense I do feel apprehensive -- I have no wish to talk nonsense . " " if you do , it would be in such a grave , quiet manner , I should mistake it for sense . do you never laugh , ? do not trouble yourself to answer -- I see you laugh rarely ; but you can laugh very merrily : believe I , you be not naturally austere , any more than I be naturally vicious . the Lowood constraint still cling to you somewhat ; control you feature , muff you voice , and restrict you limb ; and you fear in the presence of a man and a brother -- or father , or master , or what you will -- to smile too gaily , speak too freely , or move too quickly : but , in time , I think you will learn to be natural with I , as I find it impossible to be conventional with you ; and then you look and movement will have more vivacity and variety than they dare offer now . I see at interval the glance of a curiious sort of bird through the close - set bars of a cage : a vivid , restless , resolute captive be there ; be it but free , it would soar cloud - high . you be still bend on go ? " " it have struck nine , sir . " " never mind , -- wait a minute : be not ready to go to bed yet . my position , , with my back to the fire , and my face to the room , favour observation . while talk to you , I have also occasionally watch ( I have my own reason for think she a curiious study , -- reason that I may , nay , that I shall , impart to you some day ) . she pull out of she box , about ten minute ago , a little pink silk frock ; rapture light she face as she unfold it ; coquetry run in she blood , blend with she brain , and season the marrow of she bone . ' Il faut que je l'essaie ! ' cry she , 'et e l'instant meme ! ' and she rush out of the room . she be now with , undergo a robing process : in a few minute she will re-enter ; and I know what I shall see , -- a miniature of , as she use to appear on the board at the rising of -- but never mind that . however , my tenderest feeling be about to receive a shock : such be my presentiment ; stay now , to see whether it will be realise . " Ere long , 's little foot be hear tripping across the hall . she enter , transform as she guardian have predict . a dress of rose -coloured satin , very short , and as full in the skirt as it could be gather , replace the brown frock she have previously worn ; a wreath of rosebud circle she forehead ; she foot be dress in silk stocking and small white satin sandal . " est - ce que ma robe va bien ? " cry she , bounde forwards ; " et m soulier ? et m ba ? Tenez , je crois que je vais danser ! " and spreade out she dress , she chasseed across the room till , have reach , she wheel lightly round before he on tip - toe , then drop on one knee at he foot , exclaim - " Monsieur , je vous remercie mille foi de votre bont ; " then rise , she add , " C'est comme cela que maman faisait , n'est - ce pa , monsieur ? " " Pre-cise - ly ! " be the answer ; " and , ' comme cela , ' she charme my gold out of my british breech ' pocket . I have be green , too , , -- ay , grass green : not a more vernal tint freshen you now than once freshen I . my spring be
be gone , however , but it have leave I that french floweret on my hand , which , in some mood , I would fain be rid of . not value now the root whence it spring ; have find that it be of a sort which nothing but gold dust could manure , I have but half a liking to the blossom , especially when it look so artificial as just now . I keep it and rear it rather on the principle of expiat numerous sins , great or small , by one good work . I will explain all this some day . good -night . " do , on a future occasion , explain it . it be one afternoon , when he chance to meet I and in the grounds : and while she play with and she shuttlecock , he ask I to walk up and down a long beech avenue within sight of she . he then say that she be the daughter of a french opera- dancer , , towards whom he have once cherish what he call a " grande passion . " this passion have profess to return with even superior ardour . he think himself she idol , ugly as he be : he believe , as he say , that she preferre he " taille d'athlete " to the elegance of the . " and , , so much be I flatter by this preference of the sylph for she british gnome , that I install she in a hotel ; give she a complete establishment of servants , a carriage , cashmere , diamonds , dentelle , &c . in short , I begin the process of ruin myself in the receive style , like any other spoony . I have not , it seem , the originality to chalk out a new road to shame and destruction , but trode the old track with stupid exactness not to deviate a inch from the beaten centre . I have -- as I deserv to have -- the fate of all other spoony . happen to call one evening when do not expect I , I find she out ; but it be a warm night , and I be tired with stroll through , so I sit down in she boudoir ; happy to breathe the air consecrate so lately by she presence . no , -- I exaggerate ; I never think there be any consecrat virtue about she : it be rather a sort of pastille perfume she have leave ; a scent of musk and amber , than a odour of sanctity . I be just begin to stifle with the fume of conservatory flower and sprinkle essences , when I bethotch myself to open the window and step out on to the balcony . it be moonlight and gaslight beside , and very still and serene . the balcony be furnish with a chair or two ; I sit down , and take out a cigar , -- I will take one now , if you will excuse I . " here ensue a pause , fill up by the producing and lighting of a cigar ; have place it to he lip and breathe a trail of incense on the freezing and sunless air , he go on - " I like bonbon too in those day , , and I be croquant -- ( overlook the barbarism ) -- croquant chocolate comfit , and smoke alternately , watch meantime the equipage that roll along the fashionable street towards the neighbouring opera- house , when in a elegant close carriage draw by a beautiful pair of English horse , and distinctly see in the brilliant city - night , I recognise the ' voiture ' I have give . she be return : of course my heart thump with impatience against the iron rail I lean upon . the carriage stop , as I have expect , at the hotel door ; my flame ( that be the very word for a opera inamorata ) alight : though muff in a cloak -- a unnecessary encumbrance , by - the - bye , on so warm a evening -- I know she instantly by she little foot , see peepe from the skirt of she dress , as she skip from the carriage - step . bend over the balcony , I be about to ' ' -- in a tone , of course , which should be audible to the ear of love alone -- when a figure jump from the carriage after she ; cloak also ; but that be a spurred heel which have ring on the pavement , and that be a hat head which now pass under the arch porte cochere of the hotel . " you never feel jealousy , do you , ? of course not : I need not ask you ; because you never feel love . you have both sentiment yet to experience : you soul sleep ; the shock be yet to be give which shall wake it . you think all existence lapse in as quiet a flow as that in which you youth have hithertoo slid away . float on with closed eye and muff ear , you neither see the rock bristl not far off in the bed of the flood , nor hear the breaker boil at they base . but I tell you -- and you may mark my word -- you will come some day to a craggy pass in the channel , where the whole of life 's stream will be break up into whirl and tumult , foam and noise : either you will be dashed to atom on crag point , or lift up and borne on by some master - wave into a calmer current -- as I be now .
. " I like this day ; I like that sky of steel ; I like the sternness and stillness of the world under this frost . I like , its antiquity , its retirement , its old crow -tree and thorn - tree , it be grey facade , and line of dark window reflect that metal welkin : and yet how long have I abhor the very thought of it , shunn it like a great plague - house ? how I do still abhor -" he ground he tooth and be silent : he arrest he step and strike he boot against the hard ground . some hate thought seem to have he in its grip , and to hold he so tightly that he could not advance . we be ascend the avenue when he thus pause ; the hall be before we . lift he eye to its battlement , he cast over they a glare such as I never see before or since . , shame , ire , impatience , disgust , detestation , seem momentarily to hold a quivering conflict in the large pupil dilat under he ebon eyebrow . wild be the wrestle which should be paramount ; but another feel rose and triumph : something hard and cynical : self - will and resolute : it settle he passion and petrify he countenance : he go on - " during the moment I be silent , , I be arrange a point with my destiny . she stand there , by that beech - trunk -- a hag like one of those who appear to on the heath of Forres . ' you like ? ' she say , lift she finger ; and then she write in the air a memento , which run in lurid hieroglyphic all along the house - front , between the upper and lower row of window , ' like it if you can ! like it if you dare ! ' " 'I will like it , ' say I ; 'I dare like it ; ' and " ( he subjoin moodily ) " I will keep my word ; I will break obstacle to happiness , to goodness -- yes , goodness . I wish to be a better man than I have be , than I be ; as 's leviathan break the spare , the dart , and the habergeon , hindrance which other count as iron and brass , I will esteem but straw and rotten wood . " here run before he with she shuttlecock . " away ! " he cry harshly ; " keep at a distance , child ; or go in to ! " continue then to pursue he walk in silence , I venture to recall he to the point whence he have abruptly diverge - " do you leave the balcony , sir , " I ask , " when . Varens enter ? " I almost expect a rebuff for this hardly well - time question , but , on the contrary , wake out of he scowling abstraction , he turn he eye towards I , and the shade seem to clear off he brow . " oh , I have forget ! well , to resume . when I see my charmer thus come in accompany by a cavalier , I seem to hear a hiss , and the green snake of jealousy , rise on undulating coil from the moonlit balcony , glide within my waistcoat , and eat its way in two minute to my heart 's core . ! " he exclaim , suddenly start again from the point . " strange that I should choose you for the confident of all this , young lady ; pass strange that you should listen to I quietly , as if it be the most usual thing in the world for a man like I to tell story of he opera-mistress to a quaint , inexperienc girl like you ! but the last singularity explain the first , as I intimate once before : you , with you gravity , considerateness , and caution be make to be the recipient of secret . besides , I know what sort of a mind I have place in communication with my own : I know it be one not liable to take infection : it be a peculiar mind : it be a unique one . happily I do not mean to harm it : but , if I do , it would not take harm from I . the more you and I converse , the better ; for while I can not blight you , you may refresh I . " after this digression he proceed - " I remain in the balcony . ' they will come to she boudoir , no doubt , ' think I : ' let I prepare a ambush . ' so put my hand in through the open window , I draw the curtain over it , leave only a opening through which I could take observation ; then I close the casement , all but a chink just wide enough to furnish a outlet to lover ' whisper vow : then I steal back to my chair ; and as I resume it the pair come in . my eye be quickly at the aperture . 's chamber-maid enter , light a lamp , leave it on the table , and withdrew . the couple be thus revealead to I clearly : both remove they cloak , and there be ' the , ' shine in satin and jewel , -- my gift of course , -- and there be she companion in a officer 's uniform ; and I know he for a young roue of a vicomte -- a brainless and vicious youth whom I have sometimes meet
meet in society , and have never think of hate because I despise he so absolutely . on recognise he , the fang of the be instantly broken ; because at the same moment my love for sank under a extinguisher . a woman who could betray I for such a rival be not worth contende for ; she deserv only scorn ; less , however , than I , who have be she dupe . " they begin to talk ; they conversation ease I completely : frivolous , mercenary , heartless , and senseless , it be rather calculate to weary than enrage a listener . a card of mine lay on the table ; this be perceive , bring my name under discussion . neither of they possess energy or wit to belabour I soundly , but they insult I as coarsely as they could in they little way : especially , who even wax rather brilliant on my personal defect -- deformity she terme they . now it have be she custom to launch out into fervent admiration of what she call my ' beaute male :' wherein she differ diametrically from you , who tell I point - blank , at the second interview , that you do not think I handsome . the contrast struck I at the time and -- " here come run up again . " , have just be to say that you agent have call and wish to see you . " " ah ! in that case I must abridge . open the window , I walk in upon they ; liberate from my protection ; give she notice to vacate she hotel ; offer she a purse for immediate exigency ; disregard scream , hysteric , prayer , protestation , convulsion ; make a appointment with the vicomte for a meeting at the . next morning I have the pleasure of encounter he ; leave a bullet in one of he poor etiolate arm , feeble as the wing of a chicken in the pip , and then think I have do with the whole crew . but unluckily the , six month before , have give I this filette , who , she affir , be my daughter ; and perhaps she may be , though I see no proof of such grim paternity write in she countenance : be more like I than she . some year after I have break with the mother , she abandon she child , and run away to with a musician or singer . I acknowledge no natural claim on 's part to be support by I , nor do I now acknowledge any , for I be not she father ; but hear that she be quite destitute , I e'en take the poor thing out of the slime and mud of , and transplant it here , to grow up clean in the wholesome soil of a english country garden . find you to train it ; but now you know that it be the illegitimate offspring of a french opera - girl , you will perhaps think differently of you post and protegee : you will be come to I some day with notice that you have find another place -- that you beg I to look out for a new governess , & c. -- ? " " no : be not answerable for either she mother 's fault or yours : I have a regard for she ; and now that I know she be , in a sense , parentless -- forsake by she mother and disown by you , sir -- I shall cling closer to she than before . how could I possibly prefer the spoilt pet of a wealthy family , who would hate she governess as a nuisance , to a lonely little orphan , who lean towards she as a friend ? " " oh , that be the light in which you view it ! well , I must go in now ; and you too : it darken . " but I stay out a few minute longer with and -- run a race with she , and play a game of battledore and shuttlecock . when we go in , and I have remove she bonnet and coat , I take she on my knee ; keep she there a hour , allow she to prattle as she like : not rebuk even some little freedom and triviality into which she be apt to stray when much notice , and which betraye in she a superficiality of character , inherit probably from she mother , hardly congenial to a english mind . still she have she merit ; and I be dispose to appreciate all that be good in she to the utmost . I seek in she countenance and feature a likeness to , but find none : no trait , no turn of expression announce relationship . it be a pity : if she could but have be prove to resemble he , he would have think more of she . it be not till after I have withdraw to my own chamber for the night , that I steadily review the tale have tell I . as he have say , there be probably nothing at all extraordinary in the substance of the narrative itself : a wealthy 's passion for a french dancer , and she treachery to he , were every day matter enough , no doubt , in society ; but there be something decidedly strange in the paroxysm of emotion which have suddenly seize he when he be in the act of express the present contentment of he mood , and he newly revive pleasure in the old hall and its environ . I meditate wonderingly on this incident ; but gradually quit it , as I find it
it for the present inexplicable , I turn to the consideration of my master 's manner to myself . the confidence he have think fit to repose in I see a tribute to my discretion : I regard and accept it as such . he deportment have now for some week be more uniform towards I than at the first . I never see in he way ; he do not take fit of chilling hauteur : when he meet I unexpectedly , the encounter seem welcome ; he have always a word and sometimes a smile for I : when summon by formal invitation to he presence , I be honoure by a cordiality of reception that make I feel I really possess the power to amuse he , and that these evening conference be seek as much for he pleasure as for my benefit . I , indeed , talk comparatively little , but I hear he talk with relish . it be he nature to be communicative ; he like to open to a mind unacquaint with the world glimpse of its scene and way ( I do not mean its corrupt scene and wick way , but such as derive they interest from the great scale on which they be act , the strange novelty by which they be characterise ) ; and I have a keen delight in receive the new idea he offer , in imagine the new picture he portray , and follow he in think through the new region he disclose , never start or trouble by one noxious allusion . the ease of he manner free I from painful restraint : the friendly frankness , as correct as cordial , with which he treat I , draw I to he . I feel at time as if he be my relation rather than my master : yet he be imperious sometimes still ; but I do not mind that ; I see it be he way . so happy , so gratify do I become with this new interest add to life , that I cease to pine after kind : my thin crescent -destiny seem to enlarge ; the blank of existence be fill up ; my bodily health improve ; I gather flesh and strength . and be now ugly in my eyes ? no , reader : gratitude , and many associations , all pleasurable and genial , make he face the object I best like to see ; he presence in a room be more cheer than the brightest fire . yet I have not forget he fault ; indeed , I could not , for he bring they frequently before I . he be proud , sardonic , harsh to inferiority of every description : in my secret soul I know that he great kindness to I be balance by unjust severity to many other . he be moody , too ; unaccountably so ; I more than once , when send for to read to he , find he sit in he library alone , with he head bend on he fold arm ; and , when he look up , a morose , almost a malignant , scowl blacken he feature . but I believe that he moodiness , he harshness , and he former fault of morality ( I say former , for now he seem correcte of they ) have they source in some cruel cross of fate . I believe he be naturally a man of better tendency , higher principle , and purer taste than such as circumstance have develop , education instil , or destiny encourage . I think there be excellent material in he ; though for the present they hang together somewhat spoil and tangle . I can not deny that I grieve for he grief , whatever that be , and would have give much to assuage it . though I have now extinguish my candle and be laid down in bed , I could not sleep for thinking of he look when he pause in the avenue , and tell how he destiny have risen up before he , and da he to be happy at . " why not ? " I ask myself . " what alienate he from the house ? will he leave it again soon ? say he seldom stay here longer than a fortnight at a time ; and he have now be resident eight week . if he do go , the change will be doleful . suppose he should be absent spring , summer , and autumn : how joyless sunshine and fine day will seem ! " I hardly know whether I have sleep or not after this musing ; at any rate , I start wide awake on hear a vague murmur , peculiar and lugubrious , which sound , I think , just above I . I wish I have keep my candle burn : the night be drearily dark ; my spirit be depresse . I rise and sit up in bed , listen . the sound be hush . I try again to sleep ; but my heart beat anxiously : my inward tranquillity be broken . the clock , far down in the hall , struck two . just then it seem my chamber - door be touch ; as if finger have sweep the panel in grope a way along the dark gallery outside . I say , " who be there ? " nothing answer . I be chill with fear . all at once I remember that it might be , who , when the kitchen - door chance to be leave open , not unfrequently find he way up to the threshold of 's chamber : I have see he lie there myself in the morning . the idea calme I somewhat : I lay down . Silence
Silence compose the nerve ; and as a unbroken hush now reign again through the whole house , I begin to feel the return of slumber . but it be not fate that I should sleep that night . a dream have scarcely approach my ear , when it fle affright , scare by a marrow -freeze incident enough . this be a demoniac laugh -- low , suppress , and deep -- utter , as it see , at the very keyhole of my chamber door . the head of my bed be near the door , and I think at first the goblin - laugher stood at my bedside -- or rather , crouch by my pillow : but I rise , look round , and could see nothing ; while , as I still gaze , the unnatural sound be reiterate : and I know it come from behind the panel . my first impulse be to rise and fasten the bolt ; my next , again to cry out , " who be there ? " something gurgle and moan . Ere long , step retreat up the gallery towards the third - storey staircase : a door have lately be make to shut in that staircase ; I hear it open and close , and all be still . " be that ? and be she possess with a devil ? " think I . impossible now to remain longer by myself : I must go to . I hurry on my frock and a shawl ; I withdraw the bolt and open the door with a trembling hand . there be a candle burn just outside , and on the matting in the gallery . I be surprise at this circumstance : but still more be I amaze to perceive the air quite dim , as if fill with smoke ; and , while look to the right hand and leave , to find whence these blue wreat issue , I become further aware of a strong smell of burning . something creak : it be a door ajar ; and that door be 's , and the smoke rush in a cloud from thence . I think no more of ; I think no more of , or the laugh : in a instant , I be within the chamber . tongue of flame dart round the bed : the curtain be on fire . in the midst of blaze and vapour , lay stretch motionless , in deep sleep . " wake ! wake ! " I cry . I shook he , but he only murmure and turn : the smoke have stupefy he . not a moment could be lose : the very sheet be kindl , I rush to he basin and ewer ; fortunately , one be wide and the other deep , and both be fill with water . I heav they up , deluge the bed and its occupant , fly back to my own room , bring my own water - jug , baptize the couch afresh , and , by 's aid , succeed in extinguish the flame which be devour it . the hiss of the quenched element , the breakage of a pitcher which I fling from my hand when I have empty it , and , above all , the splash of the shower - bath I have liberally bestowed , rouse at last . though it be now dark , I know he be awake ; because I hear he fulminat strange anathema at finding himself lie in a pool of water . " be there a flood ? " he cry . " no , sir , " I answer ; " but there have be a fire : get up , do ; you be quench now ; I will fetch you a candle . " " in the name of all the elf in , be that ? " he demand . " what have you do with I , witch , sorceress ? who be in the room besides you ? have you plot to dry I ? " " I will fetch you a candle , sir ; and , in 's name , get up . somebody have plot something : you can not too soon find out who and what it be . " " there ! I be up now ; but at you peril you fetch a candle yet : wait two minute till I get into some dry garment , if any dry there be -- yes , here be my dressing - gow . now run ! " I do run ; I bring the candle which still remain in the gallery . he take it from my hand , hold it up , and survey the bed , all blacken and scorch , the sheet drench , the carpet round swim in water . " what be it ? and who do it ? " he ask . I briefly related to he what have transpire : the strange laugh I have hear in the gallery : the step ascend to the third storey ; the smoke , -- the smell of fire which have conduct I to he room ; in what state I have find matter there , and how I have deluge he with all the water I could lay hand on . he listen very gravely ; he face , as I go on , express more concern than astonishment ; he do not immediately speak when I have conclude . " shall I call ? " I ask . " ? no ; what the deuce would you call she for ? what can she do ? let she sleep unmolested . " " then I will fetch , and wake and he wife . " " not at all : just be still
still . you have a shawl on . if you be not warm enough , you may take my cloak yonder ; wrap it about you , and sit down in the arm -chair : there , -- I will put it on . now place you foot on the stool , to keep they out of the wet . I be go to leave you a few minute . I shall take the candle . remain where you be till I return ; be as still as a mouse . I must pay a visit to the second storey . do not move , remember , or call any one . " he go : I watch the light withdraw . he pass up the gallery very softly , unclose the staircase door with as little noise as possible , shut it after he , and the last ray vanish . I be leave in total darkness . I listen for some noise , but hear nothing . a very long time elapse . I grow weary : it be cold , in spite of the cloak ; and then I do not see the use of staying , as I be not to rouse the house . I be on the point of risking 's displeasure by disobey he order , when the light once more gleam dimly on the gallery wall , and I hear he unshod foot tread the matting . " I hope it be he , " think I , " and not something worse . " he re-enter , pale and very gloomy . " I have find it all out , " say he , set he candle down on the washstand ; " it be as I think . " " how , sir ? " he make no reply , but stand with he arm fold , look on the ground . at the end of a few minute he inquire in rather a peculiar tone - " I forget whether you say you see anything when you open you chamber door . " " no , sir , only the candlestick on the ground . " " but you hear a odd laugh ? you have hear that laugh before , I should think , or something like it ? " " yes , sir : there be a woman who sew here , call , -- she laugh in that way . she be a singular person . " " just so . -- you have guess it . she be , as you say , singular -- very . well , I shall reflect on the subject . meantime , I be glad that you be the only person , besides myself , acquaint with the precise detail of to - night 's incident . you be no talking fool : say nothing about it . I will account for this state of affair " ( point to the bed ) : " and now return to you own room . I shall do very well on the sofa in the library for the rest of the night . it be near four :- in two hour the servant will be up . " " good - night , then , sir , " say I , depart . he seem surprised -- very inconsistently so , as he have just tell I to go . " what ! " he exclaim , " be you quit I already , and in that way ? " " you say I might go , sir . " " but not without take leave ; not without a word or two of acknowledgment and good - will : not , in short , in that brief , dry fashion . why , you have save my life ! -- snatch I from a horrible and excruciat death ! and you walk past I as if we be mutual stranger ! at least shake hand . " he hold out he hand ; I give he mine : he take it first in one , they in both he own . " you have save my life : I have a pleasure in owe you so immense a debt . I can not say more . nothing else that have be would have be tolerable to I in the character of creditor for such a obligation : but you : it be different ; -- I feel you benefit no burden , . " he pause ; gaze at I : word almost visible tremble on he lip ,- - but he voice be check . " good - night again , sir . there be no debt , benefit , burden , obligation , in the case . " " I know , " he continue , " you would do I good in some way , at some time ; -- I see it in you eye when I first beheld you : they expression and smile do not " -- ( again he stop ) -- " do not " ( he proceed hastily ) " strike delight to my very inmost heart so for nothing . people talk of natural sympathy ; I have hear of good genii : there be grains of truth in the wildest fable . my cherish preserver , goodnight ! " energy be in he voice , strange fire in he look . " I be glad I happen to be awake , " I say : and then I be go . " what ! you will go ? " " I be cold , sir . " " ? yes , -- and stand in a pool ! go , then , ; go ! " but he still retain my hand , and I could not free it . I bethotch myself of a expedient . " I think
think I hear move , sir , " say I . " well , leave I : " he relax he finger , and I be gone . I regain my couch , but never think of sleep . morning dawn I be toss on a buoyant but unquiet sea , where billow of trouble roll under surge of joy . I think sometimes I see beyond its wild water a shore , sweet as the hill of ; and now and then a freshening gale , wake by hope , bear my spirit triumphantly towards the bourne : but I could not reach it , even in fancy -- a counteracting breeze blow off land , and continually drive I back . sense would resist delirium : judgment would warn passion . too feverish to rest , I rise as soon as day dawn . I both wish and fear to see on the day which follow this sleepless night : I want to hear he voice again , yet fear to meet he eye . during the early part of the morning , I momentarily expect he come ; he be not in the frequent habit of enter the schoolroom , but he do step in for a few minute sometimes , and I have the impression that he be sure to visit it that day . but the morning pass just as usual : nothing happen to interrupt the quiet course of 's study ; only soon after breakfast , I hear some bustle in the neighbourhood of 's chamber , 's voice , and 's , and the cook 's -- that be , 's wife -- and even 's own gruff tone . there be exclamation of " what a mercy master be not burn in he bed ! " " it be always dangerous to keep a candle lit at night . " " how providential that he have presence of mind to think of the water - jug ! " " I wonder he wake nobody ! " " it be to be hope he will not take cold with sleep on the library sofa , " &c . too much confabulation succeed a sound of scrubbing and set to rights ; and when I pass the room , in go downstairs to dinner , I see through the open door that all be again restore to complete order ; only the bed be stripp of its hangings . stand up in the window - seat , rub the pane of glass dim with smoke . I be about to address she , for I wish to know what account have be give of the affair : but , on advancing , I see a second person in the chamber -- a woman sit on a chair by the bedside , and sew ring to new curtain . that woman be no other than . there she sit , staid and taciturn -looking , as usual , in she brown stuff gown , she check apron , white handkerchief , and cap . she be intent on she work , in which she whole thought seem absorb : on she hard forehead , and in she commonplace feature , be nothing either of the paleness or desperation one would have expect to see mark the countenance of a woman who have attempt murder , and whose intend victim have follow she last night to she lair , and ( as I believe ) , charge she with the crime she wish to perpetrate . I be amaze -- confound . she look up , while I still gaze at she : no start , no increase or failure of colour betrayed emotion , consciousness of guilt , or fear of detection . she say " good morning , , " in she usual phlegmatic and brief manner ; and take up another ring and more tape , go on with she sewing . " I will put she to some test , " think I : " such absolute impenetrability be past comprehension . " " good morning , , " I say . " have anything happen here ? I think I hear the servants all talk together a while ago . " " only master have be read in he bed last night ; he fall asleep with he candle lit , and the curtain get on fire ; but , fortunately , he awoke before the bed - clothes or the wood - work catch , and contrive to quench the flame with the water in the ewer . " " a strange affair ! " I say , in a low voice : then , look at she fixedly -- " wake nobody ? do no one hear he move ? " she again raise she eye to I , and this time there be something of consciousness in they expression . she seem to examine I warily ; then she answer - " the servants sleep so far off , you know , , they would not be likely to hear . 's room and yours be the nearest to master 's ; but say she hear nothing : when people get elderly , they often sleep heavy . " she pause , and then add , with a sort of assume indifference , but still in a mark and significant tone -- " but you be young , ; and I should say a light sleeper : perhaps you may have hear a noise ? " " I do , " say I , drop my voice , so that , who be still polish the pane , could not hear I , " and at first I think it be : but can not laugh ; and I be certain I hear a laugh , and a strange one . " she take a new needleful of
of thread , wax it carefully , thread she needle with a steady hand , and then observe , with perfect composure - " it be hardly likely master would laugh , I should think , , when he be in such danger : you must have be dream . " " I be not dream , " I say , with some warmth , for she brazen coolness provoke I . again she look at I ; and with the same scrutinising and conscious eye . " have you tell master that you hear a laugh ? " she inquire . " I have not have the opportunity of speaking to he this morning . " " you do not think of open you door and look out into the gallery ? " she further ask . she appear to be cross-question I , attempt to draw from I information unaware . the idea struck I that if she discover I know or suspect she guilt , she would be play of some of she malignant prank on I ; I think it advisable to be on my guard . " on the contrary , " say I , " I bolt my door . " " then you be not in the habit of bolt you door every night before you get into bed ? " " Fiend ! she want to know my habits , that she may lay she plan accordingly ! " Indignation again prevail over prudence : I reply sharply , " I have often omit to fasten the bolt : I do not think it necessary . I be not aware any danger or annoyance be to be dread at : but in future " ( and I lay mark stress on the word ) " I shall take good care to make all secure before I venture to lie down . " " it will be wise so to do , " be she answer : " this neighbourhood be as quiet as any I know , and I never hear of the hall be attempt by robber since it be a house ; though there be hundred of pound 's worth of plate in the plate - closet , as be well kny . and you see , for such a large house , there be very few servants , because master have never live here much ; and when he do come , be a bachelor , he need little wait on : but I always think it best to err on the safe side ; a door be soon fastened , and it be as well to have a draw bolt between one and any mischief that may be about . a deal of people , , be for trust all to ; but I say will not dispense with the means , though he often bless they when they be use discreetly . " and here she close she harangue : a long one for she , and utter with the demureness of a Quakeress . I still stand absolutely dumfounder at what appear to I she miraculous self - possession and most inscrutable hypocrisy , when the cook enter . " . , " say she , address , " the servants 's dinner will soon be ready : will you come down ? " " no ; just put my pint of porter and bit of pudding on a tray , and I will carry it upstairs . " " you will have some meat ? " " just a morsel , and a taste of cheese , that be all . " " and the sago ? " " never mind it at present : I shall be come down before teatime : I will make it myself . " the cook here turn to I , say that be wait for I : so I depart . I hardly hear 's account of the curtain conflagration during dinner , so much be I occupy in puzzl my brain over the enigmatical character of , and still more in ponder the problem of she position at and question why she have not be give into custody that morning , or , at the very least , dismiss from she master 's service . he have almost as much as declare he conviction of she criminality last night : what mysterious cause withheld he from accuse she ? why have he enjoin I , too , to secrecy ? it be strange : a bold , vindictive , and haughty gentleman seem somehow in the power of one of the meanest of he dependant ; so much in she power , that even when she lift she hand against he life , he da not openly charge she with the attempt , much less punish she for it . have be young and handsome , I should have be tempt to think that tenderer feeling than prudence or fear influence in she behalf ; but , hard - favoured and matronly as she be , the idea could not be admit . " yet , " I reflect , " she have be young once ; she youth would be contemporary with she master 's : tell I once , she have liv here many year . I do not think she can ever have be pretty ; but , for atch I know , she may possess originality and strength of character to compensate for the want of personal advantages . be a amateur of the decided and eccentric : be eccentric at least . what if a former caprice ( a freak very possible to a nature so sudden and headstrong as he ) have deliver he into she power , and she now exercise over he action a secret influence , the result of he own indiscretion , which he can not shake off
off , and dare not disregard ? " but , have reach this point of conjecture , 's square , flat figure , and uncomely , dry , even coarse face , recur so distinctly to my mind 's eye , that I think , " no ; impossible ! my supposition can not be correct . yet , " suggest the secret voice which talk to we in we own heart , " you be not beautiful either , and perhaps approve you : at any rate , you have often feel as if he do ; and last night -- remember he word ; remember he look ; remember he voice ! " I well remember all ; language , glance , and tone seem at the moment vividly renew . I be now in the schoolroom ; be draw ; I bend over she and direct she pencil . she look up with a sort of start . " Qug avez-vous , mademoiselle ? " say she . " doigts tremblent comme la feuille , et vos joue so not rouge : mais , rouge comme des cerise ! " " I be hot , , with stoop ! " she go on sketching ; I go on thinking . I hasten to drive from my mind the hateful notion I have be conceive respect ; it disgust I . I compare myself with she , and find we be different . have say I be quite a lady ; and she speak truth -- I be a lady . and now I look much better than I do when see I ; I have more colour and more flesh , more life , more vivacity , because I have brighter hope and keener enjoyment . " evening approach , " say I , as I look towards the window . " I have never hear 's voice or step in the house to - day ; but surely I shall see he before night : I fear the meeting in the morning ; now I desire it , because expectation have be so long baffle that it be grow impatient . " when dusk actually close , and when leave I to go and play in the nursery with , I do most keenly desire it . I listen for the bell to ring below ; I listen for Leah come up with a message ; I fancie sometimes I hear 's own tread , and I turn to the door , expect it to open and admit he . the door remain shut ; darkness only come in through the window . still it be not late ; he often send for I at seven and eight o'clock , and it be yet but six . surely I should not be wholly disappointed to - night , when I have so many thing to say to he ! I want again to introduce the subject of , and to hear what he would answer ; I want to ask he plainly if he really believe it be she who have make last night 's hideous attempt ; and if so , why he keep she wickedness a secret . it little matter whether my curiosity irritate he ; I know the pleasure of vexing and soothe he by turn ; it be one I chiefly delighte in , and a sure instinct always prevent I from go too far ; beyond the verge of provocation I never venture ; on the extreme brink I like well to try my skill . Retain every minute form of respect , every propriety of my station , I could still meet he in argument without fear or uneasy restraint ; this suit both he and I . a tread creak on the stair at last . make she appearance ; but it be only to intimate that tea be ready in 's room . Thither I repair , glad at least to go downstairs ; for that bring I , I imagine , nearer to 's presence . " you must want you tea , " say the good lady , as I join she ; " you eat so little at dinner . I be afraid , " she continue , " you be not well to - day : you look flushed and feverish . " " oh , quite well ! I never feel better . " " then you must prove it by evince a good appetite ; will you fill the teapot while I knit off this needle ? " have complete she task , she rise to draw down the blind , which she have hitherto keep up , by way , I suppose , of make the most of daylight , though dusk be now fast deepen into total obscurity . " it be fair to - night , " say she , as she look through the pane , " though not starlight ; have , on the whole , have a favourable day for he journey . " " ! -- be go anywhere ? I do not know he be out . " " oh , he set off the moment he have breakfast ! he be go to the , 's place , ten mile on the other side . I believe there be quite a party assemble there ; , , , and other . " " do you expect he back to - night ? " " no -- nor to - morrow either ; I should think he be very likely to stay a week or more : when these fine , fashionable people get together , they be so surround by elegance and gaiety , so well provide with all that can please and entertain , they be in no hurry to separate . gentleman especially be often in request on such occasion ;
; and be so talented and so lively in society , that I believe he be a general favourite : the lady be very fond of he ; though you would not think he appearance calculate to recommend he particularly in they eye : but I suppose he acquirement and ability , perhaps he wealth and good blood , make amend for any little fault of look . " " be there lady at the Leas ? " " there be and she three daughter -- very elegant young lady indeed ; and there be the and , most beautiful woman , I suppose : indeed I have see , six or seven year since , when she be a girl of eighteen . she come here to a ball and party give . you should have see the dining - room that day -- how richly it be decorate , how brilliantly light up ! I should think there be fifty lady and gentleman present -- all of the first county family ; and be consider the belle of the evening . " " you see she , you say , : what be she like ? " " yes , I see she . the dining - room door be thrown open ; and , as it be - time , the servant be allow to assemble in the hall , to hear some of the ladie sing and play . would have I to come in , and I sit down in a quiet corner and watch they . I never see a more splendid scene : the lady be magnificently dress ; most of they -- at least most of the younger one -- look handsome ; but be certainly the queen . " " and what be she like ? " " tall , fine bust , slop shoulders ; long , graceful neck : olive complexion , dark and clear ; noble feature ; eye rather like 's : large and black , and as brilliant as she jewel . and then she have such a fine head of hair ; raven - black and so becomingly arrange : a crown of thick plait behind , and in front the longest , the glossiest curl I ever see . she be dress in pure white ; a amber -coloured scarf be pass over she shoulder and across she breast , tie at the side , and descende in long , fringe end below she knee . she wear a amber - colou flower , too , in she hair : it contrast well with the jetty mass of she curl . " " she be greatly admired , of course ? " " yes , indeed : and not only for she beauty , but for she accomplishment . she be one of the ladie who sang : a gentleman accompany she on the piano . she and sang a duet . " " ? I be not aware he could se . " " oh ! he have a fine bass voice , and a excellent taste for music . " " and : what sort of a voice have she ? " " a very rich and powerful one : she sang delightfully ; it be a treat to listen to she ; -- and she play afterwards . I be no judge of music , but be ; and I hear he say she execution be remarkably good . " " and this beautiful and accomplish lady , she be not yet marrie ? " " it appear not : I fancy neither she nor she sister have very large fortune . 's estate be chiefly entail , and the eldest son come in for everything almost . " " but I wonder no wealthy nobleman or gentleman have take a fancy to she : , for instance . he be rich , be he not ? " " oh ! yes . but you see there be a considerable difference in age : be nearly forty ; she be but twenty - five . " " what of that ? more unequal matches be make every day . " " true : yet I should scarcely fancy would entertain a idea of the sort . but you eat nothing : you have scarcely taste since you begin tea . " " no : I be too thirsty to eat . will you let I have another cup ? " I be about again to revert to the probability of a union between and the beautiful Blanche ; but come in , and the conversation be turn into another channel . when once more alone , I review the information I have get ; look into my heart , examine its thought and feeling , and endeavoure to bring back with a strict hand such as have be stray through imagination 's boundless and trackless waste , into the safe fold of common sense . Arraign at my own bar , have give she evidence of the hope , wish , sentiment I have be cherish since last night -- of the general state of mind in which i have indulge for nearly a fortnight past ; have come forward and tell , in she own quiet way a plain , unvarnished tale , show how I have reject the real , and rabidly devoure the ideal ; -- I pronounce judgment to this effect :- that a greater fool than have never breathe the breath of life ; that a more fantastic idiot have never surfeit herself on sweet lie , and swallow poison as if it be nectar . " you , " I say , " a favourite with ? you gift with the power of please he ? you of importance to he in any way ? go ! you folly sicken I . and you have derive
derive pleasure from occasional token of preference -- equivocal token show by a gentleman of family and a man of the world to a dependent and a novice . how da you ? poor stupid dupe ! -- could not even self - interest make you wiser ? you repeat to yourself this mor the brief scene of last night ? -- cover you face and be asham ! he say something in praise of you eye , do he ? blind puppy ! open they bleared lid and look on you own accurse senselessness ! it do good to no woman to be flatter by she superior , who can not possibly intend to marry she ; and it be madness in all woman to let a secret love kindle within they , which , if unreturned and unknown , must deavor the life that feed it ; and , if discover and responde to , must lead , igni -fatus - like , into miry wilds whence there be no extrication . " , then , , to you sentence : tomorrow , place the glass before you , and draw in chalk you own picture , faithfully , without softene one defect ; omin no harsh line , smooth away no displeasing irregularity ; write under it , ' Portrait of a Governess , disconnect , poor , and plain . ' " afterwards , take a piece of smooth ivory -- you have one prepare in you drawing - box : take you palette , mix you freshest , finest , clearest tints ; choose you most delicate camel - hair pencil ; delineate carefully the loveliest face you can imagine ; paint it in you softest shade and sweetest line , accord to the description give by of ; remember the raven ringlet , the oriental eye ; -- what ! you revert to as a model ! order ! no snivel ! -- no sentiment ! -- no regret ! I will endure only sense and resolution . recall the august yet harmonious lineament , the Grecian neck and bust ; let the round and dazzl arm be visible , and the delicate hand ; omit neither diamond ring nor gold bracelet ; portray faithfully the attire , aerial lace and glisten satin , graceful scarf and golden rose ; call it ' Blanche , a accomplished lady of rank . ' " whenever , in future , you should chance to fancy think well of you , take out these two picture and compare they : say , ' . Rochester might probably win that noble lady 's love , if he choose to strive for it ; be it likely he would waste a serious thought on this indigent and insignificant plebeian ? ' " " I will do it , " I resolve : and have fram this determination , I grow calm , and fall asleep . I keep my word . a hour or two suffice to sketch my own portrait in crayon ; and in less than a fortnight I have complete a ivory miniature of a imaginary . it look a lovely face enough , and when compare with the real head in chalk , the contrast be as great as self - control could desire . I derive benefit from the task : it have keep my head and hand employ , and have give force and fixedness to the new impressions I wish to stamp indelibly on my heart . Ere long , I have reason to congratulate myself on the course of wholesome discipline to which i have thus force my feeling to submit . thanks to it , I be able to meet subsequent occurrence with a decent calm , which , have they find I unprepared , I should probably have be unequal to maintain , even externally . week pass , and no news arrive of : ten day , and still he do not come . say she should not be surprised if he be to go straight from the to , and thence to the continent , and not show he face again at for a year to come ; he have not unfrequently quit it in a manner quite as abrupt and unexpected . when I hear this , I be begin to feel a strange chill and fail at the heart . I be actually permit myself to experience a sickening sense of disappointment ; but rally my wit , and recollect my principle , I at once call my sensation to order ; and it be wonderful how I get over the temporary blunder -- how I clear up the mistake of suppose 's movement a matter in which i have any cause to take a vital interest . not that I humble myself by a slavish notion of inferiority : on the contrary , I just say - " you have nothing to do with the master of , further than to receive the salary he give you for teach he protegee , and to be grateful for such respectful and kind treatment as , if you do you duty , you have a right to expect at he hand . be sure that be the only tie he seriously acknowledge between you and he ; so do not make he the object of you fine feeling , you rapture , agony , and so forth . he be not of you order : keep to you caste , and be too self - respecte to lavish the love of the whole heart , soul , and strength , where such a gift be not want and would be despise . " I go on with my day 's business tranquilly ; but ever and anon vague suggestion keep wander across my brain of reason why I should quit ; and I keep involuntarily fram advertisement
advertisement and ponder conjecture about new situation : these thought I do not think to check ; they might germinate and bear fruit if they could . have be absent upward of a fortnight , when the post bring a letter . " it be from the master , " say she , as she look at the direction . " now I suppose we shall know whether we be to expect he return or not . " and while she break the seal and peruse the document , I go on take my coffee ( we be at breakfast ) : it be hot , and I attribute to that circumstance a fiery glow which suddenly rise to my face . why my hand shook , and why I involuntarily spild half the contents of my cup into my saucer , I do not choose to consider . " well , I sometimes think we be too quiet ; but we run a chance of be busy enough now : for a little while at least , " say , still hold the note before she spectacle . Ere I permit myself to request a explanation , I tie the string of 's pinafore , which happen to be loose : have help she also to another bun and refill she mug with milk , I say , nonchalantly - " be not likely to return soon , I suppose ? " " indeed he be -- in three day , he say : that will be next ; and not alone either . I do not know how many of the fine people at the be come with he : he send direction for all the best bedrooms to be prepare ; and the library and drawing - room be to be clean out ; I be to get more kitchen hand from the , at , and from wherever else I can ; and the lady will bring they maid and the gentleman they valets : so we shall have a full house of it . " and swallow she breakfast and hasten away to commence operation . the three day were , as she have foretold , busy enough . I have think all the room at beautifully clean and well arrange ; but it appear I be mistaken . three woman be get to help ; and such scrubbing , such brushing , such washing of paint and beat of carpet , such take down and put up of picture , such polishing of mirror and lustre , such lighting of fire in bedroom , such airing of sheet and feather - bed on heart , I never beheld , either before or since . run quite wild in the midst of it : the preparations for company and the prospect of they arrival , seem to throw she into ecstasy . she would have to look over all she " toilette , " as she call frock ; to furbish up any that be " passee , " and to air and arrange the new . for herself , she do nothing but caper about in the front chamber , jump on and off the bedstead , and lie on the mattress and pile - up bolster and pillow before the enormous fire roaring in the chimney . from school duty she be exonerate : have press I into she service , and I be all day in the storeroom , help ( or hinder ) she and the cook ; learn to make custard and cheese - cake and french pastry , to truss game and garnish desert - dish . the party be expect to arrive on afternoon , in time for dinner at six . during the intervene period I have no time to nurse chimera ; and I believe I be as active and gay as anybody -- Adele accept . still , now and then , I receive a damping check to my cheerfulness ; and be , in spite of myself , throw back on the region of doubt and portent , and dark conjecture . this be when I chance to see the third - storey staircase door ( which of late have always be keep lock ) open slowly , and give passage to the form of , in prim cap , white apron , and handkerchief ; when I watch she glide along the gallery , she quiet tread muff in a list slipper ; when I see she look into the bustling , topsy - turvy bedroom , -- just say a word , perhaps , to the charwoman about the proper way to polish a grate , or clean a marble mantelpiece , or take stain from papered wall , and then pass on . she would thus descend to the kitchen once a day , eat she dinner , smoke a moderate pipe on the hearth , and go back , carry she pot of porter with she , for she private solace , in she own gloomy , upper haunt . only one hour in the twenty - four do she pass with she fellow - servants below ; all the rest of she time be spend in some low - ceiled , oaken chamber of the second storey : there she sit and sew -- and probably laugh drearily to herself , -- as companionless as a prisoner in he dungeon . the strangest thing of all be , that not a soul in the house , except I , notice she habits , or seem to marvel at they : no one discuss she position or employment ; no one pitie she solitude or isolation . I once , indeed , overheard part of a dialogue between and one of the charwoman , of which form the subject . have be say something I have not catch , and the
the charwoman remark - " she get 's good wage , I guess ? " " yes , " say ; " I wish I have as good ; not that mine be to complain of , -- there be no stinginess at ; but they be not one fifth of the sum Mr . Poole receive . and she be lay by : she go every quarter to the bank at . I should not wonder but she have save enough to keep she independent if she like to leave ; but I suppose she be get used to the place ; and then she be not forty yet , and strong and able for anything . it be too soon for she to give up business . " " she be a good hand , I daresay , " say the charwoman . " ah ! -- she understand what she have to do , -- nobody better , " rejoin significantly ; " and it be not every one could fill she shoe -- not for all the money she get . " " that it be not ! " be the reply . " I wonder whether the master -- " the charwoman be go on ; but here turn and perceive I , and she instantly give she companion a nudge . " do not she know ? " I hear the woman whisper . Leah shook she head , and the conversation be of course drop . all I have gather from it amount to this , -- that there be a mystery at ; and that from participation in that mystery I be purposely exclude . come : all work have be complete the previous evening ; carpet be laid down , bed - hanging festooned , radiant white counterpane spread , toilet table arrange , furniture rub , flower pile in vase : both chamber and saloon look as fresh and bright as hand could make they . the hall , too , be scour ; and the great carved clock , as well as the step and banister of the staircase , be polish to the brightness of glass ; in the dining - room , the sideboard flash resplendent with plate ; in the drawing - room and boudoir , vase of exotic bloom on all side . afternoon arrive : assume she best black satin gown , she glove , and she gold watch ; for it be she part to receive the company , -- to conduct the lady to they room , &c . Adele , too , would be dress : though I think she have little chance of be introduce to the party that day at least . however , to please she , I allow to apparel she in one of she short , full muslin frock . for myself , I have no need to make any change ; I should not be call upon to quit my sanctum of the schoolroom ; for a sanctum it be now become to I , -- " a very pleasant refuge in time of trouble . " it have be a mild , serene spring day -- one of those day which , towards the end of or the beginning of , rise shining over the earth as herald of summer . it be draw to a end now ; but the evening be even warm , and I sit at work in the schoolroom with the window open . " it get late , " say , enter in rustling state . " I be glad I order dinner a hour after the time mention ; for it be past six now . I have send down to the gate to see if there be anything on the road : one can see a long way from thence in the direction of . " she go to the window . " here he be ! " say she . " well , " ( lean out ) , " any news ? " " they be come , ma 'am , " be the answer . " they will be here in ten minute . " flew to the window . I follow , take care to stand on one side , so that , screen by the curtain , I could see without be see . the ten minute have give see very long , but at last wheel be hear ; four equestrian gallop up the drive , and after they come two open carriage . Flutter veil and wave plume fill the vehicle ; two of the cavalier be young , dashing - look gentleman ; the third be , on he black horse , , bounding before he ; at he side ride a lady , and he and she be the first of the party . she purple ri - habit almost swept the ground , she veil stream long on the breeze ; mingl with its transparent fold , and gleam through they , shine rich raven ringlet . " ! " exclaim , and away she hurrie to she post below . the cavalcade , follow the sweep of the drive , quickly turn the angle of the house , and I lose sight of it . Adele now petition to go down ; but I take she on my knee , and give she to understand that she must not on any account think of venturing in sight of the ladie , either now or at any other time , unless expressly send for : that would be very angry , &c . " some natural tear she she " on be tell this ; but as I begin to look very grave , she consent at last to wipe they . a joyous stir be now audible in the hall : gentleman 's deep tone and
and lady ' silvery accents blent harmoniously together , and distinguishable above all , though not loud , be the sonorous voice of the master of , welcome he fair and gallant guest under its roof . then light step ascend the stair ; and there be a tripping through the gallery , and soave cheerful laugh , and open and close door , and , for a time , a hush . " Elle changent de toilette , " say ; who , listen attentively , have follow every movement ; and she sigh . " , " say she , " quand il y avait do monde , je le suivais partout , au salon et e leur chambre ; souvent je regardais les femme de chambre coiffer et habiller les dame , et c'etait si amusant : comme cela on apprend . " " do not you feel hungry , ? " " Mais oui , mademoiselle : voile cinq out six heure que nous n'avon pa mange . " " well now , while the lady be in they room , I will venture down and get you something to eat . " and issue from my asylum with precaution , I seek a back - stair which conduct directly to the kitchen . all in that region be fire and commotion ; the soup and fish be in the last stage of projection , and the cook hang over she crucible in a frame of mind and body threaten spontaneous combustion . in the servant 's hall two coachman and three gentleman 's gentleman stand or sit round the fire ; the abigail , I suppose , be upstairs with they mistress ; the new servants , that have be hire from , be bust about everywhere . Thread this chaos , I at last reach the larder ; there I take possession of a cold chicken , a roll of bread , some tart , a plate or two and a knife and fork : with this booty I make a hasty retreat . I have regain the gallery , and be just shutt the back - door behind I , when a accelerate hum warn I that the lady be about to issue from they chamber . I could not proceed to the schoolroom without pass some of they door , and run the risk of be surprised with my cargo of victualage ; so I stand still at this end , which , be windowless , be dark : quite dark now , for the sun be set and twilight gather . presently the chamber give up they fair tenant one after another : each come out gaily and airily , with dress that gleam lustrous through the dusk . for a moment they stand group together at the other extremity of the gallery , converse in a key of sweet subdue vivacity : they then descende the staircase almost as noiselessly as a bright mist roll down a hill . they collective appearance have leave on I a impression of high - born elegance , such as I have never before receive . I find Adele pee through the schoolroom door , which she hold ajar . " what beautiful lady ! " cry she in . " oh , I wish I might go to they ! do you think will send for we by - and - bye , after dinner ? " " no , indeed , I do not ; have something else to think about . never mind the lady to - night ; perhaps you will see they to - morrow : here be you dinner . " she be really hungry , so the chicken and tart serve to divert she attention for a time . it be well I secure this forage , or both she , I , and , to whom I convey a share of we repast , would have run a chance of get no dinner at all : every one downstair be too much engage to think off we . the dessert be not carry out till after nine and at ten footman be still run to and for with tray and coffee - cup . I allow to sit up much later than usual ; for she declare she could not possibly go to sleep while the door keep open and shutt below , and people bustl about . besides , she add , a message might possibly come from when she be undressed ; " et alors quel dommage ! " I tell she story as long as she would listen to they ; and then for a change I take she out into the gallery . the hall lamp be now lit , and it amuse she to look over the balustrade and watch the servants pass backward and forward . when the evening be far advanced , a sound of music issue from the draw - room , whither the piano have be remove ; and I sit down on the top step of the stair to listen . presently a voice blent with the rich tone of the instrument ; it be a lady who sang , and very sweet she note were . the solo over , a duet follow , and then a glee : a joyous conversational murmur fill up the interval . I listen long : suddenly I discover that my ear be wholly intent on analyse the mingl sound , and try to discriminate amidst the confusion of accents those of ; and when it catch they , which it soon do , it find a further task in fram the tone , render by distance inarticulate , into word . the clock struck eleven . I look at , whose head lean against my shoulder ; she eye be wax heavy , so I take she up in
in my arm and carry she off to bed . it be near one before the gentleman and lady seek they chamber . the next day be as fine as its predecessor : it be devo by the party to a excursion to some site in the neighbourhood . they set out early in the forenoon , some on horseback , the rest in carriage ; I witness both the departure and the return . , as before , be the only lady equestrian ; and , as before , gallop at she side ; the two rode a little apart from the rest . I point out this circumstance to , who be stand at the window with I - " you say it be not likely they should think of be marry , " say I , " but you see evidently prefer she to any of the other lady . " " yes , I daresay : no doubt he admire she . " " and she he , " I add ; " look how she lean she head towards he as if she be converse confidentially ; I wish I could see she face ; I have never have a glimpse of it yet . " " you will see she this evening , " answer . " I happen to remark to Rochester how much wish to be introduce to the ladie , and he say : 'Oh ! let she come into the drawing - room after dinner ; and request to accompany she . ' " " yes ; he say that from mere politeness : I need not go , I be sure , " I answer . " well , I observ to he that as you be unused to company , I do not think you would like appear before so gay a party -- all stranger ; and he reply , in he quick way -- ' Nonsense ! if she object , tell she it be my particular wish ; and if she resist , say I shall come and fetch she in case of contumacy . ' " " I will not give he that trouble , " I answer . " I will go , if no better may be ; but I do not like it . shall you be there , ? " " no ; I plead off , and he admit my plea . I will tell you how to manage so as to avoid the embarrassment of make a formal entrance , which be the most disagreeable part of the business . you must go into the drawing - room while it be empty , before the lady leave the dinner - table ; choose you seat in any quiet nook you like ; you need not stay long after the gentleman come in , unless you please : just let see you be there and then slip away -- nobody will notice you . " " will these people remain long , do you think ? " " perhaps two or three week , certainly not more . after the recess , , who be lately elect member for , will have to go up to town and take he seat ; I daresay will accompany he : it surprise I that he have already make so protract a stay at . " it be with some trepidation that I perceive the hour approach when I be to repair with my charge to the drawing - room . Adele have be in a state of ecstasy all day , after hear she be to be present to the ladie in the evening ; and it be not till commence the operation of dress she that she sober down . then the importance of the process quickly steady she , and by the time she have she curl arrange in well - smoothe , droop cluster , she pink satin frock put on , she long sash tie , and she lace mitten adjust , she look as grave as any judge . no need to warn she not to disarrange she attire : when she be dress , she sit demurely down in she little chair , take care previously to lift up the satin skirt for fear she should crease it , and assure I she would not stir thence till I be ready . this I quickly be : my best dress ( the silver - grey one , purchase for 's wedding , and never wear since ) be soon put on ; my hair be soon smoothe ; my sole ornament , the pearl brooch , soon assume . we descend . fortunately there be another entrance to the draw - room than that through the saloon where they be all seat at dinner . we find the apartment vacant ; a large fire burn silently on the marble hearth , and wax candles shine in bright solitude , amid the exquisite flower with which the table be adorn . the crimson curtain hang before the arch : slight as be the separation this drapery form from the party in the adjoining saloon , they speak in so low a key that nothing of they conversation could be distinguished beyond a soothing murmur . , who appear to be still under the influence of a most solemnising impression , sit down , without a word , on the footstool I point out to she . I retire to a window - seat , and take a book from a table near , endeavoure to read . bring she stool to my foot ; ere long she touch my knee . " what be it , ? " " est - ce que je ne pui pa prendrie une seule de ce fleur magnifique , mademoiselle ? Seulement pour completer ma toilette . " " you think
think too much of you 'toilette ,' Adele : but you may have a flower . " and I take a rose from a vase and fasten it in she sash . she sigh a sigh of ineffable satisfaction , as if she cup of happiness be now full . I turn my face away to conceal a smile I could not suppress : there be something ludicrous as well as painful in the little 's earnest and innate devotion to matter of dress . a soft sound of rising now become audible ; the curtain be sweep back from the arch ; through it appear the dining - room , with its lit lustre pour down light on the silver and glass of a magnificent dessert - service cover a long table ; a band of lady stood in the opening ; they enter , and the curtain fall behind they . there be but eight ; yet , somehow , as they flock in , they give the impression of a much larger number . some of they be very tall ; many be dress in white ; and all have a sweeping amplitude of array that seem to magnify they person as a mist magnify the moon . I rise and curtsey to they : one or two bend they head in return , the other only sta at I . they disperse about the room , remind I , by the lightness and buoyancy of they movement , of a flock of white plumy bird . some of they throw themselves in half - recline position on the sofa and ottoman : some bent over the table and examine the flower and book : the rest gather in a group round the fire : all talk in a low but clear tone which seem habitual to they . I know they name afterwards , and may as well mention they now . first , there be and two of she daughter . she have evidently be a handsome woman , and be well preserve still . of she daughter , the eldest , , be rather little : naive , and child - like in face and manner , and piquant in form ; she white muslin dress and blue sash become she well . the second , , be taller and more elegant in figure ; with a very pretty face , of that order the french term minois chiffone : both sister be fair as lily . be a large and stout personage of about forty , very erect , very haughty - look , richly dress in a satin robe of changeful sheen : she dark hair shone glossily under the shade of a azure plume , and within the circlet of a band of gem . be less showy ; but , I think , more lady - like . she have a slight figure , a pale , gentle face , and fair hair . she black satin dress , she scarf of rich foreign lace , and she pearl ornament , please I better than the rainbow radiance of the title dame . but the three most distinguished -- partly , perhaps , because the tallest figure of the band -- be the and she daughter , and . they be all three of the loftiest stature of woman . the Dowager might be between forty and fifty : she shape be still fine ; she hair ( by candle - light at least ) still black ; she tooth , too , be still apparently perfect . most people would have term she a splendid woman of she age : and so she be , no doubt , physically speak ; but then there be a expression of almost insupportable haughtiness in she bearing and countenance . she have feature and a double ching , disappear into a throat like a pillar : these feature appear to I not only inflate and darken , but even furrow with pride ; and the ching be sustain by the same principle , in a position of almost preternatural erectness . she have , likewise , a fierce and a hard eye : it remind I of Mrs . Reed 's ; she mouth she word in speak ; she voice be deep , its inflection very pompous , very dogmatical , -- very intolerable , in short . a crimson velvet robe , and a shawl turban of some gold - wrotch indian fabric , invest she ( I suppose she think ) with a truly imperial dignity . Blanche and be of equal stature , -- straight and tall as poplar . be too slim for she height , but Blanche be mould like a Dian . I regard she , of course , with special interest . first , I wish to see whether she appearance accord with 's description ; secondly , whether it at all resemble the fancy miniature I have pain of she ; and thirdly -- it will out ! -- whether it be such as I should fancy likely to suit 's taste . as far as person go , she answer point for point , both to my picture and 's description . the noble bust , the sloping shoulder , the graceful neck , the dark eye and black ringlet be all there ; -- but she face ? she face be like she mother 's ; a youthful unfurrowed likeness : the same low brow , the same high feature , the same pride . it be not , however , so saturnine a pride ! she laugh continually ; she laugh be satirical , and so be the habitual expression of she arched and haughty lip . be say to be self - conscious . I can not tell whether be a genius , but she be self - conscious --
-- remarkably self - conscious indeed . she enter into a discourse on botany with the gentle . it seem . have not study that science : though , as she say , she like flower , " especially wild one ; " have , and she run over its vocabulary with a air . I presently perceive she be ( what be vernacularly term ) Trail ; that be , play on she ignorance -- she trail might be clever , but it be decidedly not good - natured . she play : she execution be brilliant ; she sang : she voice be fine ; she talk apart to she mamma ; and she talk it well , with fluency and with a good accent . have a milder and more open countenance than Blanche ; softer feature too , and a skin some shade fairer ( be dark as a ) -- but be deficient in life : she face lack expression , she eye lustre ; she have nothing to say , and have once take she seat , remain fix like a statue in it be nico . the sister be both attire in spotless white . and do I now think such a choice as would be likely to make ? I could not tell -- I do not know he taste in female beauty . if he like the majestic , she be the very type of majesty : then she be accomplish , sprightly . most gentleman would admire she , I think ; and that he do admire she , I already seem to have obtained proof : to remove the last shade of doubt , it remain but to see they together . you be not to suppose , reader , that have all this time be sit motionless on the stool at my foot : no ; when the lady enter , she rise , advanc to meet they , make a stately reverence , and say with gravity - " Bon jour , mesdame . " and have look down at she with a mocking air , and exclaim , " oh , what a little puppet ! " have remark , " it be 's ward , I suppose -- the little french girl he be speak of . " have kindly take she hand , and give she a kiss . and have cry out simultaneously -- " what a love of a child ! " and then they have call she to a sofa , where she now sit , ensconce between they , chatter alternately in french and broken ; absorb not only the young lady ' attention , but that of and , and get spoilt to she heart 's content . at last coffee be brotch in , and the gentleman be summon . I sit in the shade -- if any shade there be in this brilliantly - light apartment ; the window - curtain half hide I . again the arch yawn ; they come . the collective appearance of the gentleman , like that of the lady , be very imposing : they be all costume in black ; most of they be tall , some young . and be very dashing spark indeed ; and be a fine soldierly man . , the magistrate of the district , be gentleman - like : he hair be quite white , he eyebrow and whisker still dark , which give he something of the appearance of a " pere noble de theatre . " , like he sister , be very tall ; like they , also , he be handsome ; but he share 's apathetic and listless look : he seem to have more length of limb than vivacity of blood or vigour of brain . and where be ? he come in last : I be not look at the arch , yet I see he enter . I try to concentrate my attention on those netting - needle , on the mesh of the purse I be form -- I wish to think only of the work I have in my hand , to see only the silver bead and silk thread that lie in my lap ; whereas , I distinctly behold he figure , and I inevitably recall the moment when I last see it ; just after I have render he , what he deem , a essential service , and he , hold my hand , and look down on my face , survey I with eye that reveal a heart full and eager to overflow ; in whose emotion I have a part . how near have I approach he at that moment ! what have occur since , calculate to change he and my relative position ? yet now , how distant , how far estrange we be ! so far estrange , that I do not expect he to come and speak to I . I do not wonder , when , without look at I , he take a seat at the other side of the room , and begin conversing with some of the ladie . no sooner do I see that he attention be rivet on they , and that I might gaze without be observe , than my eye be draw involuntarily to he face ; I could not keep they lid under control : they would rise , and the irid would fix on he . I look , and have a acute pleasure in looking , -- a precious yet poignant pleasure ; pure gold , with a steely point of agony : a pleasure like what the thirst - perishing man might feel who know the well to which he have creep be poisoned , yet stoops and drink divine draught nevertheless . most true be it that " beauty be in the
the eye of the gazer . " my master 's colourless , olive face , square , massive brow , broad and jetty eyebrow , deep eye , strong feature , firm , grim mouth , -- all energy , decision , will , -- be not beautiful , accord to rule ; but they be more than beautiful to I ; they be full of a interest , a influence that quite master I , -- that take my feeling from my own power and fetter they in he . I have not intend to love he ; the reader know I have wrotch hard to extirpate from my soul the germ of love there detect ; and now , at the first renew view of he , they spontaneously arrive , green and strong ! he make I love he without look at I . I compare he with he guest . what be the gallant grace of the , the languid elegance of , -- even the military distinction of , contrast with he look of native pith and genuine power ? I have no sympathy in they appearance , they expression : yet I could imagine that most observer would call they attractive , handsome , imposing ; while they would pronounce at once harsh - featured and melancholy - look . I see they smile , laugh -- it be nothing ; the light of the candle have as much soul in it as they smile ; the tinkle of the bell as much significance as they laugh . I see smile :- he stern feature soften ; he eye grow both brilliant and gentle , its ray both searching and sweet . he be talk , at the moment , to and . I wonder to see they receive with calm that look which seem to I so penetrate : I expect they eye to fall , they colour to rise under it ; yet I be glad when I find they be in no sense move . " he be not to they what he be to I , " I think : " he be not of they kind . I believe he be of mine ; -- I be sure he be -- I feel akin to he -- I understand the language of he countenance and movement : though rank and wealth sever we widely , I have something in my brain and heart , in my blood and nerve , that assimilate I mentally to he . do I say , a few day since , that I have nothing to do with he but to receive my salary at he hand ? do I forbid myself to think of he in any other light than as a paymaster ? Blasphemy against nature ! every good , true , vigorous feeling I have gather impulsively round he . I know I must conceal my sentiment : I must smother hope ; I must remember that he can not care much for I . for when I say that I be of he kind , I do not mean that I have he force to influence , and he spell to attract ; I mean only that I have certain taste and feeling in common with he . I must , then , repeat continually that we be for ever sunder :- and yet , while I breathe and think , I must love he . " be hande . the lady , since the gentleman enter , have become lively as lark ; conversation wax brisk and merry . and argue on politics ; they wives listen . the two proud dowager , and , confabulate together . -- whom , by - the - bye , I have forget to describe , -- a very big , and very fresh - look country gentleman , stand before they sofa , coffee - cup in hand , and occasionally put in a word . have take a seat beside , and be show she the engraving of a splendid volume : she look , smile now and then , but apparently say little . the tall and phlegmatic lean with fold arm on the chair - back of the little and lively ; she glance up at he , and chatter like a wren : she like he better than she do . have take possession of a ottoman at the foot of : share it with he : he be try to talk french with she , and laugh at he blunder . with whom will Blanche pair ? she be stand alone at the table , bend gracefully over a album . she seem wait to be seek ; but she will not wait too long : she herself select a mate . , have quit the Eshtons , stand on the hearth as solitary as she stand by the table : she confront he , take she station on the opposite side of the mantelpiece . " , I think you be not fond of child ? " " be I . " " then , what induce you to take charge of such a little doll as that ? " ( point to ) . " where do you pick she up ? " " I do not pick she up ; she be leave on my hand . " " you should have send she to school . " " I could not afford it : school be so dear . " " why , I suppose you have a governess for she : I see a person with she just now -- be she go ? oh , no ! there she be still , behind the window - curtain . you pay she , of course ; I should think it quite as expensive , -- more so ; for you have they
they both to keep in addition . " I fear -- or should I say , hope ? -- the allusion to I would make glance my way ; and I involuntarily shrank farther into the shade : but he never turn he eye . " I have not consider the subject , " say he indifferently , look straight before he . " no , you men never do consider economy and common sense . you should hear mama on the chapter of governess : and I have have , I should think , a dozen at least in we day ; half of they detestable and the rest ridiculous , and all incubi -- be they not , mama ? " " do you speak , my own ? " the young lady thus claim as the dowager 's special property , reiterat she question with a explanation . " my dearest , do not mention governess ; the word make I nervous . I have suffer a martyrdom from they incompetency and caprice . I thank heaven I have now do with they ! " here bend over to the pious lady and whisper something in she ear ; I suppose , from the answer elicit , it be a reminder that one of the anathematised race be present . " Tant pis ! " say she Ladyship , " I hope it may do she good ! " then , in a lower tone , but still loud enough for I to hear , " I notice she ; I be a judge of physiognomy , and in hers I see all the fault of she class . " " what be they , madam ? " inquire aloud . " I will tell you in you private ear , " reply she , wag she turban three time with portentous significancy . " but my curiosity will be past its appetite ; it crave food now . " " ask Blanche ; she be nearer you than I . " " oh , do not refer he to I , mama ! I have just one word to say of the whole tribe ; they be a nuisance . not that I ever suffer much from they ; I take care to turn the table . what trick and I use to play on we miss Wilsons , and , and ! be always too sleepy to join in a plot with spirit . the best fun be with : be a poor sickly thing , lachrymose and low - spirited , not worth the trouble of vanquishing , in short ; and be coarse and insensible ; no blow take effect on she . but poor ! I see she yet in she raging passion , when we have drive she to extremity -- spild we tea , crumble we bread and butter , toss we book up to the ceiling , and play a charivari with the ruler and desk , the fender and fire -iron . Theodore , do you remember those merry day ? " " , to be sure I do , " draw ; " and the poor old stick use to cry out ' oh you villain child ! ' -- and then we sermonise she on the presumption of attempting to teach such clever blade as we be , when she be herself so ignorant . " " we do ; and , , you know , I help you in prosecuting ( or persecut ) you tutor , whey - face -- the parson in the pip , as we use to call he . he and take the liberty of falling in love with each other -- at least and I think so ; we surprise sundry tender glance and sigh which we interpret as token of ' la belle passion , ' and I promise you the public soon have the benefit of we discovery ; we employ it as a sort of lever to hoist we dead - weight from the house . dear mama , there , as soon as she get a inkling of the business , find out that it be of a immoral tendency . do you not , my lady - mother ? " " certainly , my best . and I be quite right : depend on that : there be a thousand reason why liaison between governess and tutor should never be tolerate a moment in any well - regulate house ; firstly -- " " oh , gracious , mama ! spare we the enumeration ! Au reste , we all know they : danger of bad example to innocence of childhood ; distraction and consequent neglect of duty on the part of the attach -- mutual alliance and reliance ; confidence thence result -- insolence accompany -- mutiny and general blow - up . be I right , , of ? " " my lily - flower , you be right now , as always . " " then no more need be say : change the subject . " , not hear or not heed this dictum , join in with she soft , infantine tone : " and I use to we governess too ; but she be such a good creature , she would bear anything : nothing put she out . she be never cross with we ; be she , ? " " no , never : we might do what we please ; ransack she desk and she workbox , and turn she drawer inside out ; and she be so good - natured , she would give we anything we ask for . " " I suppose , now , " say , curl she lip sarcastically , " we shall have a abstract of the memoir of all the governess extant : in order to avert such
such a visitation , I again move the introduction of a new topic . , do you second my motion ? " " madam , I support you on this point , as on every other . " " then on I be the onus of bring it forward . , be you in to - night ? " " , if you command it , I will be . " " then , signior , I lay on you my sovereign behest to furbish up you lung and other vocal organ , as they will be want on my royal service . " " who would not be the of so divine a Mary ? " " a fig for ! " cry she , toss she head with all its curl , as she move to the piano . " it be my opinion the fiddler must have be a insipid sort of fellow ; I like black Bothwell better : to my mind a man be nothing without a spice of the devil in he ; and history may say what it will of , but I have a notion , he be just the sort of wild , fierce , bandit hero whom I could have consent to giave with my hand . " " gentlemen , you hear ! now which of you most resemble ? " cry . " I should say the preference lie with you , " respond . " on my honour , I be much oblige to you , " be the reply . , who have now seat herself with proud grace at the piano , spread out she snowy rob in queenly amplitude , commence a brilliant prelude ; talk meantime . she appear to be on she high horse to - night ; both she word and she air seem intend to excite not only the admiration , but the amazement of she auditor : she be evidently bent on strike they as something very dashing and da indeed . " oh , I be so sick of the young man of the present day ! " exclaim she , ratt away at the instrument . " poor , puny thing , not fit to stir a step beyond papa 's park gate : nor to go even so far without 's permission and guardianship ! creature so absorb in care about they pretty face , and they white hand , and they small foot ; as if a man have anything to do with beauty ! as if loveliness be not the special prerogative of woman -- she legitimate appanage and heritage ! I grant a ugly woman be a blot on the fair face of creation ; but as to the gentleman , let they be solicitous to possess only strength and valour : let they motto be :- hunt , shoot , and fight : the rest be not worth a fillip . such should be my device , be I a man . " " whenever I marry , " she continue after a pause which none interrupt , " I be resolve my husband shall not be a rival , but a foil to I . I will suffer no competitor near the throne ; I shall exact a undivided homage : he devotion shall not be share between I and the shape he see in he mirror . , now se , and I will play for you . " " I be all obedience , " be the response . " here then be a Corsair - song . know that I doat on ; and for that reason , s it con spirito . " " command from 's lip would put spirit into a mug of milk and water . " " take care , then : if you do not please I , I will shame you by show how such thing should be do . " " that be offer a premium on incapacity : I shall now endeaavor to fail . " " - vous en bien ! if you err wilfully , I shall devise a proportionate punishment . " " ought to be clement , for she have it in she power to inflict a chastisement beyond mortal endurance . " " ha ! explain ! " command the lady . " pardon I , madam : no need of explanation ; you own fine sense must inform you that one of you frown would be a sufficient substitute for capital punishment . " " ! " say she , and again touch the piano , she commence a accompaniment in spirited style . " now be my time to slip away , " think I : but the tone that then severe the air arrest I . have say possess a fine voice : he do -- a mellow , powerful bass , into which he throw he own feeling , he own force ; find a way through the ear to the heart , and there wake sensation strangely . I wait till the last deep and full vibration have expire -- till the tide of talk , check a instant , have resume it be flow ; I then quit my sheltered corner and make my exit by the side - door , which be fortunately near . Thence a narrow passage lead into the hall : in cross it , I perceive my sandal be loose ; I stop to tie it , knee down for that purpose on the mat at the foot of the staircase . I hear the dining - room door unclose ; a gentleman come out ; rise hastily , I stand face to face with he : it be . " how do you do ? " he ask . " I be very well , sir . " " why do you not
not come and speak to I in the room ? " I think I might have retort the question on he who put it : but I would not take that freedom . I answer - " I do not wish to disturb you , as you see engage , sir . " " what have you be do during my absence ? " " nothing particular ; teache as usual . " " and get a good deal paler than you be -- as I see at first sight . what be the matter ? " " nothing at all , sir . " " do you take any cold that night you half drown I ? " " not the least . " " return to the drawing - room : you be desert too early . " " I be tired , sir . " he look at I for a minute . " and a little depressed , " he say . " what about ? tell I . " " nothing -- nothing , sir . I be not depresse . " " but I affirm that you be : so much depresse that a few more word would bring tear to you eye -- indeed , they be there now , shine and swimm ; and a bead have slipp from the lash and fall on to the flag . if I have time , and be not in mortal dread of some prat prig of a servant passing , I would know what all this mean . well , to - night I excuse you ; but understand that so long as my visitor stay , I expect you to appear in the drawing - room every evening ; it be my wish ; do not neglect it . now go , and send for . good - night , my -- " he stop , bit he lip , and abruptly leave I . day be these at ; and busy day too : how different from the first three month of stillness , monotony , and solitude I have pass beneath its roof ! all sad feeling seem now drive from the house , all gloomy associations forgote : there be life everywhere , movement all day long . you could not now traverse the gallery , once so hush , nor enter the front chamber , once so tenantless , without encounter a smart lady 's - maid or a dandy valet . the kitchen , the butler 's pantry , the servant 's hall , the entrance hall , be equally alive ; and the saloon be only leave void and still when the blue sky and halcyon sunshine of the genial spring weather call they occupant out into the grounds . even when that weather be break , and continuous rain set in for some day , no damp seem cast over enjoyment : indoor amusement only become more lively and varied , in consequence of the stop put to outdoor gaiety . I wonder what they be go to do the first evening a change of entertainment be propose : they speak of " play charade , " but in my ignorance I do not understand the term . the servant be call in , the dining - room table wheel away , the light otherwise dispose , the chair place in a semicircle opposite the arch . while and the other gentleman direct these alteration , the lady be run up and down stair ring for they maid . be summon to give information respect the resource of the house in shawl , dress , drapery of any kind ; and certain wardrobe of the third storey be ransack , and they contents , in the shape of brocad and hoop petticoat , satin sacque , black modes , lace lappet , & c. , be bring down in armful by the abigail ; then a selection be make , and such thing as be chosen be carry to the boudoir within the drawing - room . , have again summon the lady round he , and be select certain of they number to be of he party . " be mine , of course , " say he : afterwards he name the two , and . he look at I : I happen to be near he , as I have be fasten the clasp of 's bracelet , which have get loose . " will you play ? " he ask . I shook my head . he do not insist , which I rather fear he would have do ; he allow I to return quietly to my usual seat . he and he aids now withdraw behind the curtain : the other party , which be head by , sit down on the crescent of chair . one of the gentleman , , obserive I , seem to propose that I should be ask to join they ; but instantly negativ the notion . " no , " I hear she say : " she look too stupid for any game of the sort . " Ere long a bell tinkle , and the curtain draw up . within the arch , the bulky figure of , whom have likewise chosen , be see envelope in a white sheet : before he , on a table , lay open a large book ; and at he side stand , drape in 's cloak , and hold a book in she hand . somebody , unseen , ring the bell merrily ; then ( who have insist on be one of she guardian 's party ) , bounde forward , scatter round she the contents of a basket of flower she carry on she arm . then appear the magnificent figure of , clad in white , a long veil on she head
head , and a wreath of ros round she brow ; by she side walk , and together they draw near the table . they knelt ; while and , dress also in white , take up they station behind they . a ceremony follow , in dumb show , in which it be easy to recognise the pantomime of a marriage . at its termination , and he party consult in whisper for two minute , then the call out - " ! " bow , and the curtain fell . a considerable interval elapse before it again rise . it be second rise display a more elaborately prepare scene than the last . the drawing - room , as I have before observ , be raise two step above the dining - room , and on the top of the upper step , place a yard or two back within the room , appear a large marble basin -- which I recognise as a ornament of the conservatory -- where it usually stand , surround by exotic , and tenant by gold fish -- and whence it must have be transport with some trouble , on account of its size and weight . seat on the carpet , by the side of this basin , be see , costume in shawl , with a turban on he head . he dark eye and swarthy skin and feature suite the costume exactly : he look the very model of a eastern emir , a agent or a victim of the bowstring . presently advanc into view . she , too , be attire in oriental fashion : a crimson scarf tie sash - like round the waist : a embroidered handkerchief knot about she temple ; she beautifully - mould arm bare , one of they upraise in the act of support a pitcher , poise gracefully on she head . both she cast of form and feature , she complexion and she general air , suggest the idea of some Israelitish princess of the patriarchal day ; and such be doubtless the character she intend to represent . she approach the basin , and bend over it as if to fill she pitcher ; she again lift it to she head . the personage on the well - brink now seem to accost she ; to make some request :- " she hast , let down she pitcher on she hand , and give he to drink . " from the bosom of he robe he then produce a casket , open it and show magnificent bracelet and earring ; she act astonishment and admiration ; knee , he lay the treasure at she foot ; incredulity and delight be express by she look and gesture ; the stranger fasten the bracelet on she arm and the ring in she ear . it be and : the camels only be want . the divining party again lay they head together : apparently they could not agree about the word or syllable the scene illustrate . , they spokesman , demand " the tableau of the whole ; " whereupon the curtain again descende . on it be third rise only a portion of the drawing - room be disclose ; the rest be conceal by a screen , hang with some sort of dark and coarse drapery . the marble basin be remove ; in its place , stand a deal table and a kitchen chair : these objects be visible by a very dim light proceed from a horn lantern , the wax candles be all extinguish . Amidst this sordo scene , sit a man with he clenched hand rest on he knee , and he eye bend on the ground . I know ; though the begrim face , the disorder dress ( he coat hang loose from one arm , as if it have be almost tear from he back in a scuffle ) , the desperate and scowling countenance , the rough , bristling hair might well have disguise he . as he move , a chain clank ; to he wrist be attach fetter . " ! " exclaim , and the charade be solve . a sufficient interval have elapse for the performer to resume they ordinary costume , they re-enter the dining - room . lead in ; she be compliment he on he acting . " do you know , " say she , " that , of the three character , I like you in the last best ? oh , have you but live a few year earlier , what a gallant gentleman-highwayman you would have make ! " " be all the soot washed from my face ? " he ask , turn it towards she . " ! yes : the more be the pity ! nothing could be more become to you complexion than that ruffian 's rouge . " " you would like a hero of the road then ? " " a english hero of the road would be the next best thing to a italian bandit ; and that could only be surpass by a pirate . " " well , whatever I be , remember you be my wife ; we be marry a hour since , in the presence of all these witness . " she giggle , and she colour rise . " now , , " continue , " it be you turn . " and as the other party withdraw , he and he band take the vacated seat . place herself at she leader 's right hand ; the other diviner fill the chair on each side of he and she . I do not now watch the actor ; I no longer wait with interest for the curtain to rise ; my attention be absorb by the spectator ; my eye , erewhile fix on
on the arch , be now irresistibly attract to the semicircle of chair . what charay and he party play , what word they choose , how they acquit themselves , I no longer remember ; but I still see the consultation which follow each scene : I see turn to , and to he ; I see she incline she head towards he , till the jetty curl almost touch he shoulder and wave against he cheek ; I hear they mutual whispering ; I recall they interchange glance ; and something even of the feeling rouse by the spectacle return in memory at this moment . I have tell you , reader , that I have learn to love : I could not unlove he now , merely because I find that he have cease to notice I -- because I might pass hour in he presence , and he would never once turn he eye in my direction -- because I see all he attention appropriate by a great lady , who scorn to touch I with the hem of she rob as she pass ; who , if ever she dark and imperious eye fell on I by chance , would withdraw it instantly as from a object too mean to merit observation . I could not unlove he , because I feel sure he would soon marry this very lady -- because I read daily in she a proud security in he intention respect she -- because I witness hourly in he a style of courtship which , if careless and choose rather to be seek than to seek , be yet , in it be very carelessness , captivat , and in its very pride , irresistible . there be nothing to cool or banish love in these circumstance , though much to create despair . much too , you will think , reader , to engender jealousy : if a woman , in my position , could presume to be jealous of a woman in 's . but I be not jealous : or very rarely ; -- the nature of the pain I suffer could not be explain by that word . be a mark beneath jealousy : she be too inferior to excite the feeling . pardon the seem paradox ; I mean what I say . she be very showy , but she be not genuine : she have a fine person , many brilliant attainment ; but she mind be poor , she heart barren by nature : nothing bloom spontaneously on that soil ; no unforced natural fruit delighte by its freshness . she be not good ; she be not original : she use to repeat sound phrase from book : she never offer , nor have , a opinion of she own . she advocate a high tone of sentiment ; but she do not know the sensation of sympathy and pity ; tenderness and truth be not in she . too often she betraye this , by the undue vent she give to a spiteful antipathy she have conceive against little Adele : push she away with some contumelious epithet if she happen to approach she ; sometimes order she from the room , and always treat she with coldness and acrimony . other eye besides mine watch these manifestation of character -- watch they closely , keenly , shrewdly . yes ; the future bridegroom , himself , exercise over he intend a ceaseless surveillance ; and it be from this sagacity -- this guardedness of he -- this perfect , clear consciousness of he fair one 's defect -- this obvious absence of passion in he sentiment towards she , that my ever - torture pain arise . I see he be go to marry she , for family , perhaps political reason , because she rank and connection suite he ; I feel he have not give she he love , and that she qualifications be ill adapt to win from he that treasure . this be the point -- this be where the nerve be touch and tease -- this be where the fever be sustain and feed : she could not charm he . if she have manage the victory at once , and he have yield and sincerely lay he heart at she foot , I should have cover my face , turn to the wall , and ( figuratively ) have die to they . if have be a good and noble woman , endow with force , fervour , kindness , sense , I should have have one vital struggle with two tiger -- jealousy and despair : then , my heart tear out and devoure , I should have admire she -- acknowledge she excellence , and be quiet for the rest of my day : and the more absolute she superiority , the deeper would have be my admiration -- the more truly tranquil my quiescence . but as matter really stand , to watch 's effort at fascinating , to witness they repeat failure -- herself unconscious that they do fail ; vainly fancie that each shaft launch hit the mark , and infatuatedly plum herself on success , when she pride and self - complacency repell further and further what she wish to allure -- to witness this , be to be at once under ceaseless excitation and ruthless restraint . because , when she fail , I see how she might have succeed . Arrow that continually glance off from 's breast and fall harmless at he foot , might , I know , if shoot by a surer hand , have quiver keen in he proud heart -- have call love into he stern eye , and softness into he sardonic face ; or , better still , without weapon a silent conquest might have be win . " why can she
she not influence he more , when she be privileged to draw so near to he ? " I ask myself . " surely she can not truly like he , or not like he with true affection ! if she do , she need not coin she smile so lavishly , flash she glance so unremittingly , manufacture air so elaborate , graces so multitudinous . it seem to I that she might , by merely sit quietly at he side , say little and look less , get nigher he heart . I have see in he face a far different expression from that which harden it now while she be so vivaciously accost he ; but then it come of itself : it be not elicit by meretricious art and calculate manoeuvre ; and one have but to accept it -- to answer what he ask without pretension , to address he when needful without grimace -- and it increase and grow kinder and more genial , and warm one like a foster sunbeam . how will she manage to please he when they be marry ? I do not think she will manage it ; and yet it might be manage ; and he wife might , I verily believe , be the very happiest woman the sun shine on . " I have not yet say anything condemnatory of 's project of marry for interest and connection . it surprise I when I first discover that such be he intention : I have think he a man unlikely to be influence by motives so commonplace in he choice of a wife ; but the longer I consider the position , education , & c. , of the party , the less I feel justified in judging and blame either he or for acting in conformity to idea and principle instil into they , doubtless , from they childhood . all they class hold these principle : I suppose , then , they have reason for hold they such as I could not fathom . it seem to I that , be I a gentleman like he , I would take to my bosom only such a wife as I could love ; but the very obviousness of the advantages to the husband 's own happiness offer by this plan convince I that there must be argument against its general adoption of which I be quite ignorant : otherwise I feel sure all the world would act as I wish to act . but in other point , as well as this , I be grow very lenient to my master : I be forget all he fault , for which i have once keep a sharp look - out . it have formerly be my endeavour to study all side of he character : to take the bad with the good ; and from the just weighing of both , to form a equitable judgment . now I see no bad . the sarcasm that have repell , the harshness that have start I once , were only like keen condiment in a choice dish : they presence be pungent , but they absence would be feel as comparatively insipid . and as for the vague something -- be it a sinister or a sorrowful , a designing or a desponding expression ? -- that open upon a careful observer , now and then , in he eye , and close again before one could fathom the strange depth partially disclose ; that something which use to make I fear and shrink , as if I have be wander amongst volcanic - look hill , and have suddenly feel the ground quiver and see it gape : that something , I , at interval , beheld still ; and with throbbing heart , but not with palsied nerve . instead of wish to shin , I long only to dare -- to divine it ; and I think happy , because one day she might look into the abyss at she leisure , explore its secret and analyse they nature . meantime , while I think only of my master and he future bride -- see only they , hear only they discourse , and consider only they movement of importance -- the rest of the party be occupy with they own separate interest and pleasure . the ladies and continue to consort in solemn conferences , where they nod they two turban at each other , and hold up they four hand in confront gesture of surprise , or mystery , or horror , accord to the theme on which they gossip run , like a pair of magnified puppet . talk with good - nature ; and the two sometimes bestow a courteous word or smile on I . , , and discuss politics , or county affair , or justice business . flirt with ; play and sang to and with one of the Messr . ; and listen languidly to the gallant speech of the other . sometimes all , as with one consent , suspend they by - play to observe and listen to the principal actor : for , after all , and -- because closely connect with he -- be the life and soul of the party . if he be absent from the room a hour , a perceptible dulness seem to steal over the spirit of he guest ; and he re-entrance be sure to give a fresh impulse to the vivacity of conversation . the want of he animating influence appear to be peculiarly feel one day that he have be summon to Millcote on business , and be not likely to return till late . the afternoon be wet : a walk the party have propose to take to see a gipsy camp , lately pitch on a common beyond , be consequently defer .
. some of the gentleman be go to the stable : the younger one , together with the younger lady , be play billiards in the billiard - room . the dowager and seek solace in a quiet game at card . Blanche Ingram , after have repell , by supercilious taciturnity , some effort of and to draw she into conversation , have first murmured over some sentimental tune and air on the piano , and then , have fetch a novel from the library , have flng herself in haughty listlessness on a sofa , and prepare to beguile , by the spell of fiction , the tedious hour of absence . the room and the house be silent : only now and then the merriment of the billiard - player be hear from above . it be verge on dusk , and the clock have already give warning of the hour to dress for dinner , when little , who knelt by I in the drawing - room window - seat , suddenly exclaim - " , , qui revient ! " I turn , and dart forwards from she sofa : the other , too , look up from they several occupations ; for at the same time a crunching of wheel and a splashing tramp of horse - hoof become audible on the wet gravel . a post -chaise be approach . " what can possess he to come home in that style ? " say . " he rode ( the black horse ) , do he not , when he go out ? and be with he :- what have he do with the animal ? " as she say this , she approach she tall person and ample garment so near the window , that I be oblige to bend back almost to the breaking of my spine : in she eagerness she do not observe I at first , but when she do , she curl she lip and move to another casement . the post-chaise stop ; the driver ring the door - bell , and a gentleman alight attire in travel garb ; but it be not ; it be a tall , fashionable - look man , a stranger . " how provoke ! " exclaim : " you tiresome monkey ! " ( apostrophise ) , " who perch you up in the window to give false intelligence ? " and she cast on I a angry glance , as if I be in fault . some parleying be audible in the hall , and soon the new - comer enter . he bow to , as deem she the eldest lady present . " it appear I come at a inopportune time , madam , " say he , " when my friend , , be from home ; but I arrive from a very long journey , and I think I may presume so far on old and intimate acquaintance as to instal myself here till he return . " he manner be polite ; he accent , in speak , strike I as be somewhat unusual , -- not precisely foreign , but still not altogether English : he age might be about 's , -- between thirty and forty ; he complexion be singularly sallow : otherwise he be a fine - look man , at first sight especially . on closer examination , you detect something in he face that displease , or rather that fail to please . he feature be regular , but too relaxed : he eye be large and well cut , but the life look out of it be a tame , vacant life -- at least so I think . the sound of the dressing - bell disperse the party . it be not till after dinner that I see he again : he then see quite at he ease . but I like he physiognomy even less than before : it strike I as be at the same time unsettled and inanimate . he eye wander , and have no meaning in its wandering : this give he a odd look , such as I never remember to have see . for a handsome and not a unamiable - look man , he repell I exceedingly : there be no power in that smooth - skinned face of a full oval shape : no firmness in that aquiline nose and small cherry mouth ; there be no thought on the low , even forehead ; no command in that blank , brown eye . as I sit in my usual nook , and look at he with the light of the girandole on the mantelpiece beam full over he -- for he occupy a arm -chay draw close to the fire , and keep shrink still nearer , as if he be cold , I compare he with . I think ( with deference be it speak ) the contrast could not be much greater between a sleek gander and a fierce falcon : between a meek sheep and the rough - coate keen - ey dog , it be guardian . he have speak of as a old friend . a curious friendship theirs must have be : a point illustration , indeed , of the old adage that " extreme meet . " two or three of the gentleman sit near he , and I catch at time scrap of they conversation across the room . at first I could not make much sense of what I hear ; for the discourse of and , who sit nearer to I , confuse the fragmentary sentence that reach I at interval . these last be discuss the stranger ; they both call he " a beautiful man . " say he be " a love of a creature , " and she " adore he
he ; " and instance he " pretty little mouth , and nice nose , " as she ideal of the charming . " and what a sweet - temper forehead he have ! " cry , -- " so smooth -- none of those frown irregularity I dislike so much ; and such a placid eye and smile ! " and then , to my great relief , summon they to the other side of the room , to settle some point about the deferred excursion to . I be now able to concentrate my attention on the group by the fire , and I presently gather that the new - comer be call ; then I learn that he be but just arrive in , and that he come from some hot country : which be the reason , doubtless , he face be so sallow , and that he sit so near the hearth , and wear a surtout in the house . presently the word , , spanish town , indicate the West Indies as he residence ; and it be with no little surprise I gather , ere long , that he have there first see and become acquainted with . he speak of he friend 's dislike of the burn heats , the hurricane , and rainy season of that region . I know have be a traveller : have say so ; but I think the continent of have bounde he wandering ; till now I have never hear a hint give of visit to more distant shore . I be ponder these thing , when a incident , and a somewhat unexpected one , break the thread of my musing . , shiver as some one chance to open the door , ask for more coal to be put on the fire , which have burn out its flame , though it be mass of cinder still shine hot and red . the footman who bring the coal , in go out , stop near 's chair , and say something to he in a low voice , of which I hear only the word , " old woman , " -- " quite troublesome . " " tell she she shall be put in the stock if she do not take herself off , " reply the magistrate . " no -- stop ! " interrupt . " do not send she away , ; we might turn the thing to account ; better consult the lady . " and speak aloud , he continue -- " lady , you talk of go to to visit the gipsy camp ; here say that one of the old mother Bunches be in the servants ' hall at this moment , and insist upon be bring in before ' the quality , ' to tell they they fortune . would you like to see she ? " " surely , colonel , " cry , " you would not encourage such a low impostor ? Dismiss she , by all means , at once ! " " but I can not persuade she to go away , my lady , " say the footman ; " nor can any of the servants : be with she just now , entreat she to be go ; but she have take a chair in the chimney - comer , and say nothing shall stir she from it till she get leave to come in here . " " what do she want ? " ask . " 'To tell the gentry they fortune , ' she say , ma 'am ; and she swear she must and will do it . " " what be she like ? " inquire the , in a breath . " a shockingly ugly old creature , miss ; almost as black as a crock . " " why , she be a real sorceress ! " cry . " let we have she in , of course . " " to be sure , " rejoin he brother ; " it would be a thousand pity to throw away such a chance of fun . " " my dear boy , what be you think about ? " exclaim . " I can not possibly countenance any such inconsistent proceeding , " chim in the . " indeed , mama , but you can -- and will , " pronounce the haughty voice of , as she turn round on the piano - stool ; where till now she have sit silent , apparently examine sundry sheet of music . " I have a curiosity to hear my fortune tell : therefore , , order the beldame forward . " " my darl Blanche ! recollect -- " " I do -- I recollect all you can suggest ; and I must have my will -- quick , ! " " yes -- yes -- yes ! " cry all the juvenile , both lady and gentleman . " let she come -- it will be excellent sport ! " the footman still linger . " she look such a rough one , " say he . " go ! " ejaculate , and the man go . Excitement instantly seize the whole party : a run fire of raillery and jest be proceed when return . " she will not come now , " say he . " she say it be not she mission to appear before the ' vulgar hered ' ( they be she word ) . I must show she into a room by herself , and then those who wish to consult she must go to she one by one . " " you see now , my queenly Blanche , " begin , " she encroach . be advise , my angel girl -- and -- " " show she into the
the library , of course , " cut in the " angel girl . " " it be not my mission to listen to she before the vulgar herd either : I mean to have she all to myself . be there a fire in the library ? " " yes , ma 'am -- but she look such a tinkler . " " cease that chatter , blockhead ! and do my bidding . " again vanish ; and mystery , animation , expectation rise to full flow once more . " she be ready now , " say the footman , as he reappear . " she wish to know who will be she first visitor . " " I think I have better just look in upon she before any of the ladie go , " say . " tell she , , a gentleman be come . " go and return . " she say , sir , that she will have no gentleman ; they need not trouble themselves to come near she ; nor , " he add , with difficulty suppresse a titter , " any lady either , except the young , and single . " " by , she have taste ! " exclaim . rise solemnly : " I go first , " she say , in a tone which might have befit the leader of a forlorn hope , mount a breach in the van of he man . " oh , my best ! oh , my dearest ! pause -- reflect ! " be she mama 's cry ; but she sweep past she in stately silence , pass through the door which hold open , and we hear she enter the library . a comparative silence ensue . think it " le cas " to wr she hand : which she do accordingly . declare she feel , for she part , she never da venture . and titter under they breath , and look a little frightened . the minute pass very slowly : fifteen be count before the library - door again open . return to we through the arch . would she laugh ? would she take it as a joke ? all eye meet she with a glance of eager curiosity , and she meet all eye with one of rebuff and coldness ; she look neither flurry nor merry : she walk stifinitely to she seat , and take it in silence . " well , Blanche ? " say . " what do she say , sister ? " ask . " what do you think ? how do you feel ? -- be she a real fortune - teller ? " demand the . " now , now , good people , " return , " do not press upon I . really you organ of wonder and credulity be easily exci : you seem , by the importance of you all -- my good mama include -- ascribe to this matter , absolutely to believe we have a genuine witch in the house , who be in close alliance with the old gentleman . I have see a gipsy vagabond ; she have practise in hackneyed fashion the science of palmistry and tell I what such people usually tell . my whim be gratify ; and now I think will do well to put the hag in the stock to - morrow morning , as he threaten . " take a book , lean back in she chair , and so decline further conversation . I watch she for nearly half - a - hour : during all that time she never turn a page , and she face grow momently darker , more dissatisfied , and more sourly expressive of disappointment . she have obviously not hear anything to she advantage : and it seem to I , from she prolonge fit of gloom and taciturnity , that she herself , notwithstand she profess indifference , attach undue importance to whatever revelation have be make she . , , and , declare they da not go alone ; and yet they all wish to go . a negotiation be open through the medium of the ambassador , ; and after much pacing to and fro , till , I think , the say 's calf must have ach with the exercise , permission be at last , with great difficulty , extort from the rigorous , for the three to wait upon she in a body . they visit be not so still as 's have be : we hear hysterical giggling and little shriek proceeding from the library ; and at the end of about twenty minute they burst the door open , and come run across the hall , as if they be half - scare out of they wit . " I be sure she be something not right ! " they cry , one and all . " she tell we such thing ! she know all about we ! " and they sank breathless into the various seat the gentleman hasten to bring they . press for further explanation , they declare she have tell they of thing they have say and do when they be mere child ; describe book and ornament they have in they boudoir at home : keepsakes that different relation have present to they . they affirm that she have even divine they thought , and have whisper in the ear of each the name of the person she like best in the world , and inform they of what they must wish for . here the gentleman interpose with earnest petition to be further enlighten on these two last - name point ; but they get only blush , ejaculation , tremor , and titter , in return for they importunity . the matron , meantime ,
, offer vinaigrette and wield fan ; and again and again reiterat the expression of they concern that they warning have not be take in time ; and the elder gentleman laugh , and the younger urge they service on the agitate fair one . in the midst of the tumult , and while my eye and ears be fully engage in the scene before I , I hear a hem close at my elbow : I turn , and see . " if you please , miss , the gipsy declare that there be another young single lady in the room who have not be to she yet , and she swear she will not go till she have see all . I think it must be you : there be no one else for it . what shall I tell she ? " " oh , I will go by all means , " I answer : and I be glad of the unexpected opportunity to gratify my much - excited curiosity . I slip out of the room , unobserve by any eye -- for the company be gather in one mass about the trembling trio just return -- and I close the door quietly behind I . " if you like , miss , " say , " I will wait in the hall for you ; and if she frighten you , just call and I will come in . " " no , , return to the kitchen : I be not in the least afraid . " be I ; but I be a good deal interested and excited . the library look tranquil enough as I enter it , and the Sibyl -- if she be -- be seat snugly enough in a easy - chair at the chimney - corner . she have on a red cloak and a black bonnet : or rather , a broad - brimmed gipsy hat , tie down with a striped handkerchief under she ching . a extinguished candle stand on the table ; she be bend over the fire , and seem read in a little black book , like a prayer - book , by the light of the blaze : she mutter the word to herself , as most old woman do , while she read ; she do not desist immediately on my entrance : it appear she wish to finish a paragraph . I stand on the rug and warm my hand , which be rather cold with sit at a distance from the drawing - room fire . I feel now as compose as ever I do in my life : there be nothing indeed in the gipsy 's appearance to trouble one 's calm . she shut she book and slowly look up ; she hat - brim partially shade she face , yet I could see , as she raise it , that it be a strange one . it look all brown and black : elf -lock bristle out from beneath a white band which pass under she ching , and come half over she cheek , or rather jaw : she eye confront I at once , with a bold and direct gaze . " well , and you want you fortune tell ? " she say , in a voice as decide as she glance , as harsh as she feature . " I do not care about it , mother ; you may please yourself : but I ought to warn you , I have no faith . " " it be like you impudence to say so : I expect it of you ; I hear it in you step as you cross the threshold . " " do you ? you have a quick ear . " " I have ; and a quick eye and a quick brain . " " you need they all in you trade . " " I do ; especially when I have customer like you to deal with . why do not you tremble ? " " I be not cold . " " why do not you turn pale ? " " I be not sick . " " why do not you consult my art ? " " I be not silly . " the old crone " nicher " a laugh under she bonnet and bandage ; she then draw out a short black pipe , and light it begin to smoke . have indulge a while in this sedative , she raise she bent body , take the pipe from she lip , and while gaze steadily at the fire , say very deliberately -- " you be cold ; you be sick ; and you be silly . " " prove it , " I rejoin . " I will , in few word . you be cold , because you be alone : no contact strike the fire from you that be in you . you be sick ; because the best of feeling , the highest and the sweetest give to man , keep far away from you . you be silly , because , suffer as you may , you will not beckon it to approach , nor will you stir one step to meet it where it wait you . " she again put she short black pipe to she lip , and renew she smoke with vigour . " you might say all that to almost any one who you know live as a solitary dependent in a great house . " " I might say it to almost any one : but would it be true of almost any one ? " " in my circumstance . " " yes ; just so , in you circumstance : but find I another precisely place as you be . " " it would be easy
easy to find you thousand . " " you could scarcely find I one . if you know it , you be peculiarly situate : very near happiness ; yes , within reach of it . the materials be all prepared ; there only want 's a movement to combine they . chance lay they somewhat apart ; let they be once approach and bliss result . " " I do not understand enigma . I never could guess a riddle in my life . " " if you wish I to speak more plainly , show I you palm . " " and I must cross it with silver , I suppose ? " " to be sure . " I give she a shilling : she put it into a old stocking - foot which she take out of she pocket , and have tie it round and return it , she tell I to hold out my hand . I do . she arch she face to the palm , and po over it without touch it . " it be too fine , " say she . " I can make nothing of such a hand as that ; almost without line : beside , what be in a palm ? be not write there . " " I believe you , " say I . " no , " she continue , " it be in the face : on the forehead , about the eyes , in the line of the mouth . , and lift up you head . " " ah ! now you be come to reality , " I say , as I obey she . " I shall begin to put some faith in you presently . " I knelt within half a yard of she . she stir the fire , so that a ripple of light break from the disturbed coal : the glare , however , as she sit , only throw she face into deeper shadow : mine , it illumin . " I wonder with what feeling you come to I to - night , " she say , when she have examine I a while . " I wonder what thought be busy in you heart during all the hour you sit in yonder room with the fine people flitt before you like shape in a magic - lantern : just as little sympathetic communion pass between you and they as if they be really mere shadow of human form , and not the actual substance . " " I feel tired often , sleepy sometimes , but seldom sad . " " then you have some secret hope to buoy you up and please you with whisper of the future ? " " not I . the utmost I hope be , to save money enough out of my earning to set up a school some day in a little house rent by myself . " " a mean nutriment for the spirit to exist on : and sit in that window - seat ( you see I know you habits ) -- " " you have learn they from the servants . " " ah ! you think yourself sharp . well , perhaps I have : to speak truth , I have a acquaintance with one of they , -- " I start to my foot when I hear the name . " you have -- have you ? " think I ; " there be diablerie in the business after all , then ! " " do not be alarm , " continue the strange be ; " she be a safe hand be Poole : close and quiet ; any one may repose confidence in she . but , as I be say : sit in that window - seat , do you think of nothing but you future school ? have you no present interest in any of the company who occupy the sofa and chair before you ? be there not one face you study ? one figure whose movement you follow with at least curiosity ? " " I like to observe all the face and all the figure . " " but do you never single one from the rest -- or it may be , two ? " " I do frequently ; when the gesture or look of a pair thseey tell a tale : it amuse I to watch they . " " what tale do you like best to hear ? " " oh , I have not much choice ! they generally run on the same theme -- courtship ; and promise to end in the same catastrophe -- marriage . " " and do you like that monotonous theme ? " " Positively , I do not care about it : it be nothing to I . " " nothing to you ? when a lady , young and full of life and health , charme with beauty and endow with the gift of rank and fortune , sit and smile in the eyes of a gentleman you -- " " I what ? " " you know -- and perhaps think well off . " " I do not know the gentleman here . I have scarcely interchange a syllable with one of they ; and as to think well of they , I consider some respectable , and stately , and middle - aged , and other young , dashing , handsome , and lively : but certainly they be all at liberty to be the recipient of whose smile they please , without my feeling dispose to consider the transaction of any moment to I . " " you do not know the gentleman here ? you have not exchange a syllable with one of they ? will you say that of the master of the
the house ! " " he be not at home . " " a profound remark ! a most ingenious quibble ! he go to Millcote this morning , and will be back here to - night or to - morrow : do that circumstance exclude he from the list of you acquaintance -- blot he , as it be , out of existence ? " " no ; but I can scarcely see what have to do with the theme you have introduce . " " I be talk of lady smile in the eyes of gentleman ; and of late so many smile have be she into 's eye that they overflow like two cup fill above the brim : have you never remark that ? " " have a right to enjoy the society of he guest . " " no question about he right : but have you never observe that , of all the tale tell here about , have be favour with the most lively and the most continuous ? " " the eagerness of a listener quickend the tongue of a narrator . " I say this rather to myself than to the gipsy , whose strange talk , voice , manner , have by this time wrap I in a kind of dream . one unexpected sentence come from she lip after another , till I get involved in a web of mystification ; and wonder what unseen spirit have be sit for week by my heart watch its workings and take record of every pulse . " Eagerness of a listener ! " repeat she : " yes ; have sit by the hour , he ear inclin to the fascinating lip that take such delight in they task of communicating ; and be so willing to receive and look so grateful for the pastime give he ; you have notice this ? " " ! I can not remember detect gratitude in he face . " " Detect ! you have analyse , then . and what do you detect , if not gratitude ? " I say nothing . " you have see love : have you not ? -- and , look forward , you have see he marry , and beheld he bride happy ? " " Humph ! not exactly . you witch 's skill be rather at fault sometimes . " " what the have you see , then ? " " never mind : I come here to inquire , not to confess . be it know that be to be marry ? " " yes ; and to the beautiful . " " shortly ? " " Appearance would warrant that conclusion : and , no doubt ( though , with a audacity that want chastise out of you , you seem to question it ) , they will be a superlatively happy pair . he must love such a handsome , noble , witty , accomplish lady ; and probably she love he , or , if not he person , at least he purse . I know she consider the estate eligible to the last degree ; though ( God pardon I ! ) I tell she something on that point about a hour ago which make she look wondrous grave : the corner of she mouth fall half a inch . I would advise she blackaviced suitor to look out : if another come , with a longer or clearer rent - roll , -- he be dish -- " " but , mother , I do not come to hear 's fortune : I come to hear my own ; and you have tell I nothing of it . " " you fortune be yet doubtful : when I examine you face , one trait contradict another . have mete you a measure of happiness : that I know . I know it before I come here this evening . she have lay it carefully on one side for you . I see she do it . it depend on yourself to stretch out you hand , and take it up : but whether you will do so , be the problem I study . Kneel again on the rug . " " do not keep I long ; the fire scorch I . " I knelt . she do not stoop towards I , but only gaze , lean back in she chair . she begin muttering , - " the flame flicker in the eye ; the eye shine like dew ; it look soft and full of feeling ; it smile at my jargon : it be susceptible ; impression follow impression through its clear sphere ; where it cease to smile , it be sad ; a unconscious lassitude weigh on the lid : that signify melancholy result from loneliness . it turn from I ; it will not suffer further scrutiny ; it seem to deny , by a mocking glance , the truth of the discoveries I have already make , -- to disow the charge both of sensibility and chagrin : it be pride and reserve only confirm I in my opinion . the eye be favourable . " as to the mouth , it delight at time in laughter ; it be dispose to impart all that the brain conceive ; though I daresay it would be silent on much the heart experience . Mobile and flexible , it be never intend to be compress in the eternal silence of solitude : it be a mouth which should speak much and smile often , and have human affection for its interlocutor . that feature too be propitious . " I see no enemy to a fortunate issue but in the brow ; and that brow profess to say , -- 'I can live alone , if self - respect , and circumstance
circumstance require I so to do . I need not sell my soul to buy bliss . I have a inward treasure bear with I , which can keep I alive if all extraneous delight should be withheld , or offer only at a price I can not afford to give . ' the forehead declare , ' reason sit firm and hold the rein , and she will not let the feeling burst away and hurry she to wild chasm . the passion may rage furiously , like true heathen , as they be ; and the desire may imagine all sort of vain thing : but judgment shall still have the last word in every argument , and the casting vote in every decision . strong wind , earthquake - shock , and fire may pass by : but I shall follow the guiding of that still small voice which interpret the dictate of conscience . ' " well say , forehead ; you declaration shall be respect . I have form my plan -- right plan I deem they -- and in they I have attend to the claim of conscience , the counsel of reason . I know how soon youth would fake and bloom perish , if , in the cup of bliss offer , but one dreg of shame , or one flavour of remorse be detect ; and I do not want sacrifice , sorrow , dissolution -- such be not my taste . I wish to foster , not to blight -- to earn gratitude , not to wr tear of blood -- no , nor of brine : my harvest must be in smile , in endearment , in sweet -- that will do . I think I rave in a kind of exquisite delirium . I should wish now to protract this moment ad infinitum ; but I dare not . so far I have govern myself thoroughly . I have act as I inwardly swore I would act ; but further might try I beyond my strength . rise , : leave I ; the play be play out '. " where be I ? do I wake or sleep ? have I be dream ? do I dream still ? the old woman 's voice have change : she accent , she gesture , and all be familiar to I as my own face in a glass -- as the speech of my own tongue . I get up , but do not go . I look ; I stir the fire , and I look again : but she draw she bonnet and she bandage closer about she face , and again beckon I to depart . the flame illuminate she hand stretch out : rouse now , and on the alert for discoveries , I at once notice that hand . it be no more the withered limb of eld than my own ; it be a rounded supple member , with smooth finger , symmetrically turn ; a broad ring flash on the little finger , and stoop forward , I look at it , and see a gem I have see a hundred time before . again I look at the face ; which be no longer turn from I -- on the contrary , the bonnet be doff , the bandage displace , the head advance . " well , , do you know I ? " ask the familiar voice . " only take off the red cloak , sir , and then -- " " but the string be in a knot -- help I . " " break it , sir . " " there , then -- ' off , ye lending ! ' " and step out of he disguise . " now , sir , what a strange idea ! " " but well carry out , eh ? do not you think so ? " " with the lady you must have manage well . " " but not with you ? " " you do not act the character of a gipsy with I . " " what character do I act ? my own ? " " no ; some unaccountable one . in short , I believe you have be try to draw I out -- or in ; you have be talk nonsense to make I talk nonsense . it be scarcely fair , sir . " " do you forgive I , ? " " I can not tell till I have think it all over . if , on reflection , I find I have fall into no great absurdity , I shall try to forgive you ; but it be not right . " " oh , you have be very correct -- very careful , very sensible . " I reflect , and think , on the whole , I have . it be a comfort ; but , indeed , I have be on my guard almost from the beginning of the interview . something of masquerade I suspect . I know gipsy and fortune - teller do not express themselves as this seem old woman have express herself ; besides I have not she feign voice , she anxiety to conceal she feature . but my mind have be run on -- that live enigma , that mystery of mystery , as I consider she . I have never think of . " well , " say he , " what be you muse about ? what do that grave smile signify ? " " wonder and self - congratulation , sir . I have you permission to retire now , I suppose ? " " no ; stay a moment ; and tell I what the people in the drawing - room yonder be do . " " discuss the gipsy , I daresay . "
" " sit down ! -- let I hear what they say about I . " " I have better not stay long , sir ; it must be near eleven o'clock . oh , be you aware , , that a stranger have arrive here since you leave this morning ? " " a stranger ! -- no ; who can it be ? I expect no one ; be he go ? " " no ; he say he have know you long , and that he could take the liberty of install himself here till you return . " " the he do ! do he give he name ? " " he name be , sir ; and he come from the West Indies ; from spanish town , in , I think . " be stand near I ; he have take my hand , as if to lead I to a chair . as I speak he give my wrist a convulsive grip ; the smile on he lip froze : apparently a spasm catch he breath . " ! -- the West Indies ! " he say , in the tone one might fancy a speak automaton to enounce its single word ; " ! -- the West Indies ! " he reiterate ; and he go over the syllable three time , grow , in the interval of speaking , whiter than ash : he hardly seem to know what he be do . " do you feel ill , sir ? " I inquire . " , I have get a blow ; I have get a blow , ! " he stagger . " oh , lean on I , sir . " " , you offer I you shoulder once before ; let I have it now . " " yes , sir , yes ; and my arm . " he sit down , and make I sit beside he . hold my hand in both he own , he chaf it ; gaze on I , at the same time , with the most troubled and dreary look . " my little friend ! " say he , " I wish I be in a quiet island with only you ; and trouble , and danger , and hideous recollection remove from I . " " can I help you , sir ? -- I would give my life to serve you . " " , if aid be want , I will seek it at you hand ; I promise you that . " " thank you , sir . tell I what to do , -- I will try , at least , to do it . " " fetch I now , , a glass of wine from the dining - room : they will be at supper there ; and tell I if be with they , and what he be do . " I go . I find all the party in the dining - room at supper , as have say ; they be not seat at table , -- the supper be arrange on the sideboard ; each have take what he choose , and they stand about here and there in group , they plate and glass in they hand . every one seem in high glee ; laughter and conversation be general and animated . stand near the fire , talk to and , and appear as merry as any of they . I fill a wine - glass ( I see watch I frowningly as I do so : she think I be take a liberty , I daresay ) , and I return to the library . 's extreme pallor have disappear , and he look once more firm and stern . he take the glass from my hand . " here be to you health , ministrant spirit ! " he say . he swallow the contents and return it to I . " what be they do , ? " " laugh and talk , sir . " " they do not look grave and mysterious , as if they have hear something strange ? " " not at all : they be full of jest and gaiety . " " and ? " " he be laugh too . " " if all these people come in a body and spat at I , what would you do , ? " " turn they out of the room , sir , if I could . " he half smile . " but if I be to go to they , and they only look at I coldly , and whisper sneeringly amongst each other , and then drop off and leave I one by one , what then ? would you go with they ? " " I rather think not , sir : I should have more pleasure in stay with you . " " to comfort I ? " " yes , sir , to comfort you , as well as I could . " " and if they lay you under a ban for adhere to I ? " " I , probably , should know nothing about they ban ; and if I do , I should care nothing about it . " " then , you could dare censure for my sake ? " " I could dare it for the sake of any friend who deserv my adherence ; as you , I be sure , do . " " go back now into the room ; step quietly up to , and whisper in he ear that be come and wish to see he : show he in here and then leave I . " " yes , sir . " I do he behest . the company all star at I as I pass straight among
among they . I seek , deliver the message , and proceed he from the room : I usher he into the library , and then I go upstairs . at a late hour , after I have be in be some time , I hear the visitor repair to they chamber : I distinguished 's voice , and hear he say , " this way , Mason ; this be you room . " he speak cheerfully : the gay tone set my heart at ease . I be soon asleep . I have forget to draw my curtain , which I usually do , and also to let down my window - blind . the consequence be , that when the moon , which be full and bright ( for the night be fine ) , come in she course to that space in the sky opposite my casement , and look in at I through the unveiled pane , she glorious gaze rouse I . Awak in the dead of night , I open my eye on she disk -- silver - white and crystal clear . it be beautiful , but too solemn ; I half rise , and stretch my arm to draw the curtain . ! what a cry ! the night -- its silence -- its rest , be rent in twain by a savage , a sharp , a shrilly sound that run from end to end of . my pulse stop : my heart stand still ; my stretch arm be paralyse . the cry die , and be not renew . indeed , whatever be utter that fearful shriek could not soon repeat it : not the widest - win condor on the Ande could , twice in succession , send out such a yell from the cloud shroud he eyrie . the thing deliver such utterance must rest ere it could repeat the effort . it come out of the third storey ; for it pass overhead . and overhead -- yes , in the room just above my chamber - ceiling -- I now hear a struggle : a deadly one it see from the noise ; and a half - smother voice shoute - " help ! help ! help ! " three time rapidly . " will no one come ? " it cry ; and then , while the staggering and stamping go on wildly , I distinguished through plank and plaster :- " ! ! for 's sake , come ! " a chamber - door open : some one ran , or rush , along the gallery . another step stamp on the flooring above and something fall ; and there be silence . I have put on some clothes , though horror shook all my limb ; I issue from my apartment . the sleeper be all arouse : ejaculation , terrify murmur sound in every room ; door after door unclose ; one look out and another look out ; the gallery fill . gentleman and lady alike have quit they bed ; and " oh ! what be it ? " -- " who be hurt ? " -- " what have happen ? " -- " fetch a light ! " -- " be it fire ? " -- " be there robber ? " -- " where shall we run ? " be demand confusedly on all hand . but for the moonlight they would have be in complete darkness . they run to and for ; they crowd together : some sob , some stumble : the confusion be inextricable . " where the devil be ? " cry . " I can not find he in he bed . " " Here ! here ! " be shoute in return . " be compose , all of you : I be come . " and the door at the end of the gallery open , and advanc with a candle : he have just descende from the upper storey . one of the lady run to he directly ; she seize he arm : it be . " what awful event have take place ? " say she . " ! let we know the worst at once ! " " but do not pull I down or strangle I , " he reply : for the be cling about he now ; and the two dowager , in vast white wrapper , be bear down on he like ship in full sail . " all be right ! -- all be right ! " he cry . " it be a mere rehearsal of Much about . lady , keep off , or I shall wax dangerous . " and dangerous he look : he black eye dart spark . calme himself by a effort , he add - " a servant have have the nightmare ; that be all . she be a excitable , nervous person : she construe she dream into a apparition , or something of that sort , no doubt ; and have take a fit with fright . now , then , I must see you all back into you room ; for , till the house be settled , she can not be look after . gentlemen , have the goodness to set the lady the example . Ingram , I be sure you will not fail in evincing superiority to idle terror . and , return to you nests like a pair of dove , as you be . " ( to the dowager ) , " you will take cold to a dead certainty , if you stay in this chill gallery any longer . " and so , by dint of alternate coaxing and command , he contrive to get they all once more enclose in they separate dormitory . I do not wait to be
be order back to mine , but retreate unnoticed , as unnoticed I have leave it . not , however , to go to bed : on the contrary , I begin and dress myself carefully . the sound I have hear after the scream , and the word that have be utter , have probably be hear only by I ; for they have proceed from the room above mine : but they assure I that it be not a servant 's dream which have thus struck horror through the house ; and that the explanation have give be merely a invention fram to pacify he guest . I dress , then , to be ready for emergencies . when dress , I sit a long time by the window look out over the silent grounds and silvere field and wait for I know not what . it seem to I that some event must follow the strange cry , struggle , and call . no : stillness return : each murmur and movement cease gradually , and in about a hour be again as hush as a desert . it seem that sleep and night have resum they empire . meantime the moon decline : she be about to set . not like to sit in the cold and darkness , I think I would lie down on my bed , dress as I be . I leave the window , and move with little noise across the carpet ; as I stoop to take off my shoe , a cautious hand tap low at the door . " be I want ? " I ask . " be you up ? " ask the voice I expect to hear , viz. , my master 's . " yes , sir . " " and dress ? " " yes . " " come out , then , quietly . " I obey . stand in the gallery hold a light . " I want you , " he say : " come this way : take you time , and make no noise . " my slipper be thin : I could walk the mat floor as softly as a cat . he glide up the gallery and up the stair , and stop in the dark , low corridor of the fateful third storey : I have follow and stand at he side . " have you a sponge in you room ? " he ask in a whisper . " yes , sir . " " have you any salt -- volatile salts ? " " yes . " " go back and fetch both . " I return , seek the sponge on the washstand , the salt in my drawer , and once more retrace my step . he still wait ; he hold a key in he hand : approach one of the small , black door , he put it in the lock ; he pause , and address I again . " you do not turn sick at the sight of blood ? " " I think I shall not : I have never be try yet . " I feel a thrill while I answer he ; but no coldness , and no faintness . " just give I you hand , " he say : " it will not do to risk a fainting fit . " I put my finger into he . " warm and steady , " be he remark : he turn the key and open the door . I see a room I remember to have see before , the day show I over the house : it be hang with tapestry ; but the tapestry be now loope up in one part , and there be a door apparent , which have then be conceal . this door be open ; a light shone out of the room within : I hear thence a snarling , snatch sound , almost like a dog quarrelling . , put down he candle , say to I , " wait a minute , " and he go forward to the inner apartment . a shout of laughter greet he entrance ; noisy at first , and terminate in 's own goblin ha ! ha ! she then be there . he make some sort of arrangement without speak , though I hear a low voice address he : he come out and close the door behind he . " here , ! " he say ; and I walk round to the other side of a large bed , which with its drawn curtain conceal a considerable portion of the chamber . a easy - chair be near the bed - head : a man sit in it , dress with the exception of he coat ; he be still ; he head lean back ; he eye be close . hold the candle over he ; I recognise in he pale and seemingly lifeless face -- the stranger , : I see too that he linen on one side , and one arm , be almost soaked in blood . " hold the candle , " say , and I take it : he fetch a basin of water from the washstand : " hold that , " say he . I obey . he take the sponge , dip it in , and moisten the corpse - like face ; he ask for my smelling - bottle , and apply it to the nostril . shortly unclose he eye ; he groan . open the shirt of the wounded man , whose arm and shoulder be bandage : he sponge away blood , trickl fast down . " be there immediate danger ? " murmure . " Pooh ! no -- a mere scratch . do not be so overcome , man : bear
bear up ! I will fetch a surgeon for you now , myself : you will be able to be remove by morning , I hope . , " he continue . " ? " " I shall have to leave you in this room with this gentleman , for a hour , or perhaps two hour : you will sponge the blood as I do when it return : if he feel faint , you will put the glass of water on that stand to he lip , and you salt to he nose . you will not speak to he on any pretext -- and -- , it will be at the peril of you life if you speak to she : open you lip -- agitate yourself - - and I will not answer for the consequence . " again the poor man groane ; he look as if he da not move ; fear , either of death or of something else , appear almost to paralyse he . put the now bloody sponge into my hand , and I proceed to use it as he have do . he watch I a second , then say , " remember ! -- no conversation , " he leave the room . I experience a strange feeling as the key grate in the lock , and the sound of he retreating step cease to be hear . here then I be in the third storey , fasten into one of its mystic cell ; night around I ; a pale and bloody spectacle under my eye and hand ; a murderess hardly separate from I by a single door : yes -- that be appal -- the rest I could bear ; but I shudder at the thought of Poole burste out upon I . I must keep to my post , however . I must watch this ghastly countenance -- these blue , still lip forbidden to unclose -- these eye now shut , now open , now wander through the room , now fix on I , and ever glaze with the dulness of horror . I must dip my hand again and again in the basin of blood and water , and wipe away the trickling gore . I must see the light of the unsnuffed candle wane on my employment ; the shadow darke on the wrotch , antique tapestry round I , and grow black under the hanging of the vast old bed , and quiver strangely over the door of a great cabinet opposite -- whose front , divide into twelve panel , bore , in grim design , the head of the twelve apostle , each enclose in its separate panel as in a frame ; while above they at the top rise a ebon crucifix and a die . accord as the shifting obscurity and flicker gleam hover here or glance there , it be now the bearded physician , , that bend he brow ; now 's long hair that wave ; and anon the devilish face of , that grow out of the panel , and seem gather life and threaten a revelation of the arch -traitor -- of himself -- in he subordinate 's form . Amidst all this , I have to listen as well as watch : to listen for the movement of the wild beast or the fiend in yonder side den . but since 's visit it seem spellbound : all the night I hear but three sound at three long interval , -- a step creak , a momentary renewal of the snarling , canine noise , and a deep human groan . then my own thought worri I . what crime be this that liv incarnate in this sequester mansion , and could neither be expel nor subdue by the owner ? -- what mystery , that break out now in fire and now in blood , at the deadest hour of night ? what creature be it , that , mask in a ordinary woman 's face and shape , uttere the voice , now of a mocking demon , and anon of a carrion - seek bird of prey ? and this man I bend over -- this commonplace , quiet stranger -- how have he become involved in the web of horror ? and why have the Fury fly at he ? what make he seek this quarter of the house at a untimely season , when he should have be asleep in bed ? I have hear assign he a apartment below -- what bring he here ! and why , now , be he so tame under the violence or treachery do he ? why do he so quietly submit to the concealment enforce ? why enforce this concealment ? he guest have be outrage , he own life on a former occasion have be hideously plot against ; and both attempt he smother in secrecy and sank in ! Lastly , I see be submissive to ; that the impetuous will of the latter held complete sway over the inertness of the former : the few word which have pass between they assure I of this . it be evident that in they former intercourse , the passive disposition of the one have be habitually influence by the active energy of the other : whence then have arisen 's dismay when he hear of 's arrival ? why have the mere name of this unresisting individual -- whom he word now suffice to control like a child -- fall on he , a few hour since , as a thunderbolt might fall on a oak ? oh ! I could not forget he look and he paleness when he whisper : " , I have get a blow -- I have get a blow , . " I could not forget how the arm have
have tremble which he rest on my shoulder : and it be no light matter which could thus bow the resolute spirit and thrill the vigorous frame of . " when will he come ? when will he come ? " I cry inwardly , as the night linger and linger -- as my bleeding patient droop , moan , sicken : and neither day nor aid arrive . I have , again and again , hold the water to 's white lip ; again and again offer he the stimulate salts : my effort seem ineffectual : either bodily or mental suffer , or loss of blood , or all three combine , be fast prostrat he strength . he moan so , and look so weak , wild , and lose , I fear he be die ; and I might not even speak to he . the candle , waste at last , go out ; as it expire , I perceive streak of grey light ed the window curtain : dawn be then approach . presently I hear bark far below , out of he distant kennel in the courtyard : hope revive . be it unwarrant : in five minute more the grating key , the yielding lock , warn I my watch be relieved . it could not have last more than two hour : many a week have see shorter . enter , and with he the surgeon he have be to fetch . " now , , be on the alert , " he say to this last : " I give you but half - a - hour for dress the wound , fasten the bandage , get the patient downstair and all . " " but be he fit to move , sir ? " " no doubt of it ; it be nothing serious ; he be nervous , he spirit must be keep up . come , set to work . " draw back the thick curtain , draw up the holland blind , let in all the daylight he could ; and I be surprise and cheer to see how far dawn be advance : what rosy streak be begin to brighten the east . then he approach , whom the surgeon be already handle . " now , my good fellow , how be you ? " he ask . " she have do for I , I fear , " be the faint reply . " not a whit ! -- courage ! this day fortnight you will hardly be a pin the worse of it : you have lose a little blood ; that be all . , assure he there be no danger . " " I can do that conscientiously , " say , who have now undone the bandage ; " only I wish I could have get here sooner : he would not have b so much -- but how be this ? the flesh on the shoulder be tear as well as cut . this wound be not do with a knife : there have be tooth here ! " " she bit I , " he murmure . " she worri I like a tigress , when get the knife from she . " " you should not have yield : you should have grapple with she at once , " say . " but under such circumstance , what could one do ? " return . " oh , it be frightful ! " he add , shudder . " and I do not expect it : she look so quiet at first . " " I warn you , " be he friend 's answer ; " I say -- be on you guard when you go near she . besides , you might have wait till to - morrow , and have I with you : it be mere folly to attempt the interview to - night , and alone . " " I think I could have do some good . " " you think ! you think ! yes , it make I impatient to hear you : but , however , you have suffer , and be likely to suffer enough for not take my advice ; so I will say no more . -- hurry ! -- hurry ! the sun will soon rise , and I must have he off . " " directly , sir ; the shoulder be just bandage . I must look to this other wound in the arm : she have have she tooth here too , I think . " " she suck the blood : she say she would drain my heart , " say . I see shudder : a singularly mark expression of disgust , horror , hatre , warp he countenance almost to distortion ; but he only say - " come , be silent , , and never mind she gibberish : do not repeat it . " " I wish I could forget it , " be the answer . " you will when you be out of the country : when you get back to spanish town , you may think of she as dead and bury -- or rather , you need not think of she at all . " " impossible to forget this night ! " " it be not impossible : have some energy , man . you think you be as dead as a herr two hour since , and you be all alive and talk now . there ! -- have do with you or nearly so ; I will make you decent in a trice . " ( he turn to I for the first time since he re-entrance ) , " take this key : go down into my bedroom , and walk straight forward into my dressing - room
room : open the top drawer of the wardrobe and take out a clean shirt and neck - handkerchief : bring they here ; and be nimble . " I go ; seek the repository he have mention , find the article name , and return with they . " now , " say he , " go to the other side of the bed while I order he toilet ; but do not leave the room : you may be want again . " I retire as directe . " be anybody stirr below when you go down , ? " inquire presently . " no , sir ; all be very still . " " we shall get you off cannily , : and it will be better , both for you sake , and for that of the poor creature in yonder . I have strive long to avoid exposure , and I should not like it to come at last . here , , help he on with he waist - coat . where do you leave you furred cloak ? you can not travel a mile without that , I know , in this damn cold climate . in you room ? -- , run down to 's room , -- the one next mine , -- and fetch a cloak you will see there . " again I run , and again return , bear a immense mantle line and ed with fur . " now , I have another errand for you , " say my untiring master ; " you must away to my room again . what a mercy you be shod with velvet , ! -- a clod - hopping messenger would never do at this juncture . you must open the middle drawer of my toilet - table and take out a little phial and a little glass you will find there , -- quick ! " I fly thither and back , bring the desire vessel . " that be well ! now , doctor , I shall take the liberty of administer a dose myself , on my own responsibility . I get this cordial at , of a italian charlatan -- a fellow you would have kick , . it be not a thing to be use indiscriminately , but it be good upon occasion : as now , for instance . , a little water . " he hold out the tiny glass , and I half fill it from the water - bottle on the washstand . " that will do ; -- now wet the lip of the phial . " I do so ; he measure twelve drop of a crimson liquid , and present it to . " drink , : it will give you the heart you lack , for a hour or so . " " but will it hurt I ? -- be it inflammatory ? " " drink ! drink ! drink ! " obey , because it be evidently useless to resist . he be dress now : he still look pale , but he be no longer gory and sully . let he sit three minute after he have swallow the liquid ; he then take he arm - " now I be sure you can get on you foot , " he say -- " try . " the patient rose . " Carter , take he under the other shoulder . be of good cheer , ; step out -- that be it ! " " I do feel better , " remark . " I be sure you do . now , , trip on before we away to the backstair ; unbolt the side - passage door , and tell the driver of the post-chaise you will see in the yard -- or just outside , for I tell he not to drive he rattling wheel over the pavement -- to be ready ; we be come : and , , if any one be about , come to the foot of the stair and hem . " it be by this time half - past five , and the sun be on the point of rising ; but I find the kitchen still dark and silent . the side - passage door be fasten ; I open it with as little noise as possible : all the yard be quiet ; but the gate stand wide open , and there be a post-chaise , with horse ready harness , and driver seat on the box , statione outside . I approach he , and say the gentleman be come ; he nod : then I look carefully round and listen . the stillness of early morning slumber everywhere ; the curtain be yet draw over the servants 's chamber window ; little bird be just twitter in the blossom - blanch orchard tree , whose bough droop like white garland over the wall enclose one side of the yard ; the carriage horse stamp from time to time in they close stable : all else be still . the gentleman now appear . , support by and the surgeon , seem to walk with tolerable ease : they assist he into the chaise ; follow . " take care of he , " say to the latter , " and keep he at you house till he be quite well : I shall ride over in a day or two to see how he get on . , how be it with you ? " " the fresh air revive I , . " " leave the window open on he side , Carter ; there be no wind -- good - bye , . " " Fairfax -- " " well what be it ? " " let she be take care of ; let she be treat as tenderly
tenderly as may be : let she -- " he stop and burst into tear . " I do my best ; and have do it , and will do it , " be the answer : he shut up the chaise door , and the vehicle drive away . " yet would to there be a end of all this ! " add , as he close and barr the heavy yard - gate . this do , he move with slow step and abstract air towards a door in the wall bordere the orchard . I , suppose he have do with I , prepare to return to the house ; again , however , I hear he call " ! " he have open feel portal and stand at it , wait for I . " come where there be some freshness , for a few moment , " he say ; " that house be a mere dungeon : do not you feel it so ? " " it seem to I a splendid mansion , sir . " " the glamour of inexperience be over you eyes , " he answer ; " and you see it through a char medium : you can not discern that the gilding be slime and the silk drapery cobweb ; that the marble be sordid slate , and the polished wood mere refuse chip and scaly bark . now here " ( he point to the leafy enclosure we have enter ) " all be real , sweet , and pure . " he stray down a walk ed with box , with apple tree , pear tree , and cherry tree on one side , and a border on the other full of all sort of old - fashioned flower , stock , sweet-williams , primrose , pansy , mingl with southernwood , sweet - briar , and various fragrant herb . they be fresh now as a succession of showers and gleam , follow by a lovely spring morning , could make they : the sun be just enter the dappled east , and he light illumin the wreathed and dewy orchard tree and shone down the quiet walk under they . " , will you have a flower ? " he gather a half - blow rose , the first on the bush , and offer it to I . " thank you , sir . " " do you like this sunrise , ? that sky with its high and light cloud which be sure to melt away as the day wax warm -- this placid and balmly atmosphere ? " " I do , very much . " " you have pass a strange night , . " " yes , sir . " " and it have make you look pale -- be you afraid when I leave you alone with ? " " I be afraid of some one come out of the inner room . " " but I have fasten the door -- I have the key in my pocket : I should have be a careless shepherd if I have leave a lamb -- my pet lamb -- so near a wolf 's den , unguard : you be safe . " " will live here still , sir ? " " oh yes ! do not trouble you head about she -- put the thing out of you thought . " " yet it seem to I you life be hardly secure while she stay . " " never fear -- I will take care of myself . " " be the danger you apprehend last night go by now , sir ? " " I can not vouch for that till Mason be out of : nor even then . to live , for I , , be to stand on a crater - crust which may crack and spue fire any day . " " but seem a man easily lead . you influence , sir , be evidently potent with he : he will never set you at defiance or wilfully injure you . " " oh , no ! Mason will not defy I ; nor , know it , will he hurt I -- but , unintentionally , he might in a moment , by one careless word , deprive I , if not of life , yet for ever of happiness . " " tell he to be cautious , sir : let he know what you fear , and show he how to avert the danger . " he laugh sardonically , hastily take my hand , and as hastily throw it from he . " if I could do that , simpleton , where would the danger be ? Annihilate in a moment . ever since I have know , I have only have to say to he ' do that , ' and the thing have be do . but I can not give he order in this case : I can not say ' beware of harm I , ; ' for it be imperative that I should keep he ignorant that harm to I be possible . now you look puzzl ; and I will puzzle you further . you be my little friend , be you not ? " " I like to serve you , sir , and to obey you in all that be right . " " precisely : I see you do . I see genuine contentment in you gait and mien , you eye and face , when you be help I and pleas I -- work for I , and with I , in , as you characteristically say , ' all that be right :' for if I bid you do what you think wrong , there would be no light - foot running , no neat - hand
hand alacrity , no lively glance and animate complexion . my friend would then turn to I , quiet and pale , and would say , ' no , sir ; that be impossible : I can not do it , because it be wrong ; ' and would become immutable as a fix star . well , you too have power over I , and may injure I : yet I dare not show you where I be vulnerable , lest , faithful and friendly as you be , you should transfix I at once . " " if you have no more to fear from than you have from I , sir , you be very safe . " " grant it may be so ! here , , be a arbour ; sit down . " the arbour be a arch in the wall , line with ivy ; it contain a rustic seat . take it , leave room , however , for I : but I stand before he . " sit , " he say ; " the bench be long enough for two . you do not hesitate to take a place at my side , do you ? be that wrong , ? " I answer he by assume it : to refuse would , I feel , have be unwise . " now , my little friend , while the sun drink the dew -- while all the flower in this old garden awake and expand , and the bird fetch they young one ' breakfast out of the , and the early be do they first spell of work -- I will put a case to you , which you must endeaavor to suppose you own : but first , look at I , and tell I you be at ease , and not fear that I err in detain you , or that you err in staying . " " no , sir ; I be content . " " well then , , call to aid you fancy :- suppose you be no longer a girl well rear and disciplin , but a wild boy indulge from childhood upward ; imagine yourself in a remote foreign land ; conceive that you there commit a capital error , no matter of what nature or from what motive , but one whose consequence must follow you through life and taint all you existence . mind , I do not say a crime ; I be not speak of shedding of blood or any other guilty act , which might make the perpetrator amenable to the law : my word be . the result of what you have do become in time to you utterly insupportable ; you take measure to obtain relief : unusual measure , but neither unlawful nor culpable . still you be miserable ; for hope have quit you on the very confines of life : you sun at noon darken in a eclipse , which you feel will not leave it till the time of setting . bitter and base associations have become the sole food of you memory : you wander here and there , seek rest in exile : happiness in pleasure -- I mean in heartless , sensual pleasure -- such as dull intellect and blight feel . heart - weary and soul -wither , you come home after year of voluntary banishment : you make a new acquaintance -- how or where no matter : you find in this stranger much of the good and bright quality which you have seek for twenty year , and never before encounter ; and they be all fresh , healthy , without soil and without taint . such society revive , regenerate : you feel better day come back -- higher wish , purer feeling ; you desire to recommence you life , and to spend what remain to you of day in a way more worthy of a immortal being . to attain this end , be you justify in overleap a obstacle of custom -- a mere conventional impediment which neither you conscience sanctify nor you judgment approve ? " he pause for a answer : and what be I to say ? oh , for some good spirit to suggest a judicious and satisfactory response ! vain aspiration ! the west wind whisper in the ivy round I ; but no gentle borrowed its breath as a medium of speech : the bird sang in the tree - top ; but they song , however sweet , be inarticulate . again propound he query : " be the wandering and sinful , but now rest - seek and repentant , man justify in da the world 's opinion , in order to attach to he for ever this gentle , gracious , genial stranger , thereby secure he own peace of mind and regeneration of life ? " " , " I answer , " a wanderer 's repose or a sinner 's reformation should never depend on a fellow - creature . man and woman die ; philosopher falter in wisdom , and in goodness : if any one you know have suffer and er , let he look higher than he equal for strength to amend and solace to heal . " " but the instrument -- the instrument ! , who do the work , ordaind the instrument . I have myself -- I tell it you without parable -- be a worldly , dissipate , restless man ; and I believe I have find the instrument for my cure in -- " he pause : the bird go on carolling , the leave lightly rust . I almost wonder they do not check they song and whisper to catch the suspend revelation ; but they would have have to wait many minute -- so long be the silence protract
protract . at last I look up at the tardy speaker : he be look eagerly at I . " little friend , " say he , in quite a change tone -- while he face change too , lose all its softness and gravity , and become harsh and sarcastic -- " you have notice my tender penchant for : do not you think if I marry she she would regenerate I with a vengeance ? " he get up instantly , go quite to the other end of the walk , and when he come back he be hum a tune . " , , " say he , stop before I , " you be quite pale with you vigil : do not you curse I for disturb you rest ? " " curse you ? no , sir . " " shake hand in confirmation of the word . what could finger ! they be warmer last night when I touche they at the door of the mysterious chamber . , when will you watch with I again ? " " whenever I can be useful , sir . " " for instance , the night before I be marry ! I be sure I shall not be able to sleep . will you promise to sit up with I to bear I company ? to you I can talk of my lovely one : for now you have see she and know she . " " yes , sir . " " she be a rare one , be she not , ? " " yes , sir . " " a strapper -- a real strapper , : big , brown , and buxom ; with hair just such as the lady of Carthage must have have . bless I ! there be and in the stable ! go in by the shrubbery , through that wicket . " as I go one way , he go another , and I hear he in the yard , say cheerfully - " get the start of you all this morning ; he be gone before sunrise : I rise at four to see he off . " be strange thing ! and so be sympathy ; and so be sign ; and the three combine make one mystery to which humanity have not yet find the key . I never laugh at presentiment in my life , because I have have strange one of my own . Sympathies , I believe , exist ( for instance , between far- distant , long - absent , wholly estrange relative assert , notwithstand they alienation , the unity of the source to which each trace he origin ) whose workings baffle mortal comprehension . and sign , for atch we know , may be but the sympathy of nature with man . when I be a little girl , only six year old , I one night hear say to that she have be dream about a little child ; and that to dream of child be a sure sign of trouble , either to one 's self or one be kin . the saying might have wear out of my memory , have not a circumstance immediately follow which serve indelibly to fix it there . the next day be send for home to the deathbed of she little sister . of late I have often recall this say and this incident ; for during the past week scarcely a night have go over my couch that have not bring with it a dream of a infant , which I sometimes hush in my arm , sometimes dandle on my knee , sometimes watch play with daisie on a lawn , or again , dabbl it 's hand in run water . it be a wailing child this night , and a laugh one the next : now it nestle close to I , and now it run from I ; but whatever mand the apparition evince , whatever aspect it wear , it fail not for seven successive night to meet I the moment I enter the land of slumber . I do not like this iteration of one idea -- this strange recurrence of one image , and I grow nervous as bedtime approach and the hour of the vision draw near . it be from companionship with this baby - phantom I have be rouse on that moonlight night when I hear the cry ; and it be on the afternoon of the day follow I be summon downstairs by a message that some one want I in 's room . on repairing thither , I find a man wait for I , have the appearance of a gentleman 's servant : he be dress in deep mourning , and the hat he hold in he hand be surround with a crape band . " I daresay you hardly remember I , , " he say , rise as I enter ; " but my name be Leave : I live coachman with . re when you be at , eight or nine year since , and I live there still . " " oh , ! how do you do ? I remember you very well : you use to give I a ride sometimes on 's bay pony . and how be ? you be marry to ? " " yes , : my wife be very hearty , thank you ; she bring I another little one about two month since -- we have three now -- and both mother and child be thrive . " " and be the family well at the house , ? " " I be sorry I can not give you better news of they , miss : they be very badly at present -- in great trouble . " " I hope no one
one be dead , " I say , glance at he black dress . he too look down at the crape round he hat and reply - " die yesterday be a week , at he chamber in . " " ? " " yes . " " and how do he mother bear it ? " " why , you see , , it be not a common mishap : he life have be very wild : these last three year he give himself up to strange way , and he death be shocke . " " I hear from he be not do well . " " do well ! he could not do worse : he ruin he health and he estate amongst the worst man and the worst woman . he get into debt and into jail : he mother help he out twice , but as soon as he be free he return to he old companion and habit . he head be not strong : the knave he live amongst foole he beyond anything I ever hear . he come down to about three week ago and wante missis to give up all to he . refuse : she mean have long be much reduce by he extravagance ; so he go back again , and the next news be that he be dead . how he die , ! -- they say he kill himself . " I be silent : the thing be frightful . resume - " have be out of health herself for some time : she have get very stout , but be not strong with it ; and the loss of money and fear of poverty be quite break she down . the information about 's death and the manner of it come too suddenly : it bring on a stroke . she be three day without speak ; but last she see rather better : she appear as if she want to say something , and keep make sign to my wife and mumbling . it be only yesterday morning , however , that understand she be pronounce you name ; and at last she make out the word , ' -- fetch : I want to speak to she . ' be not sure whether she be in she right mind , or mean anything by the word ; but she tell and , and advise they to send for you . the young lady put it off at first ; but they mother grow so restless , and say , ' , ,' so many time , that at last they consent . I leave yesterday : and if you can get ready , , I should like to take you back with I early to - morrow morning . " " yes , , I shall be ready : it seem to I that I ought to go . " " I think so too , . say she be sure you would not refuse : but I suppose you will have to ask leave before you can get off ? " " yes ; and I will do it now ; " and have direct he to the servants ' hall , and recommend he to the care of 's wife , and the attention of himself , I go in search of . he be not in any of the lower room ; he be not in the yard , the stable , or the grounds . I ask if she have see he ; -- yes : she believe he be play billiards with . to the billiard - room I hasten : the click of ball and the hum of voice resound thence ; , , the two , and they admirer , be all busy in the game . it require some courage to disturb so interesting a party ; my errand , however , be one I could not defer , so I approach the master where he stand at 's side . she turn as I draw near , and look at I haughtily : she eye seem to demand , " what can the creep creature want now ? " and when I say , in a low voice , " , " she make a movement as if temp to order I away . I remember she appearance at the moment -- it be very graceful and very strike : she wear a morning robe of sky - blue crape ; a gauzy azure scarf be twist in she hair . she have be all animation with the game , and irritate pride do not lower the expression of she haughty lineament . " do that person want you ? " she inquire of ; and turn to see who the " person " be . he make a curiious grimace -- one of he strange and equivocal demonstration -- throw down he cue and follow I from the room . " well , ? " he say , as he rest he back against the schoolroom door , which he have shut . " if you please , sir , I want leave of absence for a week or two . " " what to do ? -- where to go ? " " to see a sick lady who have send for I . " " what sick lady ? -- where do she live ? " " at ; in - shire . " " - shire ? that be a hundred mile off ! who may she be that send for people to see she that distance ? " " she name be Reed , sir -- . " " Reed of ? there be a Reed of , a magistrate . " " it be he widow , sir . " " and what have you to do with she ?
? how do you know she ? " " be my uncle -- my mother 's brother . " " the deuce he be ! you never tell I that before : you always say you have no relation . " " none that would own I , sir . be dead , and he wife cast I off . " " why ? " " because I be poor , and burdensome , and she dislike I . " " but Reed left child ? -- you must have cousin ? be talk of a Reed of yesterday , who , he say , be one of the veriest rascal on town ; and be mention a of the same place , who be much admired for she beauty a season or two ago in . " " be dead , too , sir : he ruin himself and half - ruin he family , and be suppose to have committed suicide . the news so shocke he mother that it bring on a apoplectic attack . " " and what good can you do she ? , ! I would never think of run a hundred mile to see a old lady who will , perhaps , be dead before you reach she : besides , you say she cast you off . " " yes , sir , but that be long ago ; and when she circumstance be very different : I could not be easy to neglect she wish now . " " how long will you stay ? " " as short a time as possible , sir . " " promise I only to stay a week -- " " I have better not pass my word : I might be obliged to break it . " " at all event you will come back : you will not be induce under any pretext to take up a permanent residence with she ? " " oh , no ! I shall certainly return if all be well . " " and who go with you ? you do not travel a hundred mile alone . " " no , sir , she have send she coachman . " " a person to be trust ? " " yes , sir , he have liv ten year in the family . " meditate . " when do you wish to go ? " " Early to - morrow morning , sir . " " well , you must have some money ; you can not travel without money , and I daresay you have not much : I have give you no salary yet . how much have you in the world , ? " he ask , smile . I draw out my purse ; a meagre thing it be . " five shilling , sir . " he take the purse , pour the hoard into he palm , and chuckle over it as if it be scantiness amuse he . he produce he pocket - book : " here , " say he , offer I a note ; it be fifty pound , and he owed I but fifteen . I tell he I have no change . " I do not want change ; you know that . take you wage . " I decline accept more than be my due . he scowl at first ; then , as if recollect something , he say - " right , right ! better not give you all now : you would , perhaps , stay away three month if you have fifty pound . there be ten ; be it not plenty ? " " yes , sir , but now you owe I five . " " come back for it , then ; I be you banker for forty pound . " " , I may as well mention another matter of business to you while I have the opportunity . " " matter of business ? I be curious to hear it . " " you have as good as inform I , sir , that you be go shortly to be marry ? " " yes ; what then ? " " in that case , sir , ought to go to school : I be sure you will perceive the necessity of it . " " to get she out of my bride 's way , who might otherwise walk over she rather too emphatically ? there be sense in the suggestion ; not a doubt of it . , as you say , must go to school ; and you , of course , must march straight to -- the devil ? " " I hope not , sir ; but I must seek another situation somewhere . " " in course ! " he exclaim , with a twang of voice and a distortion of feature equally fantastic and ludicrous . he look at I some minute . " and old , or the , she daughter , will be solicit by you to seek a place , I suppose ? " " no , sir ; I be not on such term with my relatives as would justify I in ask favour of they -- but I shall advertise . " " you shall walk up the pyramid of ! " he grow . " at you peril you advertise ! I wish I have only offer you a sovereign instead of ten pound . give I back nine pound , ; I have a use for it . " " and so have I , sir , " I return , put my hand and my purse behind I . " I could not spare the money on any account . " " ! " say he , " refuse I a pecuniary request ! give I five pound , .
. " " not five shilling , sir ; nor five pence . " " just let I look at the cash . " " no , sir ; you be not to be trust . " " ! " " ? " " promise I one thing . " " I will promise you anything , sir , that I think I be likely to perform . " " not to advertise : and to trust this quest of a situation to I . I will find you one in time . " " I shall be glad so to do , sir , if you , in you turn , will promise that I and shall be both safe out of the house before you bride enter it . " " very well ! very well ! I will pledge my word on it . you go to - morrow , then ? " " yes , sir ; early . " " shall you come down to the drawing - room after dinner ? " " no , sir , I must prepare for the journey . " " then you and I must bid good - bye for a little while ? " " I suppose so , sir . " " and how do people perform that ceremony of parting , ? teach I ; I be not quite up to it . " " they say , farewell , or any other form they prefer . " " then say it . " " farewell , , for the present . " " what must I say ? " " the same , if you like , sir . " " farewell , , for the present ; be that all ? " " yes ? " " it seem stingy , to my notion , and dry , and unfriendly . I should like something else : a little addition to the rite . if one shook hand , for instance ; but no -- that would not contend I either . so you will do no more than say Farewell , ? " " it be enough , sir : as much good - will may be convey in one hearty word as in many . " " very likely ; but it be blank and cool -- ' farewell . ' " " how long be he go to stand with he back against that door ? " I ask myself ; " I want to commence my packing . " the dinner - bell rang , and suddenly away he bolt , without another syllable : I see he no more during the day , and be off before he have risen in the morning . I reach the lodge at about five o'clock in the afternoon of the first of : I step in there before go up to the hall . it be very clean and neat : the ornamental window be hang with little white curtain ; the floor be spotless ; the grate and fire - iron be burnish bright , and the fire burn clear . sit on the hearth , nurse she last - bear , and and he sister play quietly in a corner . " you ! -- I know you would come ! " exclaim , as I enter . " yes , , " say I , after I have kiss she ; " and I trust I be not too late . how be ? -- alive still , I hope . " " yes , she be alive ; and more sensible and collect than she be . the doctor say she may linger a week or two yet ; but he hardly think she will finally recover . " " have she mention I lately ? " " she be talk of you only this morning , and wish you would come , but she be sleep now , or be ten minute ago , when I be up at the house . she generally lie in a kind of lethargy all the afternoon , and wake up about six or seven . will you rest yourself here a hour , , and then I will go up with you ? " here enter , and lay she sleep child in the cradle and go to welcome he : afterwards she insist on my take off my bonnet and have some tea ; for she say I look pale and tired . I be glad to accept she hospitality ; and I submit to be relieved of my travelling garb just as passively as I use to let she undress I when a child . old time crowd fast back on I as I watch she bustl about -- set out the tea -tray with she best china , cut bread and butter , toast a tea - cake , and , between whiles , give little or a occasional tap or push , just as she use to give I in former day . have retain she quick temper as well as she light foot and good look . tea ready , I be go to approach the table ; but she desire I to sit still , quite in she old peremptory tone . I must be serve at the fireside , she say ; and she place before I a little round stand with my cup and a plate of toast , absolutely as she use to accommodate I with some privately purloined dainty on a nursery chair : and I smile and obey she as in bygone day . she want to know if I be happy at , and what sort of a person the mistress be ; and when I tell she there be only a master , whether he be a nice gentleman , and if I like he . I
I tell she he be rather a ugly man , but quite a gentleman ; and that he treat I kindly , and I be content . then I go on to describe to she the gay company that have lately be stay at the house ; and to these detail Bessie listen with interest : they be precisely of the kind she relish . in such conversation a hour be soon gone : restore to I my bonnet , & c. , and , accompany by she , I quit the lodge for the hall . it be also accompany by she that I have , nearly nine year ago , walk down the path I be now ascend . on a dark , misty , raw morning in , I have leave a hostile roof with a desperate and embitter heart -- a sense of outlawry and almost of reprobation -- to seek the chilly harbourage of Lowood : that bourne so far away and unexplored . the same hostile roof now again rise before I : my prospect be doubtful yet ; and I have yet a aching heart . I still feel as a wanderer on the face of the earth ; but I experience firmer trust in myself and my own power , and less withering dread of oppression . the gaping wound of my wrongs , too , be now quite heale ; and the flame of resentment extinguish . " you shall go into the breakfast - room first , " say , as she proceed I through the hall ; " the young lady will be there . " in another moment I be within that apartment . there be every article of furniture look just as it do on the morning I be first introduce to Brocklehurst : the very rug he have stand upon still cover the hearth . Glance at the bookcase , I think I could distinguish the two volume of 's british bird occupy they old place on the third shelf , and 's and the Arabian night range just above . the inanimate objects be not change ; but the living thing have alte past recognition . two young lady appear before I ; one very tall , almost as tall as -- very thin too , with a sallow face and severe mien . there be something ascetic in she look , which be augment by the extreme plainness of a straight - skirt , black , stuff dress , a starch linen collar , hair comb away from the temple , and the nun - like ornament of a string of ebony bead and a crucifix . this I feel sure be , though I could trace little resemblance to she former self in that elongated and colourless visage . the other be as certainly : but not the I remember -- the slim and fairy - like girl of eleven . this be a full - blown , very plump damsel , fair as waxwork , with handsome and regular feature , languish blue eye , and ringlet yellow hair . the hue of she dress be black too ; but it be fashion be so different from she sister 's -- so much more flow and become -- it look as stylish as the other 's look puritanical . in each of the sister there be one trait of the mother -- and only one ; the thing and pallid elder daughter have she parent 's Cairngorm eye : the blooming and luxuriant younger girl have she contour of jaw and ching -- perhaps a little softened , but still impart a indescribable hardness to the countenance otherwise so voluptuous and buxom . both lady , as I advance , rise to welcome I , and both address I by the name of " . " 's greeting be deliver in a short , abrupt voice , without a smile ; and then she sit down again , fix she eye on the fire , and seem to forget I . add to she " how d'ye do ? " several commonplace about my journey , the weather , and so on , utter in rather a drawling tone : and accompany by sundry side - glance that measure I from head to foot -- now traverse the fold of my drab merino pelisse , and now linger on the plain trimming of my cottage bonnet . young lady have a remarkable way of let you know that they think you a " quiz " without actually say the word . a certain superciliousness of look , coolness of manner , nonchalance of tone , express fully they sentiment on the point , without commit they by any positive rudeness in word or deed . a sneer , however , whether covert or open , have now no longer that power over I it once possess : as I sit between my cousin , I be surprised to find how easy I feel under the total neglect of the one and the semi-sarcastic attention of the other -- do not mortify , nor ruffle I . the fact be , I have other thing to think about ; within the last few month feeling have be stir in I so much more potent than any they could raise -- pain and pleasur so much more acute and exquisite have be accit than any it be in they power to inflict or bestow -- that they air give I no concern either for good or bad . " how be ? " I ask soon , look calmly at , who think fit to bridle at the direct address , as if it be a unexpected liberty . " . ? ah ! mama , you mean ; she be extremely poorly : I doubt if you can see she to - night .
. " " if , " say I , " you would just step upstairs and tell she I be come , I should be much oblige to you . " almost start , and she open she blue eye wild and wide . " I know she have a particular wish to see I , " I add , " and I would not defer attend to she desire longer than be absolutely necessary . " " mama dislike be disturb in a evening , " remark . I soon rise , quietly take off my bonnet and glove , uninvited , and say I would just step out to -- who be , I da say , in the kitchen -- and ask she to ascertain whether Mrs . be dispose to receive I or not to - night . I go , and have find and despatch she on my errand , I proceed to take further measure . it have heretofore be my habit always to shrink from arrogance : receive as I have be to - day , I should , a year ago , have resolve to quit Gateshead the very next morning ; now , it be disclose to I all at once that that would be a foolish plan . I have take a journey of a hundred mile to see my aunt , and I must stay with she till she be better -- or dead : as to she daughter 's pride or folly , I must put it on one side , make myself independent of it . so I address the housekeeper ; ask she to show I a room , tell she I should probably be a visitor here for a week or two , have my trunk convey to my chamber , and follow it thither myself : I meet on the landing . " be awake , " say she ; " I have tell she you be here : come and let we see if she will know you . " I do not need to be guide to the well - know room , to which i have so often be summon for chastisement or reprimand in former day . I hasten before ; I softly open the door : a shade light stand on the table , for it be now get dark . there be the great four - post bed with amber hangings as of old ; there the toilet - table , the armchair , and the footstool , at which i have a hundred time be sentence to kneel , to ask pardon for offence by I uncommitted . I look into a certain corner near , half - expect to see the slim outline of a once dread switch which use to lurk there , wait to leap out imp - like and lace my quivering palm or shrink neck . I approach the bed ; I open the curtain and lean over the high - pile pillow . well do I remember 's face , and I eagerly seek the familiar image . it be a happy thing that time quell the longing of vengeance and hush the prompting of rage and aversion . I have leave this woman in bitterness and hate , and I come back to she now with no other emotion than a sort of ruth for she great suffering , and a strong yearning to forget and forgive all injury -- to be reconcile and clasp hand in amity . the well - know face be there : stern , relentless as ever -- there be that peculiar eye which nothing could melt , and the somewhat raise , imperious , despotic eyebrow . how often have it lower on I menace and hate ! and how the recollection of childhood 's terror and sorrow revive as I trace its harsh line now ! and yet I stoop down and kiss she : she look at I . " be this ? " she say . " yes , . how be you , dear aunt ? " I have once vow that I would never call she aunt again : I think it no sin to forget and break that vow now . my finger have fasten on she hand which lay outside the sheet : have she press mine kindly , I should at that moment have experience true pleasure . but unimpressionable nature be not so soon soften , nor be natural antipathy so readily eradicate . . take she hand away , and , turn she face rather from I , she remark that the night be warm . again she regard I so icily , I feel at once that she opinion of I -- she feel towards I -- be unchanged and unchangeable . I know by she stony eye -- opaque to tenderness , indissoluble to tear -- that she be resolve to consider I bad to the last ; because to believe I good would give she no generous pleasure : only a sense of mortification . I feel pain , and then I feel ire ; and then I feel a determination to subdue she -- to be she mistress in spite both of she nature and she will . my tear have risen , just as in childhood : I order they back to they source . I bring a chair to the bed - head : I sit down and lean over the pillow . " you send for I , " I say , " and I be here ; and it be my intention to stay till I see how you get on . " " oh , of course ! you have see my daughter ? " " yes . " " well , you may tell they I wish you to stay till I can talk some
some thing over with you I have on my mind : to - night it be too late , and I have a difficulty in recalle they . but there be something I wish to say -- let I see -- " the wander look and change utterance tell what wreck have take place in she once vigorous frame . turn restlessly , she draw the bedclothes round she ; my elbow , rest on a corner of the quilt , fix it down : she be at once irritated . " sit up ! " say she ; " do not annoy I with hold the clothes fast . be you ? " " I be . " " I have have more trouble with that child than any one would believe . such a burden to be leave on my hand -- and so much annoyance as she cause I , daily and hourly , with she incomprehensible disposition , and she sudden start of temper , and she continual , unnatural watchings of one 's movement ! I declare she talk to I once like something mad , or like a fiend -- no child ever speak or look as she do ; I be glad to get she away from the house . what do they do with she at Lowood ? the fever break out there , and many of the pupil di . she , however , do not die : but I say she do -- I wish she have die ! " " a strange wish , . Reed ; why do you hate she so ? " " I have a dislike to she mother always ; for she be my husband 's only sister , and a great favourite with he : he oppose the family 's disown she when she make she low marriage ; and when news come of she death , he weep like a simpleton . he would send for the baby ; though I entreate he rather to put it out to nurse and pay for its maintenance . I hate it the first time I set my eye on it -- a sickly , whining , pining thing ! it would wail in it be cradle all night long -- not scream heartily like any other child , but whimper and moan . pitie it ; and he use to nurse it and notice it as if it have be he own : more , indeed , than he ever notice he own at that age . he would try to make my child friendly to the little beggar : the darling could not bear it , and he be angry with they when they show they dislike . in he last illness , he have it bring continually to he bedside ; and but a hour before he die , he bound I by vow to keep the creature . I would as soon have be charge with a pauper brat out of a workhouse : but he be weak , naturally weak . do not at all resemble he father , and I be glad of it : be like I and like my brothers -- he be quite a Gibson . oh , I wish he would cease torment I with letter for money ? I have no more money to give he : we be get poor . I must send away half the servants and shut up part of the house ; or let it off . I can never submit to do that -- yet how be we to get on ? two - third of my income go in pay the interest of mortgage . gamble dreadfully , and always lose -- poor boy ! he be beset by sharper : be sink and degrad -- he look be frightful -- I feel asham for he when I see he . " she be get much excited . " I think I have better leave she now , " say I to , who stand on the other side of the bed . " perhaps you have , : but she often talk in this way towards night -- in the morning she be calmer . " I rise . " stop ! " exclaim , " there be another thing I wish to say . he threaten I -- he continually threaten I with he own death , or mine : and I dream sometimes that I see he lay out with a great wound in he throat , or with a swollen and blacken face . I be come to a strange pass : I have heavy trouble . what be to be do ? how be the money to be have ? " now endeavoure to persuade she to take a sedative dratch : she succeed with difficulty . after , . grow more composed , and sank into a do state . I then leave she . more than ten day elapse before I have again any conversation with she . she continue either delirious or lethargic ; and the doctor forbade everything which could painfully excite she . meantime , I get on as well as I could with and . they be very cold , indeed , at first . would sit half the day sew , read , or write , and scarcely utter a word either to I or she sister . would chatter nonsense to she canary bird by the hour , and take no notice of I . but I be determine not to seem at a loss for occupation or amusement : I have bring my drawing material with I , and they serve I for both . provide with a case of pencil , and some sheet of paper , I use to take a seat apart from they , near the window , and busy
busy myself in sketching fancy vignette , represent any scene that happen momentarily to shape itself in the ever - shift kaleidoscope of imagination : a glimpse of sea between two rock ; the rise moon , and a ship cross its disk ; a group of reed and water - flag , and a naiad 's head , crown with lotus-flower , rise out of they ; a elf sit in a hedge - sparrow 's nest , under a wreath of hawthorn - bloom . one morning I fall to sketch a face : what sort of a face it be to be , I do not care or know . I take a soft black pencil , give it a broad point , and work away . I have trace on the paper a broad and prominent forehead and a square lower outline of visage : that contour give I pleasure ; my finger proceed actively to fill it with feature . strongly - mark horizontal eyebrow must be trace under that brow ; then follow , naturally , a well - define nose , with a straight ridge and full nostril ; then a flexible - look mouth , by no means narrow ; then a firm ching , with a decided cleft down the middle of it : of course , some black whisker be want , and some jetty hair , tuft on the temple , and wave above the forehead . now for the eyes : I have leave they to the last , because they require the most careful work . I draw they large ; I shape they well : the eyelash I trace long and sombre ; the irid lustrous and large . " good ! but not quite the thing , " I think , as I survey the effect : " they want more force and spirit ; " and I wrotch the shade blacker , that the light might flash more brilliantly -- a happy touch or two secured success . there , I have a friend 's face under my gaze ; and what do it signify that those young lady turn they back on I ? I look at it ; I smile at the speak likeness : I be absorb and content . " be that a portrait of some one you know ? " ask , who have approach I unnoticed . I respond that it be merely a fancy head , and hurrie it beneath the other sheet . of course , I lie : it be , in fact , a very faithful representation of . but what be that to she , or to any one but myself ? also advanc to look . the other drawing please she much , but she call that " a ugly man . " they both seem surprised at my skill . I offer to sketch they portrait ; and each , in turn , sit for a pencil outline . then produce she album . I promise to contribute a water - colour draw : this put she at once into good humour . she propose a walk in the grounds . before we have be out two hour , we be deep in a confidential conversation : she have favour I with a description of the brilliant winter she have spend in two season ago -- of the admiration she have there excited -- the attention she have receive ; and I even get hints of the titled conquest she have make . in the course of the afternoon and eve these hint be enlarge on : various soft conversation be report , and sentimental scene represent ; and , in short , a volume of a novel of fashionable life be that day improvise by she for my benefit . the communications be renew from day to day : they always run on the same theme -- herself , she love , and woe . it be strange she never once advert either to she mother 's illness , or she brother 's death , or the present gloomy state of the family prospects . she mind seem wholly take up with reminiscence of past gaiety , and aspiration after dissipation to come . she pass about five minute each day in she mother 's sick - room , and no more . still speak little : she have evidently no time to talk . I never see a busier person than she seem to be ; yet it be difficult to say what she do : or rather , to discover any result of she diligence . she have a alarm to call she up early . I know not how she occupy herself before breakfast , but after that meal she divide she time into regular portion , and each hour have its allotted task . three time a day she study a little book , which I find , on inspection , be a common . I ask she once what be the great attraction of that volume , and she say , " the . " three hour she give to stitch , with gold thread , the border of a square crimson cloth , almost large enough for a carpet . in answer to my inquirie after the use of this article , she inform I it be a covering for the altar of a new church lately erect near . two hour she devote to she diary ; two to work by herself in the kitchen - garden ; and one to the regulation of she account . she seem to want no company ; no conversation . I believe she be happy in she way : this routine suffice for she ; and nothing annoye she so much as the occurrence of any incident which force she to vary its clockwork regularity . she
she tell I one evening , when more dispose to be communicative than usual , that 's conduct , and the threaten ruin of the family , have be a source of profound affliction to she : but she have now , she say , settle she mind , and form she resolution . she own fortune she have take care to secure ; and when she mother die -- and it be wholly improbable , she tranquilly remark , that she should either recover or linger long -- she would execute a long - cherish project : seek a retirement where punctual habit would be permanently secure from disturbance , and place safe barriers between herself and a frivolous world . I ask if would accompany she . " of course not . and she have nothing in common : they never have have . she would not be burdene with she society for any consideration . should take she own course ; and she , , would take hers . " , when not unburden she heart to I , spend most of she time in lying on the sofa , frett about the dulness of the house , and wish over and over again that she aunt would send she a invitation up to town . " it would be so much better , " she say , " if she could only get out of the way for a month or two , till all be over . " I do not ask what she mean by " all be over , " but I suppose she refer to the expect decease of she mother and the gloomy sequel of funeral rite . generally take no more notice of she sister 's indolence and complaint than if no such murmuring , lounge object have be before she . one day , however , as she put away she account - book and unfold she embroidery , she suddenly take she up thus - " , a more vain and absurd animal than you be certainly never allow to cumber the earth . you have no right to be bear , for you make no use of life . instead of live for , in , and with yourself , as a reasonable be ink , you seek only to fasten you feebleness on some other person 's strength : if no one can be find willing to bure she or himself with such a fat , weak , puffy , useless thing , you cry out that you be ill - treat , neglect , miserable . then , too , existence for you must be a scene of continual change and excitement , or else the world be a dungeon : you must be admire , you must be courte , you must be flatter -- you must have music , dancing , and society -- or you languish , you die away . have you no sense to devise a system which will make you independent of all effort , and all will , but you own ? take one day ; share it into section ; to each section apportion its task : leave no stray unemployed quarter of a hour , ten minute , five minute -- include all ; do each piece of business in its turn with method , with rigid regularity . the day will close almost before you be aware it have begin ; and you be indebt to no one for help you to get rid of one vacant moment : you have have to seek no one 's company , conversation , sympathy , forbearance ; you have liv , in short , as a independent be ought to do . take this advice : the first and last I shall offer you ; then you will not want I or any one else , happen what may . Neglect it -- go on as heretofore , crave , whin , and id -- and suffer the result of you idiocy , however bad and insuperable they may be . I tell you this plainly ; and listen : for though I shall no more repeat what I be now about to say , I shall steadily act on it . after my mother 's death , I wash my hand of you : from the day she coffin be carry to the vault in , you and I will be as separate as if we have never know each other . you need not think that because we chance to be bear of the same parent , I shall suffer you to fasten I down by even the feeblest claim : I can tell you this -- if the whole human race , ourselves except , be sweep away , and we twill stand alone on the earth , I would leave you in the old world , and betake myself to the new . " she close she lip . " you might have spare yourself the trouble of deliver that tirade , " answer . " everybody know you be the most selfish , heartless creature in existence : and I know you spiteful hatre towards I : I have have a specimen of it before in the trick you play I about : you could not bear I to be raise above you , to have a title , to be receive into circle where you dare not show you face , and so you act the spy and informer , and ruin my prospects for ever . " take out she handkerchief and blow she nose for a hour afterwards ; sit cold , impassable , and assiduously industrious . true , generous feeling be make small account of by some , but here be two nature render , the one intolerably acrid , the other despicably savourless for the want of
of it . feel without judgment be a washy dratch indeed ; but judgment untemper by feeling be too bitter and husky a morsel for human deglutition . it be a wet and windy afternoon : have fall asleep on the sofa over the perusal of a novel ; be gone to attend a saint 's - day service at the new church -- for in matter of religion she be a rigid formalist : no weather ever prevent the punctual discharge of what she consider she devotional duty ; fair or foul , she go to church thrice every , and as often on week - day as there be prayer . I bethotch myself to go upstairs and see how the dying woman s , who lay there almost unheeded : the very servants pay she but a remittent attention : the hire nurse , be little look after , would slip out of the room whenever she could . be faithful ; but she have she own family to mind , and could only come occasionally to the hall . I find the sick - room unwatched , as I have expect : no nurse be there ; the patient lay still , and seemingly lethargic ; she livid face sunk in the pillow : the fire be die in the grate . I renew the fuel , re-arrange the bedclothes , gaze awhile on she who could not now gaze on I , and then I move away to the window . the rain beat strongly against the pane , the wind blow tempestuously : " one lie there , " I think , " who will soon be beyond the war of earthly element . Whither will that spirit -- now struggle to quit its material tenement -- flight when at length release ? " in ponder the great mystery , I think of , recal she die word -- she faith -- she doctrine of the equality of disembodied soul . I be still listen in think to she well - remember tone -- still picture she pale and spiritual aspect , she waste face and sublime gaze , as she lay on she placid death , and whisper she long to be restore to she divine 's bosom -- when a feeble voice murmure from the couch behind : " who be that ? " I know . have not speak for day : be she revive ? I go up to she . " it be I , . " " who -- I ? " be she answer . " who be you ? " look at I with surprise and a sort of alarm , but still not wildly . " you be quite a stranger to I -- where be ? " " she be at the lodge , aunt . " " aunt , " she repeat . " who call I aunt ? you be not one of the Gibsons ; and yet I know you -- that face , and the eye and forehead , be quiet familiar to I : you be like -- why , you be like ! " I say nothing : I be afraid of occasion some shock by declare my identity . " , " say she , " I be afraid it be a mistake : my thought deceive I . I wish to see , and I fancy a likeness where none exist : besides , in eight year she must be so change . " I now gently assure she that I be the person she suppose and desire I to be : and see that I be understand , and that she sense be quite collect , I explain how have send she husband to fetch I from . " I be very ill , I know , " she say ere long . " I be try to turn myself a few minute since , and find I can not move a limb . it be as well I should ease my mind before I die : what we think little of in health , burden we at such a hour as the present be to I . be the nurse here ? or be there no one in the room but you ? " I assure she we be alone . " well , I have twice do you a wrong which I regret now . one be in break the promise which I give my husband to bring you up as my own child ; the other -- " she stop . " after all , it be of no great importance , perhaps , " she murmure to herself : " and then I may get better ; and to humble myself so to she be painful . " she make a effort to alter she position , but fail : she face change ; she seem to experience some inward sensation -- the precursor , perhaps , of the last pang . " well , I must get it over . Eternity be before I : I have better tell she . -- go to my dressing - case , open it , and take out a letter you will see there . " I obey she direction . " read the letter , " she say . it be short , and thus conceive :- " madam , -- will you have the goodness to send I the address of my niece , , and to tell I how she be ? it be my intention to write shortly and desire she to come to I at . Providence have bless my endeavour to secure a competency ; and as I be unmarried and childless , I wish to adopt she during my life , and bequeath she at my death whatever I may have to leave . -- I be
be , madam , &c. , & c. , " , . " it be date three year back . " why do I never hear of this ? " I ask . " because I dislike you too fixedly and thoroughly ever to lend a hand in lift you to prosperity . I could not forget you conduct to I , -- the fury with which you once turn on I ; the tone in which you declare you abhor I the worst of anybody in the world ; the unchildlike look and voice with which you affir that the very thought of I make you sick , and assert that I have treat you with miserable cruelty . I could not forget my own sensation when you thus start up and pour out the venom of you mind : I feel fear as if a animal that I have struck or push have look up at I with human eye and curse I in a man 's voice . -- bring I some water ! oh , make haste ! " " dear , " say I , as I offer she the dratch she require , " think no more of all this , let it pass away from you mind . forgive I for my passionate language : I be a child then ; eight , nine year have pass since that day . " she heede nothing of what I say ; but when she have taste the water and draw breath , she go on thus - " I tell you I could not forget it ; and I take my revenge : for you to be adopt by you uncle , and place in a state of ease and comfort , be what I could not endure . I write to he ; I say I be sorry for he disappointment , but be dead : she have die of typhus fever at . now act as you please : write and contradict my assertion -- expose my falsehood as soon as you like . you be bear , I think , to be my torment : my last hour be rack by the recollection of a deed which , but for you , I should never have be temp to commit . " " if you could but be persuade to think no more of it , aunt , and to regard I with kindness and forgiveness " " you have a very bad disposition , " say she , " and one to this day I feel it impossible to understand : how for nine year you could be patient and quiescent under any treatment , and in the tenth break out all fire and violence , I can never comprehend . " " my disposition be not so bad as you think : I be passionate , but not vindictive . many a time , as a little child , I should have be glad to love you if you would have let I ; and I long earnestly to be reconcile to you now : kiss I , aunt . " I approach my cheek to she lip : she would not touch it . she say I oppress she by lean over the bed , and again demand water . as I lay she down -- for I raise she and support she on my arm while she drank -- I cover she ice - cold and clammy hand with mine : the feeble finger shrank from my touch -- the glazing eye shunn my gaze . " love I , then , or hate I , as you will , " I say at last , " you have my full and free forgiveness : ask now for 's , and be at peace . " poor , suffer woman ! it be too late for she to make now the effort to change she habitual frame of mind : living , she have ever hate I -- die , she must hate I still . the nurse now enter , and follow . I yet linger half - a - hour longer , hope to see some sign of amity : but she give none . she be fast relapse into stupor ; nor do she mind again rally : at twelve o'clock that night she die . I be not present to close she eye , nor be either of she daughter . they come to tell we the next morning that all be over . she be by that time lay out . and I go to look at she : , who have burst out into loud weeping , say she da not go . there be stretch 's once robust and active frame , rigid and still : she eye of flint be cover with its cold lid ; she brow and strong trait wear yet the impress of she inexorable soul . a strange and solemn object be that corpse to I . I gaze on it with gloom and pain : nothing soave , nothing sweet , nothing pity , or hopeful , or subdue do it inspire ; only a grating anguish for she woe -- not my loss -- and a sombre tearless dismay at the fearfulness of death in such a form . survey she parent calmly . after a silence of some minute she observ - " with she constitution she should have live to a good old age : she life be shorten by trouble . " and then a spasm constrict she mouth for a instant : as it pass away she turn and leave the room , and so do I . neither of we have dropt a tear . have give I but one week 's leave of absence : yet a month elapse before I quit . I wish to leave immediately
immediately after the funeral , but entreate I to stay till she could get off to , whither she be now at last invite by she uncle , , who have come down to direct he sister 's interment and settle the family affair . say she dread be leave alone with ; from she she get neither sympathy in she dejection , support in she fear , nor aid in she preparation ; so I bear with she feeble - minded wailing and selfish lamentation as well as I could , and do my best in sewing for she and pack she dress . it be true , that while I work , she would idle ; and I think to myself , " if you and I be destin to live always together , cousin , we would commence matter on a different footing . I should not settle tamely down into be the forbear party ; I should assign you you share of labour , and compel you to accomplish it , or else it should be leave undone : I should insist , also , on you keep some of those drawling , half - insincere complaint hush in you own breast . it be only because we connection happen to be very transitory , and come at a peculiarly mournful season , that I consent thus to render it so patient and compliant on my part . " at last I see off ; but now it be 's turn to request I to stay another week . she plan require all she time and attention , she say ; she be about to depart for some unknown bourne ; and all day long she stay in she own room , she door bolt within , fill trunk , empty drawer , burn papers , and hold no communication with any one . she wish I to look after the house , to see caller , and answer note of condolence . one morning she tell I I be at liberty . " and , " she add , " I be oblige to you for you valuable service and discreet conduct ! there be some difference between live with such a one as you and with : you perform you own part in life and bure no one . to -morrow , " she continue , " I set out for the continent . I shall take up my abode in a religious house near -- a nunnery you would call it ; there I shall be quiet and unmolested . I shall devote myself for a time to the examination of the dogma , and to a careful study of the workings of they system : if i find it to be , as I half suspect it be , the one best calculate to ensure the doing of all thing decently and in order , I shall embrace the tenet of and probably take the veil . " I neither express surprise at this resolution nor attempt to dissuade she from it . " the vocation will fit you to a hair , " I think : " much good may it do you ! " when we parte , she say : " good - bye , cousin ; I wish you well : you have some sense . " I then return : " you be not without sense , cousin ; but what you have , I suppose , in another year will be wall up alive in a french convent . however , it be not my business , and so it suit you , I do not much care . " " you be in the right , " say she ; and with these word we each go we separate way . as I shall not have occasion to refer either to she or she sister again , I may as well mention here , that make a advantageous match with a wealthy worn - out man of fashion , and that actually take the veil , and be at this day superior of the convent where she pass the period of she novitiate , and which she endow with she fortune . how people feel when they be return home from a absence , long or short , I do not know : I have never experience the sensation . I have know what it be to come back to when a child after a long walk , to be scold for look cold or gloomy ; and later , what it be to come back from church to , to long for a plenteous meal and a good fire , and to be unable to get either . neither of these returnings be very pleasant or desirable : no magnet draw I to a give point , increase in its strength of attraction the nearer I come . the return to be yet to be try . my journey seem tedious -- very tedious : fifty mile one day , a night spend at a inn ; fifty mile the next day . during the first twelve hour I think of . re in she last moment ; I see she disfigure and discoloure face , and hear she strangely alte voice . I muse on the funeral day , the coffin , the hearse , the black train of tenant and servants -- few be the number of relative -- the gaping vault , the silent church , the solemn service . then I think of and ; I beheld one the cynosure of a ball - room , the other the inmate of a convent cell ; and I dwelt on and analyse they separate peculiarity of person and character . the evening arrival at the great town of -- scatter these thought ; night give they quite another turn : laid down
down on my traveller 's bed , I leave reminiscence for anticipation . I be go back to : but how long be I to stay there ? not long ; of that I be sure . I have hear from in the interim of my absence : the party at the hall be disperse ; have leave for three week ago , but he be then expect to return in a fortnight . surmise that he be gone to make arrangement for he wedding , as he have talk of purchase a new carriage : she say the idea of he marry still seem strange to she ; but from what everybody say , and from what she have herself see , she could no longer doubt that the event would shortly take place . " you would be strangely incredulous if you do doubt it , " be my mental comment . " I do not doubt it . " the question follow , " where be I to go ? " I dreamt of all the night : in a vivid morning dream I see she close the gate of against I and point I out another road ; and look on with he arm fold -- smile sardonically , as it see , at both she and I . I have not notify to the exact day of my return ; for I do not wish either car or carriage to meet I at . I propose to walk the distance quietly by myself ; and very quietly , after leave my box in the ostler 's care , do I slip away from the , about six o'clock of a evening , and take the old road to Thornfield : a road which lay chiefly through field , and be now little frequented . it be not a bright or splendid summer evening , though fair and soft : the haymaker be at work all along the road ; and the sky , though far from , be such as promise well for the future : its blue -- where blue be visible -- be mild and settled , and its clould strato high and thin . the west , too , be warm : no watery glebe chill it -- it seem as if there be a fire light , a altar burn behind its screen of marble vapour , and out of aperture shine a golden redness . I feel glad as the road shorten before I : so glad that I stop once to ask myself what that joy mean : and to remind reason that it be not to my home I be go , or to a permanent resting - place , or to a place where fond friend look out for I and wait my arrival . " Mr . Fairfax will smile you a calm welcome , to be sure , " say I ; " and little Adele will clap she hand and jump to see you : but you know very well you be think of another than they , and that he be not think of you . " but what be so headstrong as youth ? what so blind as inexperience ? these affirm that it be pleasure enough to have the privilege of again look on , whether he look on I or not ; and they add -- " ! hasten ! be with he while you may : but a few more day or week , at most , and you be part from he for ever ! " and then I strangle a new - bear agony -- a deformed thing which I could not persuade myself to own and rear -- and run on . they be make hay , too , in meadow : or rather , the labourer be just quit they work , and return home with they rake on they shoulders , now , at the hour I arrive . I have but a field or two to traverse , and then I shall cross the road and reach the gate . how full the hedge be of ros ! but I have no time to gather any ; I want to be at the house . I pass a tall briar , shoot leafy and flowery branch across the path ; I see the narrow stile with stone step ; and I see -- sit there , a book and a pencil in he hand ; he be write . well , he be not a ghost ; yet every nerve I have be unstrung : for a moment I be beyond my own mastery . what do it mean ? I do not think I should tremble in this way when I see he , or lose my voice or the power of motion in he presence . I will go back as soon as I can stir : I need not make a absolute fool of myself . I know another way to the house . it do not signify if I know twenty way ; for he have see I . " Hillo ! " he cry ; and he put up he book and he pencil . " there you be ! come on , if you please . " I suppose I do come on ; though in what fashion I know not ; be scarcely cognisant of my movement , and solicitous only to appear calm ; and , above all , to control the work muscle of my face -- which I feel rebel insolently against my will , and struggle to express what I have resolve to conceal . but I have a veil -- it be down : I may make shift yet to behave with decent composure . " and this be ? be you come from , and on foot ? yes -- just
just one of you trick : not to send for a carriage , and come clattering over street and road like a common mortal , but to steal into the vicinage of you home along with twilight , just as if you be a dream or a shade . what the deuce have you do with yourself this last month ? " " I have be with my aunt , sir , who be dead . " " a true Janian reply ! good angel be my guard ! she come from the other world -- from the abode of people who be dead ; and tell I so when she meet I alone here in the gloaming ! if I da , I would touch you , to see if you be substance or shadow , you elf ! -- but I ' as soon offer to take hold of a blue ignis fatuus light in a marsh . Truant ! truant ! " he add , when he have pause a instant . " absent from I a whole month , and forget I quite , I will be swear ! " I know there would be pleasure in meet my master again , even though break by the fear that he be so soon to cease to be my master , and by the knowledge that I be nothing to he : but there be ever in ( so at least I think ) such a wealth of the power of communicating happiness , that to taste but of the crumb he scatter to stray and stranger bird like I , be to feast genially . he last word be balm : they seem to imply that it import something to he whether I forget he or not . and he have speak of as my home -- would that it be my home ! he do not leave the stile , and I hardly like to ask to go by . I inquire soon if he have not be to . " yes ; I suppose you find that out by second - sight . " " . tell I in a letter . " " and do she inform you what I go to do ? " " oh , yes , sir ! everybody know you errand . " " you must see the carriage , , and tell I if you do not think it will suit exactly ; and whether she will not look like , lean back against those purple cushion . I wish , , I be a trifle better adapt to match with she externally . tell I now , fairy as you be -- can not you give I a charm , or a philter , or something of that sort , to make I a handsome man ? " " it would be past the power of magic , sir ; " and , in thought , I add , " a loving eye be all the charm need : to such you be handsome enough ; or rather you sternness have a power beyond beauty . " have sometimes read my unspoken thought with a acuman to I incomprehensible : in the present instance he take no notice of my abrupt vocal response ; but he smile at I with a certain smile he have of he own , and which he use but on rare occasion . he seem to think it too good for common purpose : it be the real sunshine of feeling -- he she it over I now . " pass , , " say he , make room for I to cross the stile : " go up home , and stay you weary little wander foot at a friend 's threshold . " all I have now to do be to obey he in silence : no need for I to colloquise further . I get over the stile without a word , and mean to leave he calmly . a impulse hold I fast -- a force turn I round . I say -- or something in I say for I , and in spite of I - " thank you , , for you great kindness . I be strangely glad to get back again to you : and wherever you be be my home -- my only home . " I walk on so fast that even he could hardly have overtake I have he try . be half wild with delight when she see I . receive I with she usual plain friendliness . smile , and even bid I " bon soir " with glee . this be very pleasant ; there be no happiness like that of be love by you fellow - creature , and feel that you presence be a addition to they comfort . I that evening shut my eye resolutely against the future : I stop my car against the voice that keep warn I of near separation and come griefinitely . when tea be over and Fairfax have take she knitt , and I have assume a low seat near she , and , knee on the carpet , have nestle close up to I , and a sense of mutual affection seem to surround us with a ring of golden peace , I utter a silent prayer that we might not be part far or soon ; but when , as we thus sit , enter , unannounced , and look at we , seem to take pleasure in the spectacle of a group so amicable -- when he say he suppose the old lady be all right now that she have get she adopt daughter back again , and add that he see be " prete e croquer sa petite maman Anglaise " -- I half venture to hope that he would , even after he marriage
marriage , keep we together somewhere under the shelter of he protection , and not quite exil from the sunshine of he presence . a fortnight of dubious calm succeed my return to . nothing be say of the master 's marriage , and I see no preparation go on for such a event . almost every day I ask if she have yet hear anything decide : she answer be always in the negative . once she say she have actually put the question to as to when he be go to bring he bride home ; but he have answer she only by a joke and one of he queer look , and she could not tell what to make of he . one thing specially surprise I , and that be , there be no journeying backward and forward , no visit to : to be sure it be twenty mile off , on the border of another county ; but what be that distance to a ardent lover ? to so practise and indefatigable a horseman as , it would be but a morning 's ride . I begin to cherish hope I have no right to conceive : that the match be break off ; that rumour have be mistaken ; that one or both party have change they mind . I use to look at my master 's face to see if it be sad or fierce ; but I could not remember the time when it have be so uniformly clear of cloud or evil feeling . if , in the moments I and my pupil spend with he , I lack spirit and sank into inevitable dejection , he become even gay . never have he call I more frequently to he presence ; never be kinder to I when there -- and , alas ! never have I love he so well . a splendid Midsummer shone over : sky so pure , sund so radiant as be then see in long succession , seldom favou even singly , we wave - girt land . it be as if a band of italian day have come from the , like a flock of glorious passenger bird , and light to rest they on the cliff of . the hay be all get in ; the field round be green and shorn ; the roads white and ; the tree be in they dark prime ; hedge and wood , full - leave and deeply tinte , contrast well with the sunny hue of the cleared meadow between . on - , , weary with gather wild strawberry in half the day , have go to be with the sun . I watch she drop asleep , and when I leave she , I seek the garden . it be now the sweetest hour of the twenty - four :- " day its fervid fire have waste , " and dew fall cool on panting plain and scorch summit . where the sun have go down in simple state -- pure of the pomp of cloud -- spread a solemn purple , burn with the light of red jewel and furnace flame at one point , on one hill - peak , and extend high and wide , soft and still softer , over half heaven . the east have its own charm or fine deep blue , and its own modest gem , a casino and solitary star : soon it would boast the moon ; but she be yet beneath the horizon . I walk a while on the pavement ; but a subtle , well - know scent -- that of a cigar -- stole from some window ; I see the library casement open a handbreadth ; I know I might be watch thence ; so I go apart into the orchard . no nook in the grounds more sheltered and more - like ; it be full of tree , it bloom with flower : a very high wall shut it out from the court , on one side ; on the other , a beech avenue screen it from the lawn . at the bottom be a sunk fence ; it be sole separation from lonely field : a win walk , border with laurel and terminate in a giant horse - chestnut , circle at the base by a seat , lead down to the fence . here one could wander unseen . while such honey - dew fell , such silence reign , such gloaming gather , I feel as if I could haunt such shade for ever ; but in thread the flower and fruit parterre at the upper part of the enclosure , entice there by the light the now rise moon cast on this more open quarter , my step be stay -- not by sound , not by sight , but once more by a warning fragrance . sweet - briar and southernwood , jasmine , pink , and rose have long be yield they evening sacrifice of incense : this new scent be neither of shrub nor flower ; it be -- I know it well -- it be 's cigar . I look round and I listen . I see tree laden with ripening fruit . I hear a nightingale warbling in a wood half a mile off ; no moving form be visible , no come step audible ; but that perfume increase : I must flee . I make for the wicket lead to the shrubbery , and I see enter . I step aside into the ivy recess ; he will not stay long : he will soon return whence he come , and if I sit still he will never see I . but no -- eventide be as pleasant to he as to I , and this antique garden as attractive ; and he
he stroll on , now lift the gooseberry - tree branch to look at the fruit , large as plum , with which they be laden ; now take a ripe cherry from the wall ; now stoop towards a knot of flower , either to inhale they fragrance or to admire the dew - bead on they petal . a great moth go hum by I ; it alight on a plant at 's foot : he see it , and bend to examine it . " now , he have he back towards I , " think I , " and he be occupy too ; perhaps , if I walk softly , I can slip away unnoticed . " I trode on a edging of turf that the crackle of the pebbly gravel might not betray I : he be stand among the bed at a yard or two distant from where I have to pass ; the moth apparently engage he . " I shall get by very well , " I meditate . as I cross he shadow , throw long over the garden by the moon , not yet risen high , he say quietly , without turn - " , come and look at this fellow . " I have make no noise : he have not eye behind -- could he shadow feel ? I start at first , and then I approach he . " look at he wing , " say he , " he remind I rather of a west indian insect ; one do not often see so large and gay a night - rover in ; there ! he be flow . " the moth roam away . I be sheepishly retreat also ; but follow I , and when we reach the wicket , he say - " turn back : on so lovely a night it be a shame to sit in the house ; and surely no one can wish to go to bed while sunset be thus at meeting with moonrise . " it be one of my fault , that though my tongue be sometimes prompt enough at a answer , there be time when it sadly fail I in fram a excuse ; and always the lapse occur at some crisis , when a facile word or plausible pretext be specially want to get I out of painful embarrassment . I do not like to walk at this hour alone with in the shadowy orchard ; but I could not find a reason to allege for leave he . I follow with lagging step , and thought busily bend on discover a means of extrication ; but he himself look so composed and so grave also , I become ashamed of feel any confusion : the evil -- if evil existent or prospective there be -- seem to lie with I only ; he mind be unconscious and quiet . " , " he recommence , as we enter the laurel walk , and slowly stray down in the direction of the sunk fence and the horse - chestnut , " be a pleasant place in summer , be it not ? " " yes , sir . " " you must have become in some degree attach to the house , -- you , who have a eye for natural beautie , and a good deal of the organ of Adhesiveness ? " " I be attach to it , indeed . " " and though I do not comprehend how it be , I perceive you have acquire a degree of regard for that foolish little child , too ; and even for simple dame Fairfax ? " " yes , sir ; in different way , I have a affection for both . " " and would be sorry to part with they ? " " yes . " " Pity ! " he say , and sigh and pause . " it be always the way of event in this life , " he continue presently : " no sooner have you get settle in a pleasant resting - place , than a voice call out to you to rise and move on , for the hour of repose be expired . " " must I move on , sir ? " I ask . " must I leave ? " " I believe you must , . I be sorry , , but I believe indeed you must . " this be a blow : but I do not let it prostrate I . " well , sir , I shall be ready when the order to march come . " " it be come now -- I must give it to - night . " " then you be go to be married , sir ? " " Ex- act - ly -- pre-cise - ly : with you usual acuteness , you have hit the nail straight on the head . " " , ? " " very soon , my -- that be , : and you will remember , , the first time I , or , plainly intimate to you that it be my intention to put my old bachelor 's neck into the sacred noose , to enter into the holy estate of matrimony -- to take to my bosom , in short ( she be a extensive armful : but that be not to the point -- one can not have too much of such a very excellent thing as my beautiful Blanche ) : well , as I be say -- listen to I , ! you be not turn you head to look after more moth , be you ? that be only a lady - clock , child , ' fly away home . ' I wish to remind you that it be you who first say
say to I , with that discretion I respect in you -- with that foresight , prudence , and humility which befit you responsible and dependent position -- that in case I marry , both you and little have better trot forthwith . I pass over the sort of slur convey in this suggestion on the character of my beloved ; indeed , when you be far away , , I will try to forget it : I shall notice only its wisdom ; which be such that I have make it my law of action . Adele must go to school ; and you , , must get a new situation . " " yes , sir , I will advertise immediately : and meantime , I suppose -- " I be go to say , " I suppose I may stay here , till I find another shelter to betake myself to :" but I stop , feel it would not do to risk a long sentence , for my voice be not quite under command . " in about a month I hope to be a bridegroom , " continue ; " and in the interim , I shall myself look out for employment and a asylum for you . " " thank you , sir ; I be sorry to give -- " " oh , no need to apologise ! I consider that when a dependent do she duty as well as you have do yours , she have a sort of claim upon she employer for any little assistance he can conveniently render she ; indeed I have already , through my future mother - in - law , heard of a place that I think will suit : it be to undertake the education of the five daughter of of , , . you will like , I think : they be such warm - hear people there , they say . " " it be a long way off , sir . " " no matter -- a girl of you sense will not object to the voyage or the distance . " " not the voyage , but the distance : and then the sea be a barrier -- " " from what , ? " " from and from Thornfield : and -- " " well ? " " from you , sir . " I say this almost involuntarily , and , with as little sanction of free will , my tear gush out . I do not cry so as to be hear , however ; I avoid sobbing . the thought of . and struck cold to my heart ; and colder the thought of all the brine and foam , destin , as it seem , to rush between I and the master at whose side I now walk , and coldest the remembrance of the wider ocean -- wealth , caste , custom intervene between I and what I naturally and inevitably love . " it be a long way , " I again say . " it be , to be sure ; and when you get to , , , I shall never see you again , : that be morally certain . I never go over to , not have myself much of a fancy for the country . we have be good friend , ; have we not ? " " yes , sir . " " and when friend be on the eve of separation , they like to spend the little time that remain to they close to each other . come ! we will talk over the voyage and the parting quietly half - a - hour or so , while the star enter into they shining life up in heaven yonder : here be the chestnut tree : here be the bench at its old root . come , we will sit there in peace to - night , though we should never more be destin to sit there together . " he seat I and himself . " it be a long way to , , and I be sorry to send my little friend on such weary travel : but if I can not do better , how be it to be help ? be you anything akin to I , do you think , ? " I could risk no sort of answer by this time : my heart be still . " because , " he say , " I sometimes have a queer feeling with regard to you -- especially when you be near I , as now : it be as if I have a string somewhere under my left rib , tightly and inextricably knot to a similar string situate in the corresponding quarter of you little frame . and if that boisterous Channel , and two hundred mile or so of land come broad between we , I be afraid that cord of communion will be snapt ; and then I have a nervous notion I should take to bleed inwardly . as for you , -- you would forget I . " " that I never should , sir : you know -- " impossible to proceed . " , do you hear that nightingale singe in the wood ? ! " in listening , I sob convulsively ; for I could repress what I endure no longer ; I be oblige to yield , and I be shake from head to foot with acute distress . when I do speak , it be only to express a impetuous wish that I have never be bear , or never come to . " because you be sorry to leave it ? " the vehemence of emotion , stir by grief and love within I , be claim mastery , and struggle for full sway , and assert a right
right to predominate , to overcome , to live , rise , and reign at last : yes , -- and to speak . " I grieve to leave : I love :- I love it , because I have live in it a full and delightful life , -- momentarily at least . I have not be trample on . I have not be petrify . I have not be bury with inferior mind , and exclude from every glimpse of communion with what be bright and energetic and high . I have talk , face to face , with what I reverence , with what I delight in , -- with a original , a vigorous , a expand mind . I have know you , ; and it strike I with terror and anguish to feel I absolutely must be tear from you for ever . I see the necessity of departure ; and it be like look on the necessity of death . " " where do you see the necessity ? " he ask suddenly . " where ? you , sir , have place it before I . " " in what shape ? " " in the shape of ; a noble and beautiful woman , -- you bride . " " my bride ! what bride ? I have no bride ! " " but you will have . " " yes ; -- I will ! -- I will ! " he set he tooth . " then I must go :- you have say it yourself . " " no : you must stay ! I swear it -- and the oath shall be keep . " " I tell you I must go ! " I retort , rouse to something like passion . " do you think I can stay to become nothing to you ? do you think I be a automaton ? -- a machine without feeling ? and can bear to have my morsel of bread snatch from my lip , and my drop of live water dash from my cup ? do you think , because I be poor , obscure , plain , and little , I be soulless and heartless ? you think wrong ! -- I have as much soul as you , -- and full as much heart ! and if have gift I with some beauty and much wealth , I should have make it as hard for you to leave I , as it be now for I to leave you . I be not talk to you now through the medium of custom , conventionality , nor even of mortal flesh ; -- it be my spirit that address you spirit ; just as if both have pass through the grave , and we stand at 's foot , equal , -- as we be ! " " as we be ! " repeat -- " so , " he add , enclose I in he arm . gather I to he breast , press he lip on my lip : " so , ! " " yes , so , sir , " I rejoin : " and yet not so ; for you be a married man -- or as good as a married man , and we to one inferior to you -- to one with whom you have no sympathy -- whom I do not believe you truly love ; for I have see and hear you sneer at she . I would scorn such a union : therefore I be better than you -- let I go ! " " where , ? to ? " " yes -- to . I have speak my mind , and can go anywhere now . " " , be still ; do not struggle so , like a wild frantic bird that be rend its own plumage in its desperation . " " I be no bird ; and no net ensnare I ; I be a free human be with a independent will , which I now exert to leave you . " another effort set I at liberty , and I stand erect before he . " and you will shall decide you destiny , " he say : " I offer you my hand , my heart , and a share of all my possession . " " you play a farce , which I merely laugh at . " " I ask you to pass through life at my side -- to be my second self , and best earthly companion . " " for that fate you have already make you choice , and must abide by it . " " , be still a few moment : you be over-excited : I will be still too . " a waft of wind come swee down the laurel - walk , and tremble through the bough of the chestnut : it wander away -- away -- to a indefinite distance -- it die . the nightingale 's song be then the only voice of the hour : in listen to it , I again weep . sit quiet , look at I gently and seriously . some time pass before he speak ; he at last say - " come to my side , , and let we explain and understand one another . " " I will never again come to you side : I be tear away now , and can not return . " " but , , I summon you as my wife : it be you only I intend to marry . " I be silent : I think he mock I . " come , -- come hither . " " you bride stand between we . " he rise , and with a stride reach I . " my bride be here ,
, " he say , again draw I to he , " because my equal be here , and my likeness . , will you marry I ? " still I do not answer , and still I writh myself from he grasp : for I be still incredulous . " do you doubt I , ? " " entirely . " " you have no faith in I ? " " not a whit . " " be I a liar in you eyes ? " he ask passionately . " little sceptic , you shall be convinced . what love have I for ? none : and that you know . what love have she for I ? none : as I have take pain to prove : I cause a rumour to reach she that my fortune be not a third of what be suppose , and after that I present myself to see the result ; it be coldness both from she and she mother . I would not -- I could not -- marry . you -- you strange , you almost unearthly thing ! -- I love as my own flesh . you -- poor and obscure , and small and plain as you be -- I entreat to accept I as a husband . " " what , I ! " I ejaculate , begin in he earnestness -- and especially in he incivility -- to credit he sincerity : " I who have not a friend in the world but you -- if you be my friend : not a shilling but what you have give I ? " " you , , I must have you for my own -- entirely my own . will you be mine ? say yes , quickly . " " , let I look at you face : turn to the moonlight . " " why ? " " because I want to read you countenance -- turn ! " " there ! you will find it scarcely more legible than a crumple , scratch page . read on : only make haste , for I suffer . " he face be very much agitated and very much flush , and there be strong workings in the feature , and strange gleam in the eyes " oh , , you torture I ! " he exclaim . " with that search and yet faithful and generous look , you torture I ! " " how can I do that ? if you be true , and you offer real , my only feeling to you must be gratitude and devotion -- they can not torture . " " ! " he ejaculate ; and add wildly -- " accept I quickly . , -- give I my name -- -- I will marry you . " " be you in earnest ? do you truly love I ? do you sincerely wish I to be you wife ? " " I do ; and if a oath be necessary to satisfy you , I swear it . " " then , sir , I will marry you . " " -- my little wife ! " " dear ! " " come to I -- come to I entirely now , " say he ; and add , in he deepest tone , speak in my ear as he cheek be laid on mine , " make my happiness -- I will make yours . " " God pardon I ! " he subjoin ere long ; " and man meddle not with I : I have she , and will hold she . " " there be no one to meddle , sir . I have no kindred to interfere . " " no -- that be the best of it , " he say . and if I have love he less I should have think he accent and look of exultation savage ; but , sit by he , rouse from the nightmare of parting -- call to the paradise of union -- I think only of the bliss give I to drink in so abundant a flow . again and again he say , " be you happy , ? " and again and again I answer , " yes . " after which he murmure , " it will ato -- it will ato . have I not find she friendless , and cold , and comfortless ? will I not guard , and cherish , and solace she ? be there not love in my heart , and constancy in my resolve ? it will expiate at 's tribunal . I know my maker sanction what I do . for the world 's judgament -- I wash my hand thereof . for man 's opinion -- I defy it . " but what have befall the night ? the moon be not yet set , and we be all in shadow : I could scarcely see my master 's face , near as I be . and what ail the chestnut tree ? it writh and groan ; while wind roar in the laurel walk , and come swee over we . " we must go in , " say : " the weather change . I could have sit with thee till morning , . " " and so , " think I , " could I with you . " I should have say so , perhaps , but a livid , vivid spark leapt out of a cloud at which I be look , and there be a crack , a crash , and a close rattling peal ; and I think only of hide my dazzled eye against 's shoulder . the rain rush down . he hurry I up the walk , through the grounds , and into the house ; but we be quite
quite wet before we could pass the threshold . he be take off my shawl in the hall , and shake the water out of my loosened hair , when emerge from she room . I do not observe she at first , nor do . the lamp be lit . the clock be on the stroke of twelve . " Hasten to take off you wet thing , " say he ; " and before you go , good - night -- good - night , my darling ! " he kiss I repeatedly . when I look up , on leave he arm , there stand the widow , pale , grave , and amazed . I only smile at she , and run upstairs . " explanation will do for another time , " think I . still , when I reach my chamber , I feel a pang at the idea she should even temporarily misconstrue what she have see . but joy soon efface every other feeling ; and loud as the wind blow , near and deep as the thunder crash , fierce and frequent as the lightning gleam , cataract - like as the rain fall during a storm of two hour ' duration , I experience no fear and little awe . come thrice to my door in the course of it , to ask if I be safe and tranquil : and that be comfort , that be strength for anything . before I leave my bed in the morning , little come run in to tell I that the great horse -chestnut at the bottom of the orchard have be strike by lightning in the night , and half of it split away . as I rise and dress , I think over what have happen , and wonder if it be a dream . I could not be certain of the reality till I have see again , and hear he renew he word of love and promise . while arrange my hair , I look at my face in the glass , and feel it be no longer plain : there be hope in its aspect and life in its colour ; and my eye see as if they have beheld the fount of fruition , and borrowed beam from the lustrous ripple . I have often be unwilling to look at my master , because I fear he could not be pleased at my look ; but I be sure I might lift my face to he now , and not cool he affection by its expression . I take a plain but clean and light summer dress from my drawer and put it on : it seem no attire have ever so well become I , because none have I ever wear in so blissful a mood . I be not surprise , when I run down into the hall , to see that a brilliant morning have succeed to the tempest of the night ; and to feel , through the open glass door , the breathing of a fresh and fragrant breeze . nature must be gladsome when I be so happy . a beggar- woman and she little boy -- pale , rag object both -- be come up the walk , and I run down and give they all the money I happen to have in my purse -- some three or four shilling : good or bad , they must partake of my jubilee . the rook caw , and blither bird sang ; but nothing be so merry or so musical as my own rejoicing heart . surprise I by look out of the window with a sad countenance , and say gravely -- " , will you come to breakfast ? " during the meal she be quiet and cool : but I could not undeceive she then . I must wait for my master to give explanations ; and so must she . I eat what I could , and then I hasten upstairs . I meet Adele leave the schoolroom . " where be you go ? it be time for lesson . " " have send I away to the nursery . " " where be he ? " " in there , " point to the apartment she have leave ; and I go in , and there he stand . " come and bid I good - morning , " say he . I gladly advanc ; and it be not merely a cold word now , or even a shake of the hand that I receive , but a embrace and a kiss . it seem natural : it seem genial to be so well love , so caress by he . " , you look blooming , and smile , and pretty , " say he : " truly pretty this morning . be this my pale , little elf ? be this my mustard - see ? this little sunny - faced girl with the dimple cheek and rosy lip ; the satin - smooth hazel hair , and the radiant hazel eye ? " ( I have green eye , reader ; but you must excuse the mistake : for he they be new - dyed , I suppose . ) " it be , . " " to be , " he add : " in four week , ; not a day more . do you hear that ? " I do , and I could not quite comprehend it : it make I giddy . the feeling , the announcement send through I , be something stronger than be consistent with joy -- something that smote and stun . it be , I think almost fear . " you blush , and now you be white , : what be that for ? " " because you give
give I a new name -- ; and it seem so strange . " " yes , , " say he ; " young -- 's girl - bride . " " it can never be , sir ; it do not sound likely . human being never enjoy complete happiness in this world . I be not bear for a different destiny to the rest of my species : to imagine such a lot befall I be a fairy tale -- a day - dream . " " which I can and will realise . I shall begin to - day . this morning I write to my banker in to send I certain jewel he have in he keeping , -- heirloom for the ladie of . in a day or two I hope to pour they into you lap : for every privilege , every attention shall be yours that I would accord a peer 's daughter , if about to marry she . " " oh , sir ! -- never rain jewel ! I do not like to hear they speak of . Jewels for sound unnatural and strange : I would rather not have they . " " I will myself put the diamond chain round you neck , and the circlet on you forehead , -- which it will become : for nature , at least , have stampe she patent of nobility on this brow , ; and I will clasp the bracelet on these fine wrist , and load these fairy - like finger with ring . " " no , no , sir ! think of other subject , and speak of other thing , and in another strain . do not address I as if I be a beauty ; I be you plain , Quakerish governess . " " you be a beauty in my eyes , and a beauty just after the desire of my heart , -- delicate and aerial . " " Puny and insignificant , you mean . you be dream , sir , -- or you be sneer . for 's sake do not be ironical ! " " I will make the world acknowledge you a beauty , too , " he go on , while I really become uneasy at the strain he have adopt , because I feel he be either delude himself or try to delude I . " I will attire my in satin and lace , and she shall have ros in she hair ; and I will cover the head I love best with a priceless veil . " " and then you will not know I , sir ; and I shall not be you any longer , but a ape in a harlequin 's jacket -- a jay in borrowed plume . I would have soon see you , , tricke out in stage - trapping , as myself clad in a court - lady 's robe ; and I do not call you handsome , sir , though I love you most dearly : far too dearly to flatter you . do not flatter I . " he pursue he theme , however , without notice my deprecation . " this very day I shall take you in the carriage to Millcote , and you must choose some dress for yourself . I tell you we shall be marry in four week . the wedding be to take place quietly , in the church down below yonder ; and then I shall waft you away at once to town . after a brief stay there , I shall bear my treasure to region nearer the sun : to french vineyard and italian plain ; and she shall see whatever be famous in old story and in modern record : she shall taste , too , of the life of city ; and she shall learn to value herself by just comparison with other . " " shall I travel ? -- and with you , sir ? " " you shall sojourn at , , and Naple : at , , and : all the ground I have wander over shall be re-trodden by you : wherever I stampe my hoof , you sylph 's foot shall step also . ten year since , I flow through half mad ; with disgust , hate , and rage as my companion : now I shall revisit it heal and cleanse , with a very angel as my comforter . " I laugh at he as he say this . " I be not a angel , " I assert ; " and I will not be one till I die : I will be myself . , you must neither expect nor exact anything celestial of I -- for you will not get it , any more than I shall get it of you : which i do not at all anticipate . " " what do you anticipate of I ? " " for a little while you will perhaps be as you be now , -- a very little while ; and then you will turn cool ; and then you will be capricious ; and then you will be stern , and I shall have much ado to please you : but when you get well use to I , you will perhaps like I aagain , -- like I , I say , not love I . I suppose you love will effervesce in six month , or less . I have observ in book write by man , that period assign as the farthest to which a husband 's ardour extend . yet , after all , as a friend and companion , I hope never to become quite distasteful to my dear master . " " Distasteful ! and like you again ! I think I shall like you
you again , and yet again : and I will make you confess I do not only like , but love you -- with truth , fervour , constancy . " " yet be you not capricious , sir ? " " to woman who please I only by they face , I be the very devil when I find out they have neither soul nor heart -- when they open to I a perspective of flatness , triviality , and perhaps imbecility , coarseness , and ill - temper : but to the clear eye and eloquent tongue , to the soul make of fire , and the character that bend but do not break -- at once supple and stable , tractable and consistent -- I be ever tender and true . " " have you ever experience of such a character , sir ? do you ever love such a one ? " " I love it now . " " but before I : if I , indeed , in any respect come up to you difficult standard ? " " I never meet you likeness . , you please I , and you master I -- you seem to submit , and I like the sense of pliancy you impart ; and while I be twin the soft , silken skein round my finger , it send a thrill up my arm to my heart . I be influence -- conquer ; and the influence be sweeter than I can express ; and the conquest I undergo have a witchery beyond any triumph I can win . why do you smile , ? what do that inexplicable , that uncanny turn of countenance mean ? " " I be think , sy ( you will excuse the idea ; it be involuntary ) , I be think of and with they charmer -- " " you be , you little elfish -- " " Hush , sy ! you do not talk very wisely just now ; any more than those gentleman act very wisely . however , have they be marry , they would no doubt by they severity as husband have make up for they softness as suitor ; and so will you , I fear . I wonder how you will answer I a year hence , should I ask a favour it do not suit you convenience or pleasure to grant . " " ask I something now , , -- the least thing : I desire to be entreate -- " " indeed I will , sir ; I have my petition all ready . " " ! but if you look up and smile with that countenance , I shall swear concession before I know to what , and that will make a fool of I . " " not at all , sir ; I ask only this : do not send for the jewel , and do not cry I with rose : you might as well put a border of gold lace round that plain pocket handkerchief you have there . " " I might as well ' gild refin gold . ' I know it : you request be grant then -- for the time . I will remand the order I despatch to my banker . but you have not yet ask for anything ; you have pray a gift to be withdraw : try again . " " well then , sir , have the goodness to gratify my curiosity , which be much pique on one point . " he look disturbed . " what ? what ? " he say hastily . " Curiosity be a dangerous petition : it be well I have not take a vow to accord every request -- " " but there can be no danger in comply with this , sir . " " utter it , : but I wish that instead of a mere inquiry into , perhaps , a secret , it be a wish for half my estate . " " now , ! what do I want with half you estate ? do you think I be a Jew-usurer , seek good investment in land ? I would much rather have all you confidence . you will not exclude I from you confidence if you admit I to you heart ? " " you be welcome to all my confidence that be worth have , ; but for 's sake , do not desire a useless burden ! do not long for poison -- do not turn out a downright Eve on my hand ! " " why not , sir ? you have just be tell I how much you like to be conquer , and how pleasant over -persuasion be to you . do not you think I have better take advantage of the confession , and begin and coax and entreat -- even cry and be sulky if necessary -- for the sake of a mere essay of my power ? " " I dare you to any such experiment . Encroach , presume , and the game be up . " " be it , sir ? you soon give in . how stern you look now ! you eyebrow have become as thick as my finger , and you forehead resemble what , in some very astonishing poetry , I once see style , 'a blue - pile thunderloft . ' that will be you married look , sir , I suppose ? " " if that will be you married look , I , as a , will soon give up the notion of consorting with a mere sprite or salamander . but what have you to ask , thing , -- out with it ? " " there , you be less than civil now ; and I like rudeness a great deal better
better than flattery . I have rather be a thing than a angel . this be what I have to ask , -- why do you take such pain to make I believe you wish to marry ? " " be that all ? thank it be no worse ! " and now he unknit he black brows ; look down , smile at I , and strok my hair , as if well please at see a danger avert . " I think I may confess , " he continue , " even although I should make you a little indignant , -- and I have see what a fire - spirit you can be when you be indignant . you glow in the cool moonlight last night , when you mutiny against fate , and claim you rank as my equal . , by - the - bye , it be you who make I the offer . " " of course I do . but to the point if you please , sir -- ? " " well , I feign courtship of , because I wish to render you as madly in love with I as I be with you ; and I know would be the best ally I could call in for the furtherance of that end . " " excellent ! now you be small -- not one whit bigger than the end of my little finger . it be a burn shame and a scandalous disgrace to act in that way . do you think nothing of 's feeling , sir ? " " she feeling be concentrate in one -- pride ; and that need humbling . be you jealous , ? " " never mind , : it be in no way interest to you to know that . answer I truly once more . do you think will not suffer from you dishonest coquetry ? will not she feel forsaken and desert ? " " impossible ! -- when I tell you how she , on the contrary , desert I : the idea of my insolvency cool , or rather extinguish , she flame in a moment . " " you have a curiious , designing mind , . I be afraid you principle on some point be eccentric . " " my principles be never train , : they may have grow a little awry for want of attention . " " once again , seriously ; may I enjoy the great good that have be vouchsaf to I , without fear that any one else be suffer the bitter pain I myself feel a while ago ? " " that you may , my good little girl : there be not another be in the world have the same pure love for I as yourself -- for I lay that pleasant unction to my soul , , a belief in you affection . " I turn my lip to the hand that lay on my shoulder . I love he very much -- more than I could trust myself to say -- more than word have power to express . " ask something more , " he say presently ; " it be my delight to be entreate , and to yield . " I be again ready with my request . " communicate you intentions to , sir : she see I with you last night in the hall , and she be shocked . give she some explanation before I see she again . it pain I to be misjudge by so good a woman . " " go to you room , and put on you bonnet , " he reply . " I mean you to accompany I to Millcote this morning ; and while you prepare for the drive , I will enlighten the old lady 's understanding . do she think , , you have give the world for love , and consider it well lose ? " " I believe she think I have forget my station , and yours , sir . " " Station ! station ! -- you station be in my heart , and on the neck of those who would insult you , now or hereafter . -- . " I be soon dress ; and when I hear quit 's parlour , I hurry down to it . the old lady , have be read she morning portion of -- the for the day ; she lay open before she , and she spectacle be upon it . she occupation , suspend by 's announcement , see now forgote : she eye , fix on the blank wall opposite , express the surprise of a quiet mind stir by unwonted tiding . see I , she rouse herself : she make a sort of effort to smile , and fram a few word of congratulation ; but the smile expire , and the sentence be abandon unfinished . she put up she spectacle , shut the , and push she chair back from the table . " I feel so astonished , " she begin , " I hardly know what to say to you , . I have surely not be dream , have I ? sometimes I half fall asleep when I be sit alone and fancy thing that have never happen . it have see to I more than once when I have be in a doze , that my dear husband , who die fifteen year since , have come in and sit down beside I ; and that I have even hear he call I by my name , Alice , as he use to do . now , can you tell I whether it be actually true that have ask you to marry he ? do not laugh at I . but I really think he come in
in here five minute ago , and say that in a month you would be he wife . " " he have say the same thing to I , " I reply . " he have ! do you believe he ? have you accept he ? " " yes . " she look at I bewilder . " I could never have think it . he be a proud man : all the Rochesters be proud : and he father , at least , like money . he , too , have always be call careful . he mean to marry you ? " " he tell I so . " she survey my whole person : in she eye I read that they have there find no charm powerful enough to solve the enigma . " it pass I ! " she continue ; " but no doubt , it be true since you say so . how it will answer , I can not tell : I really do not know . Equality of position and fortune be often advisable in such case ; and there be twenty year of difference in you age . he might almost be you father . " " no , indeed , ! " exclaim I , nettle ; " he be nothing like my father ! no one , who see we together , would suppose it for a instant . look as young , and be as young , as some man at five - and - twenty . " " be it really for love he be go to marry you ? " she ask . I be so hurt by she coldness and scepticism , that the tear rise to my eye . " I be sorry to grieve you , " pursue the widow ; " but you be so young , and so little acquaint with man , I wish to put you on you guard . it be a old say that ' all be not gold that glitter ;' and in this case I do fear there will be something find to be different to what either you or I expect . " " why ? -- be I a monster ? " I say : " be it impossible that should have a sincere affection for I ? " " no : you be very well ; and much improved of late ; and , I daresay , be fond of you . I have always notice that you be a sort of pet of he . there be time when , for you sake , I have be a little uneasy at he mark preference , and have wish to put you on you guard : but I do not like to suggest even the possibility of wrong . I know such a idea would shock , perhaps offend you ; and you be so discreet , and so thoroughly modest and sensible , I hope you might be trust to protect yourself . last night I can not tell you what I suffer when I seek all over the house , and could find you nowhere , nor the master either ; and then , at twelve o'clock , see you come in with he . " " well , never mind that now , " I interrupt impatiently ; " it be enough that all be right . " " I hope all will be right in the end , " she say : " but believe I , you can not be too careful . try and keep at a distance : distrust yourself as well as he . gentleman in he station be not accustom to marry they governess . " I be grow truly irritate : happily , run in . " let I go , -- let I go to too ! " she cry . " will not : though there be so much room in the new carriage . beg he to let I go mademoiselle . " " that I will , ; " and I hasten away with she , glad to quit my gloomy monitress . the carriage be ready : they be bring it round to the front , and my master be on the pavement , follow he backward and forward . " Adele may accompany we , may she not , sir ? " " I tell she no . I will have no brat ! -- I will have only you . " " do let she go , , if you please : it would be better . " " not it : she will be a restraint . " he be quite peremptory , both in look and voice . the chill of 's warning , and the damp of she doubt be upon I : something of unsubstantiality and uncertainty have beset my hope . I half lose the sense of power over he . I be about mechanically to obey he , without further remonstrance ; but as he help I into the carriage , he look at my face . " what be the matter ? " he ask ; " all the sunshine be gone . do you really wish the bairn to go ? will it annoy you if she be leave behind ? " " I would far rather she go , sir . " " then off for you bonnet , and back like a flash of lightning ! " cry he to . she obey he with what speed she might . " after all , a single morning 's interruption will not matter much , " say he , " when I mean shortly to claim you -- you thought , conversation , and company -- for life . " Adele , when lift in , commence kiss I , by way of express she gratitude
gratitude for my intercession : she be instantly stow away into a corner on the other side of he . she then pee round to where I sit ; so stern a neighbour be too restrictive to he , in he present fractious mood , she da whisper no observation , nor ask of he any information . " let she come to I , " I entreate : " she will , perhaps , trouble you , sir : there be plenty of room on this side . " he hand she over as if she have be a lapdog . " I will send she to school yet , " he say , but now he be smile . hear he , and ask if she be to go to school " san mademoiselle ? " " yes , " he reply , " absolutely san mademoiselle ; for I be to take mademoiselle to the moon , and there I shall seek a cave in one of the white valley among the volcano - top , and mademoiselle shall live with I there , and only I . " " she will have nothing to eat : you will starve she , " observe . " I shall gather man na for she morning and night : the plain and hillside in the moon be bleach with manna , . " " she will want to warm herself : what will she do for a fire ? " " fire rise out of the lunar mountain : when she be cold , I will carry she up to a peak , and lay she down on the edge of a crater . " " oh , qu ' elle y sera mal -- peu comfortable ! and she clothes , they will wear out : how can she get new one ? " profess to be puzzl . " ! " say he . " what would you do , ? Cudgel you brain for a expedient . how would a white or a pink clould answer for a gown , do you think ? and one could cut a pretty enough scarf out of a rainbow . " " she be far better as she be , " conclude , after muse some time : " beside , she would get tired of live with only you in the moon . if I be mademoiselle , I would never consent to go with you . " " she have consent : she have pledge she word . " " but you can not get she there ; there be no road to the moon : it be all air ; and neither you nor she can fly . " " Adele , look at that field . " we be now outside gate , and bowl lightly along the smooth road to , where the dust be well lay by the thunderstorm , and , where the low hedge and lofty timber tree on each side glisten green and rain-refreshed . " in that field , , I be walk late one evening about a fortnight since -- the evening of the day you help I to make hay in the orchard meadow ; and , as I be tired with rak swath , I sit down to rest I on a stile ; and there I take out a little book and a pencil , and begin to write about a misfortune that befell I long ago , and a wish I have for happy day to come : I be write away very fast , though daylight be fad from the leaf , when something come up the path and stop two yard off I . I look at it . it be a little thing with a veil of gossamer on its head . I beckon it to come near I ; it stand soon at my knee . I never speak to it , and it never speak to I , in word ; but I read its eye , and it read mine ; and we speechless colloquy be to this effect - " it be a fairy , and come from - land , it say ; and its errand be to make I happy : I must go with it out of the common world to a lonely place -- such as the moon , for instance -- and it nod it be head towards she horn , rise over - : it tell I of the alabaster cave and silver vale where we might live . I say I should like to go ; but remind it , as you do I , that I have no wing to fly . " 'Oh , ' return the fairy , ' that do not signify ! here be a talisman will remove all difficulty ;' and she hold out a pretty gold ring . ' put it , ' she say , 'on the fourth finger of my left hand , and I be yours , and you be mine ; and we shall leave earth , and make we own heaven yonder . ' she nod again at the moon . the ring , , be in my breech - pocket , under the disguise of a sovereign : but I mean soon to change it to a ring again . " " but what have mademoiselle to do with it ? I do not care for the fairy : you say it be mademoiselle you would take to the moon ? " " Mademoiselle be a fairy , " he say , whisper mysteriously . Whereupon I tell she not to mind he badinage ; and she , on she part , evince a fund of genuine french scepticism : denominat " un vrai menteur , " and assure he that she make no account whatever of he
he " conte de fee , " and that " do reste , il n'y avait pa fee , et quand meme il y en avait : " she be sure they would never appear to he , nor ever give he ring , or offer to live with he in the moon . the hour spend at be a somewhat harassing one to I . oblige I to go to a certain silk warehouse : there I be order to choose half - a - dozen dress . I hate the business , I beg leave to defer it : no -- it should be go through with now . by dint of entreaty express in energetic whisper , I reduce the half - dozen to two : these however , he vow he would select himself . with anxiety I watch he eye rove over the gay store : he fix on a rich silk of the most brilliant amethyst dye , and a superb pink satin . I tell he in a new series of whisper , that he might as well buy I a gold gown and a silver bonnet at once : I should certainly never venture to wear he choice . with infinite difficulty , for he be stubborn as a stone , I persuade he to make a exchange in favour of a sober black satin and pearl - grey silk . " it might pass for the present , " he say ; " but he would yet see I glitter like a parterre . " be I to get he out of the silk warehouse , and then out of a jeweller shop : the more he buy I , the more my cheek burn with a sense of annoyance and degradation . as we re-enter the carriage , and I sit back feverish and fag , I remember what , in the hurry of event , dark and bright , I have wholly forgotten -- the letter of my uncle , , to : he intention to adopt I and make I he legatee . " it would , indeed , be a relief , " I think , " if I have ever so small a independency ; I never can bear be dress like a doll by , or sit like a second Dana with the golden shower fall daily round I . I will write to the moment I get home , and tell my uncle I be go to be married , and to whom : if I have but a prospect of one day bring a accession of fortune , I could better endure to be keep by he now . " and somewhat relieve by this idea ( which I fail not to execute that day ) , I venture once more to meet my master 's and lover 's eye , which most pertinaciously seek mine , though I avert both face and gaze . he smile ; and I think he smile be such as a sultan might , in a blissful and fond moment , bestow on a slave he gold and gem have enrich : I crush he hand , which be ever hunt mine , vigorously , and thrust it back to he red with the passionate pressure . " you need not look in that way , " I say ; " if you do , I will wear nothing but my old Lowood frock to the end of the chapter . I will be marry in this lilac gingham : you may make a dressing - gow for yourself out of the pearl - grey silk , and a infinite series of waistcoat out of the black satin . " he chuckle ; he rub he hand . " oh , it be rich to see and hear she ? " he exclaim . " be she original ? be she piquant ? I would not exchange this one little English girl for the 's whole seraglio , gazelle - eye , houri form , and all ! " the eastern allusion bit I again . " I will not stand you a inch in the stead of a seraglio , " I say ; " so do not consider I a equivalent for one . if you have a fancy for anything in that line , away with you , sir , to the bazaar of without delay , and lay out in extensive slave - purchase some of that spare cash you seem at a loss to spend satisfactorily here . " " and what will you do , , while I be bargain for so many ton of flesh and such a assortment of black eye ? " " I will be prepare myself to go out as a missionary to preach liberty to they that be enslave -- you harem inmate amongst the rest . I will get admit there , and I will stir up mutiny ; and you , three - tail bashaw as you be , sir , shall in a trice find yourself fetter amongst we hand : nor will I , for one , consent to cut you bond till you have sign a charter , the most liberal that despot ever yet confer . " " I would consent to be at you mercy , . " " I would have no mercy , , if you supplicate for it with a eye like that . while you look so , I should be certain that whatever charter you might grant under coercion , you first act , when release , would be to violate its condition . " " why , , what would you have ? I fear you will compel I to go through a private marriage ceremony , besides that perform at the altar . you will stipulate , I see , for peculiar
peculiar term -- what will they be ? " " I only want a easy mind , sir ; not crush by crowded obligation . do you remember what you say of ? -- of the diamonds , the cashmere you give she ? I will not be you . I shall continue to act as 's governess ; by that I shall earn my board and lodging , and thirty pound a year besides . I will furnish my own wardrobe out of that money , and you shall give I nothing but -- " " well , but what ? " " you regard ; and if I give you mine in return , that debt will be quit . " " well , for cool native impudence and pure innate pride , you have not you equal , " say he . we be now approach . " will it please you to dine with I to - day ? " he ask , as we re-enter the gate . " no , thank you , sir . " " and what for , 'no , thank you ? ' if one may inquire . " " I never have dine with you , sir : and I see no reason why I should now : till -- " " till what ? you delight in half - phrase . " " till I can not help it . " " do you suppose I eat like a ogre or a ghoul , that you dread be the companion of my repast ? " " I have form no supposition on the subject , sir ; but I want to go on as usual for another month . " " you will give up you governessing slavery at once . " " indeed , begge you pardon , sir , I shall not . I shall just go on with it as usual . I shall keep out of you way all day , as I have be accustom to do : you may send for I in the evening , when you feel disposed to see I , and I will come then ; but at no other time . " " I want a smoke , , or a pinch of snuff , to comfort I under all this , ' pour I donner une contenance , ' as would say ; and unfortunately I have neither my cigar - case , nor my snuff - box . but listen -- whisper . it be you time now , little tyrant , but it will be mine presently ; and when once I have fairly seize you , to have and to hold , I will just -- figuratively speak -- attach you to a chain like this " ( touch he watch - guard ) . " yes , bonny wee thing , I will wear you in my bosom , lest my jewel I should tyne . " he say this as he help I to alight from the carriage , and while he afterwards lift out , I enter the house , and make good my retreat upstairs . he duly summon I to he presence in the evening . I have prepare a occupation for he ; for I be determine not to spend the whole time in a tete - e - tete conversation . I remembe he fine voice ; I know he like to s -- good singer generally do . I be no vocalist myself , and , in he fastidious judgament , no musician , either ; but I delighte in listen when the performance be good . no sooner have twilight , that hour of romance , begin to lower she blue and starry banner over the lattice , than I rise , open the piano , and entreate he , for the love of heaven , to give I a song . he say I be a capricious witch , and that he would rather s another time ; but I averr that no time be like the present . " do I like he voice ? " he ask . " very much . " I be not fond of pamper that susceptible vanity of he ; but for once , and from motive of expediency , I would e'en soothey and stimulate it . " then , , you must play the accompaniment . " " very well , sir , I will try . " I do try , but be presently sweep off the stool and denominate " a little bungler . " be push unceremoniously to one side -- which be precisely what I wish -- he usur my place , and proceed to accompany himself : for he could play as well as sing . I hi I to the window - recess . and while I sit there and look out on the still tree and dim lawn , to a sweet air be sung in mellow tone the follow strain :- " the truest love that ever heart feel at its kindled core , through each vein , in quickened start , the tide of be pour . " she come be my hope each day , she part be my pain ; the chance that do she step delay be ice in every vein . " I dream it would be nameless bliss , as I love , love to be ; and to this object do I press as blind as eagerly . " but wide as pathless be the space that lay we life between , and dangerous as the foamy race of ocean - surge green . " and haunt as a robber - path through wilderness or wood ; for and , and and , between we spirit stood . " I dangers da ; I hindrance scorn I omend do defy
defy : whatever menace , harass , warn , I pass impetuous by . " on sp my rainbow , fast as light ; I fly as in a dream ; for glorious rose upon my sight that child of and . " still bright on clouds of suffer dim Shine that soave , solemn joy ; care I now , how dense and grim Disaster gather nigh . " I care not in this moment swoot , though all I have rush of 'er should come on pinion , strong and fleet , proclaim vengeance sore : " though haughty hate should strike I down , right , bar approach to I , and grind , with furious frown , endless enmity . " my love have place she little hand with noble faith in mine , and vow that wedlock 's sacred band we nature shall entwine . " my love have swear , with sealing kiss , with I to live -- to die ; I have at last my nameless bliss . as I love -- love am I ! " he rise and come towards I , and I see he face all kindle , and he full falcon - eye flashing , and tenderness and passion in every lineament . I quail momentarily -- then I rally . Soft scene , da demonstration , I would not have ; and I stand in peril of both : a weapon of defence must be prepare -- I whet my tongue : as he reach I , I ask with asperity , " whom he be go to marry now ? " " that be a strange question to be put by he darling . " " indeed ! I consider it a very natural and necessary one : he have talk of he future wife die with he . what do he mean by such a pagan idea ? I have no intention of dying with he -- he might depend on that . " " oh , all he longe , all he pray for , be that I might live with he ! death be not for such as I . " " indeed it be : I have as good a right to die when my time come as he have : but I should bide that time , and not be hurrie away in a suttee . " " would I forgive he for the selfish idea , and prove my pardon by a reconciling kiss ? " " no : I would rather be excuse . " here I hear myself apostrophise as a " hard little thing ; " and it be add , " any other woman would have be melte to marrow at hearing such stanza croon in she praise . " I assure he I be naturally hard -- very flinty , and that he would often find I so ; and that , moreover , I be determined to show he diver rug point in my character before the ensue four week elapse : he should know fully what sort of a bargain he have make , while there be yet time to rescind it . " would I be quiet and talk rationally ? " " I would be quiet if he like , and as to talk rationally , I flatter myself I be do that now . " he fret , pish , and pshaw . " very good , " I think ; " you may fume and fidget as you please : but this be the best plan to pursue with you , I be certain . I like you more than I can say ; but I will not sink into a batho of sentiment : and with this needle of repartee I will keep you from the edge of the gulf too ; and , moreover , maintain by its pungent aid that distance between you and myself must conducive to we real mutual advantage . " from less to more , I work he up to considerable irritation ; then , after he have retire , in dudgeon , quite to the other end of the room , I get up , and say , " I wish you good - night , sir , " in my natural and wont respectful manner , I slipp out by the side - door and get away . the system thus enter on , I pursue during the whole season of probation ; and with the best success . he be keep , to be sure , rather cross and crusty ; but on the whole I could see he be excellently entertained , and that a lamb - like submission and turtle - dove sensibility , while foster he despotism more , would have pleas he judgment , satisfy he common - sense , and even suit he taste less . in other people 's presence I be , as formerly , deferential and quiet ; any other line of conduct be uncalled for : it be only in the evening conference I thus thwart and afflict he . he continue to send for I punctually the moment the clock struck seven ; though when I appear before he now , he have no such honeyed term as " love " and " darling " on he lip : the best word at my service be " provoke puppet , " " malicious elf , " " sprite , " " change , " &c . for caress , too , I now get grimace ; for a pressure of the hand , a pinch on the arm ; for a kiss on the cheek , a severe tweak of the ear . it be all right : at present I decidedly prefer these fierce favour to anything more tender . , I see , approve I : she
she anxiety on my account vanish ; therefore I be certain I do well . , affirm I be wear he to skin and bone , and threaten awful vengeance for my present conduct at some period fast come . I laugh in my sleeve at he menace . " I can keep you in reasonable check now , " I reflect ; " and I do not doubt to be able to do it hereafter : if one expedient lose it be virtue , another must be devised . " yet after all my task be not a easy one ; often I would rather have pleased than tease he . my future husband be become to I my whole world ; and more than the world : almost my hope of heaven . he stand between I and every thought of religion , as a eclipse intervene between man and the broad sun . I could not , in those day , see for he creature : of whom I have make a idol . the month of courtship have waste : it be very last hour be be number . there be no put off the day that advance -- the bridal day ; and all preparations for its arrival be complete . I , at least , have nothing more to do : there be my trunk , pack , lock , cord , range in a row along the wall of my little chamber ; to - morrow , at this time , they would be far on they road to : and so should I ( ) , -- or rather , not I , but one , a person whom as yet I know not . the card of address alone remain to nail on : they lay , four little square , in the drawer . have himself write the direction , " . , -- , , " on each : I could not persuade myself to affix they , or to have they affix . ! she do not exist : she would not be bear till to - morrow , some time after eight o'clock a.m. ; and I would wait to be assure she have come into the world alive before I assign to she all that property . it be enough that in yonder closet , opposite my dressing - table , garment say to be hers have already displace my black stuff Lowood frock and straw bonnet : for not to I appertain that suit of wedding raiment ; the pearl - colou robe , the vapoury veil pendent from the usurped portmanteau . I shut the closet to conceal the strange , wraith - like apparel it contain ; which , at this evening hour -- nine o'clock -- give out certainly a most ghostly shimmer through the shadow of my apartment . " I will leave you by yourself , white dream , " I say . " I be feverish : I hear the wind blow : I will go out of door and feel it . " it be not only the hurry of preparation that make I feverish ; not only the anticipation of the great change -- the new life which be to commence to - morrow : both these circumstance have they share , doubtless , in producing that restless , excited mood which hurrie I forth at this late hour into the darkening grounds : but a third cause influence my mind more than they . I have at heart a strange and anxious thought . something have happen which i could not comprehend ; no one knew of or have see the event but myself : it have take place the preceding night . that night be absent from home ; nor be he yet return : business have call he to a small estate of two or three farm he possess thirty mile off -- business it be requisite he should settle in person , previous to he meditate departure from . I wait now he return ; eager to disburthen my mind , and to seek of he the solution of the enigma that perplex I . stay till he come , reader ; and , when I disclose my secret to he , you shall share the confidence . I seek the orchard , drive to its shelter by the wind , which all day have blow strong and full from the south , without , however , bring a speck of rain . instead of subside as night draw on , it seem to augment its rush and deepen its roar : the tree blow steadfastly one way , never writh round , and scarcely toss back they bough once in a hour ; so continuous be the strain bend they branchy head northward -- the cloud drift from pole to pole , fast follow , mass on mass : no glimpse of blue sky have be visible that day . it be not without a certain wild pleasure I run before the wind , deliver my trouble of mind to the measureless air - torrent thundering through space . Descend the laurel walk , I face the wreck of the chestnut - tree ; it stand up black and rive : the trunk , split down the centre , gas ghastly . the cloven halves be not break from each other , for the firm base and strong root keep they unsunder below ; though community of vitality be destroy -- the sap could flow no more : they great bough on each side be dead , and next winter 's tempest would be sure to fall one or both to earth : as yet , however , they might be say to form one tree -- a ruin , but a entire ruin . " you do right to hold fast to
to each other , " I say : as if the monster - splinter be live thing , and could hear I . " I think , scath as you look , and charr and scorch , there must be a little sense of life in you yet , rise out of that adhesion at the faithful , honest root : you will never have green leave more -- never more see bird make nests and singe idyl in you bough ; the time of pleasure and love be over with you : but you be not desolate : each of you have a comrade to sympathise with he in he decay . " as I look up at they , the moon appear momentarily in that part of the sky which fill they fissure ; she disk be blood - red and half overcast ; she seem to throw on I one bewilder , dreary glance , and bury herself again instantly in the deep drift of cloud . the wind fall , for a second , round ; but far away over wood and water , pour a wild , melancholy wail : it be sad to listen to , and I run off again . here and there I stray through the orchard , gather up the apple with which the grass round the tree root be thickly strewn ; then I employ myself in divide the ripe from the unripe ; I carry they into the house and put they away in the store - room . then I repair to the library to ascertain whether the fire be light , for , though summer , I know on such a gloomy evening would like to see a cheerful hearth when he come in : yes , the fire have be kindle some time , and burn well . I place he arm - chair by the chimney - corner : I wheel the table near it : I let down the curtain , and have the candle bring in ready for lighting . more restless than ever , when I have complete these arrangement I could not sit still , nor even remain in the house : a little time - piece in the room and the old clock in the hall simultaneously strike ten . " how late it grow ! " I say . " I will run down to the gate : it be moonlight at interval ; I can see a good way on the road . he may be come now , and to meet he will save some minute of suspense . " the wind roar high in the great tree which embower the gate ; but the road as far as I could see , to the right hand and the left , be all still and solitary : save for the shadows of cloud cross it at interval as the moon look out , it be but a long pale line , unvaried by one move speck . a puerile tear dim my eye while I look -- a tear of disappointment and impatience ; asham of it , I wip it away . I linger ; the moon shut herself wholly within she chamber , and drew close she curtain of dense cloud : the night grow dark ; rain come drive fast on the gale . " I wish he would come ! I wish he would come ! " I exclaim , seize with hypochondriac foreboding . I have expect he arrival before tea ; now it be dark : what could keep he ? have a accident happen ? the event of last night again recur to I . I interpret it as a warning of disaster . I fear my hope be too bright to be realise ; and I have enjoy so much bliss lately that I imagine my fortune have pass its meridian , and must now decline . " well , I can not return to the house , " I think ; " I can not sit by the fireside , while he be abroad in inclement weather : better tire my limb than strain my heart ; I will go forward and meet he . " I set out ; I walk fast , but not far : ere I have measure a quarter of a mile , I hear the tramp of hoof ; a horseman come on , full gallop ; a dog run by he side . away with evil presentiment ! it be he : here he be , mount on , follow by . he see I ; for the moon have open a blue field in the sky , and ride in it watery bright : he take he hat off , and wave it round he head . I now run to meet he . " there ! " he exclaim , as he stretch out he hand and bend from the saddle : " you can not do without I , that be evident . step on my boot - toe ; give I both hand : mount ! " I obey : joy make I agile : I spring up before he . a hearty kissing I get for a welcome , and some boastful triumph , which I swallow as well as I could . he check himself in he exultation to demand , " but be there anythe the matter , , that you come to meet I at such a hour ? be there anything wrong ? " " no , but I think you would never come . I could not bear to wait in the house for you , especially with this rain and wind . " " rain and wind , indeed ! yes , you be dripp like a mermaid ; pull my cloak round you : but I think you be
be feverish , : both you cheek and hand be burn hot . I ask again , be there anything the matter ? " nothing now ; I be neither afraid nor unhappy . " " then you have be both ? " " Rather : but I will tell you all about it by - and - bye , sir ; and I daresay you will only laugh at I for my pain . " " I will laugh at you heartily when to - morrow be past ; till then I dare not : my prize be not certain . this be you , who have be as slippery as a eel this last month , and as thorny as a briar - rose ? I could not lay a finger anywhere but I be prick ; and now I seem to have gather up a stray lamb in my arm . you wandere out of the fold to seek you shepherd , do you , ? " " I want you : but do not boast . here we be at : now let I get down . " he land I on the pavement . as take he horse , and he follow I into the hall , he tell I to make haste and put something dry on , and then return to he in the library ; and he stop I , as i make for the staircase , to extort a promise that I would not be long : nor be I long ; in five minute I rejoin he . I find he at supper . " take a seat and bear I company , : please , it be the last meal but one you will eat at for a long time . " I sit down near he , but tell he I could not eat . " be it because you have the prospect of a journey before you , ? be it the thought of go to that take away you appetite ? " " I can not see my prospect clearly to - night , sir ; and I hardly know what thought I have in my head . everything in life seem unreal . " " except I : I be substantial enough -- touch I . " " you , sir , be the most phantom - like of all : you be a mere dream . " he hold out he hand , laugh . " be that a dream ? " say he , place it close to my eye . he have a rounded , muscular , and vigorous hand , as well as a long , strong arm . " yes ; though I touch it , it be a dream , " say I , as I put it down from before my face . " , have you finish supper ? " " yes , . " I ring the bell and order away the tray . when we be again alone , I stir the fire , and then take a low seat at my master 's knee . " it be near midnight , " I say . " yes : but remember , , you promise to wake with I the night before my wedding . " " I do ; and I will keep my promise , for a hour or two at least : I have no wish to go to bed . " " be all you arrangement complete ? " " all , sir . " " and on my part likewise , " he return , " I have settle everything ; and we shall leave to - morrow , within half - a - hour after we return from church . " " very well , sir . " " with what a extraordinary smile you uttere that word -- ' very well , ' ! what a bright spot of colour you have on each cheek ! and how strangely you eye glitter ! be you well ? " " I believe I be . " " ! what be the matter ? tell I what you feel . " " I could not , sir : no word could tell you what I feel . I wish this present hour would never end : who know with what fate the next may come charge ? " " this be , . you have be over-excit , or over-fatigued . " " do you , sir , feel calm and happy ? " " ? -- no : but happy -- to the heart 's core . " I look up at he to read the sign of bliss in he face : it be ardent and flushed . " give I you confidence , , " he say : " relieve you mind of any weight that oppress it , by impart it to I . what do you fear ?- - that I shall not prove a good husband ? " " it be the idea farthest from my thought . " " be you apprehensive of the new sphere you be about to enter ? -- of the new life into which you be pass ? " " no . " " you puzzle I , : you look and tone of sorrowful audacity perplex and pain I . I want a explanation . " " then , sir , listen . you be from home last night ? " " I be : I know that ; and you hint a while ago at something which have happene in my absence :- nothing , probably , of consequence ; but , in short , it have disturb you . let I hear it . have say something , perhaps ? or you have overhear the servants talk ? -- you sensitive self - respect have be
be wound ? " " no , sir . " it struck twelve -- I wait till the time - piece have conclude its silver chime , and the clock its hoarse , vibrat stroke , and then I proceed . " all day yesterday I be very busy , and very happy in my ceaseless bustle ; for I be not , as you seem to think , trouble by any haunt fear about the new sphere , et cetera : I think it a glorious thing to have the hope of live with you , because I love you . no , sir , do not caress I now -- let I talk undisturbed . yesterday I trust well in , and believe that event be work together for you good and mine : it be a fine day , if you recollect -- the calmness of the air and sky forbade apprehension respect you safety or comfort on you journey . I walk a little while on the pavement after tea , think of you ; and I beheld you in imagination so near I , I scarcely miss you actual presence . I think of the life that lay before I -- you life , sir -- a existence more expansive and stirr than my own : as much more so as the depth of the sea to which the brook run be than the shallow of its own strait channel . I wonder why moralist call this world a dreary wilderness : for I it blossom like a rose . just at sunset , the air turn cold and the sky cloudy : I go in , call I upstairs to look at my wedding - dress , which they have just bring ; and under it in the box I find you present -- the veil which , in you princely extravagance , you send for from : resolve , I suppose , since I would not have jewel , to cheat I into accept something as costly . I smile as I unfold it , and devise how I would tease you about you aristocratic taste , and you effort to masque you plebeian bride in the attribute of a peeress . I though how I would carry down to you the square of unembroidered blond I have myself prepare as a covering for my low - born head , and ask if that be not good enough for a woman who could bring she husband neither fortune , beauty , nor connection . I see plainly how you would look ; and hear you impetuous republican answer , and you haughty disavowal of any necessity on you part to augment you wealth , or elevate you standing , by marry either a purse or a coronet . " " how well you read I , you witch ! " interpose : " but what do you find in the veil besides its embroidery ? do you find poison , or a dagger , that you look so mournful now ? " " no , no , sir ; besides the delicacy and richness of the fabric , I find nothing save 's pride ; and that do not scare I , because I be use to the sight of the demon . but , sir , as it grow dark , the wind rise : it blow yesterday evening , not as it blow now -- wild and high -- but ' with a sullen , moan sound ' far more eerie . I wish you be at home . I come into this room , and the sight of the empty chair and fireless hearth chill I . for some time after I go to bed , I could not sleep -- a sense of anxious excitement distress I . the gale still rise , seem to my ear to muffle a mournful under - sound ; whether in the house or abroad I could not at first tell , but it recur , doubtful yet doleful at every lull ; at last i make out it must be some dog how at a distance . I be glad when it cease . on sleeping , I continue in dream the idea of a dark and gusty night . I continue also the wish to be with you , and experience a strange , regretful consciousness of some barrier divide we . during all my first sleep , I be follow the windings of a unknown road ; total obscurity environ I ; rain pelt I ; I be burdene with the charge of a little child : a very small creature , too young and feeble to walk , and which shiver in my cold arm , and wail piteously in my ear . I think , sir , that you be on the road a long way before I ; and I strain every nerve to overtake you , and make effort on effort to utter you name and entreat you to stop -- but my movement be fetter , and my voice still die away inarticulate ; while you , I feel , withdraw farther and farther every moment . " " and these dream weigh on you spirits now , , when I be close to you ? little nervous subject ! forget visionary woe , and think only of real happiness ! you say you love I , : yes -- I will not forget that ; and you can not deny it . those word do not die inarticulate on you lip . I hear they clear and soft : a thought too solemn perhaps , but sweet as music -- 'I think it be a glorious thing to have the hope of live with you , , because I love you . ' do you love I , ? -- repeat it . " "
" I do , sir -- I do , with my whole heart . " " well , " he say , after some minute ' silence , " it be strange ; but that sentence have penetrat my breast painfully . why ? I think because you say it with such a earnest , religious energy , and because you upward gaze at I now be the very sublime of faith , truth , and devotion : it be too much as if some spirit be near I . look wick , : as you know well how to look : coin one of you wild , shy , provoke smile ; tell I you hate I -- tease I , vex I ; do anything but move I : I would rather be incense than sadden . " " I will tease you and vex you to you heart 's content , when I have finish my tale : but hear I to the end . " " I think , , you have tell I all . I think I have find the source of you melancholy in a dream . " I shook my head . " what ! be there more ? but I will not believe it to be anything important . I warn you of incredulity beforehand . go on . " the disquietude of he air , the somewhat apprehensive impatience of he manner , surprise I : but I proceed . " I dreamt another dream , sir : that be a dreary ruin , the retreat of bat and owl . I think that of all the stately front nothing remain but a shell - like wall , very high and very fragile - look . I wander , on a moonlight night , through the grass - grow enclosure within : here I stumble over a marble hearth , and there over a fallen fragment of cornice . wrap up in a shawl , I still carry the unknown little child : I might not lay it down anywhere , however tired be my arm -- however much its weight imped my progress , I must retain it . I hear the gallop of a horse at a distance on the road ; I be sure it be you ; and you be depart for many year and for a distant country . I climb the thing wall with frantic perilous haste , eager to catch one glimpse of you from the top : the stone roll from under my foot , the ivy branch I grasp give way , the child clung round my neck in terror , and almost strangle I ; at last I gain the summit . I see you like a speck on a white track , lessen every moment . the blast blew so strong I could not stand . I sit down on the narrow ledge ; I hush the scared infant in my lap : you turn a angle of the road : I bend forward to take a last look ; the wall crumble ; I be shake ; the child roll from my knee , I lose my balance , fell , and wake . " " now , , that be all . " " all the preface , sir ; the tale be yet to come . on waking , a gleam dazzl my eye ; I think -- oh , it be daylight ! but I be mistaken ; it be only candlelight . , I suppose , have come in . there be a light in the dressing - table , and the door of the closet , where , before go to be , I have hng my wedding - dress and veil , stood open ; I hear a rustling there . I ask , ' , what be you do ? ' no one answer ; but a form emerge from the closet ; it take the light , hold it aloft , and survey the garment pendent from the portmanteau . ' ! ! ' I again cry : and still it be silent . I have risen up in bed , I bend forward : first surprise , then bewilderment , come over I ; and then my blood crept cold through my vein . , this be not , it be not , it be not : it be not -- no , I be sure of it , and be still -- it be not even that strange woman , . " " it must have be one of they , " interrupt my master . " no , sir , I solemnly assure you to the contrary . the shape stand before I have never cross my eye within the precinct of before ; the height , the contour be new to I . " " describe it , . " " it seem , sir , a woman , tall and large , with thick and dark hair hang long down she back . I know not what dress she have on : it be white and straight ; but whether gown , sheet , or shroud , I can not tell . " " do you see she face ? " " not at first . but presently she take my veil from it be place ; she hold it up , gaze at it long , and then she throw it over she own head , and turn to the mirror . at that moment I see the reflection of the visage and feature quite distinctly in the dark oblong glass . " " and how be they ? " " Fearful and ghastly to I -- oh , sir , I never see a face like it ! it be a discoloured face -- it be a savage face . I wish I could
could forget the roll of the red eye and the fearful blacken inflation of the lineament ! " " Ghost be usually pale , . " " this , sir , be purple : the lip be swelled and dark ; the brow furrow : the black eyebrow widely raise over the bloodshot eye . shall I tell you of what it remind I ? " " you may . " " of the foul german spectre -- the . " " ah ! -- what do it do ? " " , it remove my veil from it be gaunt head , rent it in two part , and flinge both on the floor , trample on they . " " afterwards ? " " it draw aside the window - curtain and look out ; perhaps it see dawn approaching , for , take the candle , it retreat to the door . just at my bedside , the figure stop : the fiery eye glar upon I -- she thrust up she candle close to my face , and extinguish it under my eye . I be aware she lurid visage flam over mine , and I lose consciousness : for the second time in my life -- only the second time -- I become insensible from terror . " " who be with you when you revive ? " " no one , sir , but the broad day . I rise , bath my head and face in water , drank a long dratch ; feel that though enfeeble I be not ill , and determine that to none but you would I impart this vision . now , sir , tell I who and what that woman be ? " " the creature of a over -stimulated brain ; that be certain . I must be careful of you , my treasure : nerve like yours be not make for rough handling . " " sir , depend on it , my nerve be not in fault ; the thing be real : the transaction actually take place . " " and you previous dream , be they real too ? be a ruin ? be I sever from you by insuperable obstacle ? be I leave you without a tear -- without a kiss -- without a word ? " " not yet . " " be I about to do it ? why , the day be already commence which be to bind we indissolubly ; and when we be once united , there shall be no recurrence of these mental terror : I guarantee that . " " mental terror , sir ! I wish I could believe they to be only such : I wish it more now than ever ; since even you can not explain to I the mystery of that awful visitant . " " and since I can not do it , , it must have be unreal . " " but , sir , when I say so to myself on rise this morning , and when I look round the room to gather courage and comfort from the cheerful aspect of each familiar object in full daylight , there -- on the carpet -- I see what give the distinct lie to my hypothesis , -- the veil , tear from top to bottom in two halve ! " I feel start and shudder ; he hastily fling he arm round I . " thank ! " he exclaim , " that if anything malignant do come near you last night , it be only the veil that be harm . oh , to think what might have happen ! " he draw he breath short , and strain I so close to he , I could scarcely pant . after some minute ' silence , he continue , cheerily - " now , , I will explain to you all about it . it be half dream , half reality . a woman do , I doubt not , enter you room : and that woman be -- must have be -- . you call she a strange be yourself : from all you know , you have reason so to call she -- what do she do to I ? what to ? in a state between sleeping and wake , you notice she entrance and she action ; but feverish , almost delirious as you be , you ascribe to she a goblin appearance different from she own : the long dishevell hair , the swelled black face , the exaggerated stature , be figment of imagination ; result of nightmare : the spiteful tearing of the veil be real : and it be like she . I see you would ask why I keep such a woman in my house : when we have be marry a year and a day , I will tell you ; but not now . be you satisfie , ? do you accept my solution of the mystery ? " I reflect , and in truth it appear to I the only possible one : satisfied I be not , but to please he I endeavoure to appear so -- relieve , I certainly do feel ; so I answer he with a contente smile . and now , as it be long past one , I prepare to leave he . " do not Sophie sleep with in the nursery ? " he ask , as I light my candle . " yes , sir . " " and there be room enough in 's little be for you . you must share it with she to - night , : it be no wonder that the incident you have relate should make you nervous , and I would rather you do not sleep alone : promise I to go to the nursery .
. " " I shall be very glad to do so , sir . " " and fasten the door securely on the inside . wake when you go upstairs , under pretence of request she to rouse you in good time to - morrow ; for you must be dress and have finish breakfast before eight . and now , no more sombre thought : chase dull care away , . do not you hear to what soft whisper the wind have fall ? and there be no more beating of rain against the window - pane : look here " ( he lift up the curtain ) -- " it be a lovely night ! " it be . half heaven be pure and stainless : the cloud , now troo before the wind , which have shift to the west , be file off eastward in long , silvere column . the moon shone peacefully . " well , " say , ga inquiringly into my eye , " how be my now ? " " the night be serene , sir ; and so be I . " " and you will not dream of separation and sorrow to - night ; but of happy love and blissful union . " this prediction be but half fulfil : I do not indeed dream of sorrow , but as little do I dream of joy ; for I never sleep at all . with little Adele in my arm , I watch the slumber of childhood -- so tranquil , so passionless , so innocent -- and wait for the come day : all my life be awake and astir in my frame : and as soon as the sun rose I rise too . I remember Adele clung to I as I leave she : I remember I kiss she as I loose she little hand from my neck ; and I cry over she with strange emotion , and quit she because I fear my sob would break she still sound repose . she seem the emblem of my past life ; and he I be now to array myself to meet , the dread , but adore , type of my unknown future day . come at seven to dress I : she be very long indeed in accomplish she task ; so long that , grow , I suppose , impatient of my delay , send up to ask why I do not come . she be just fasten my veil ( the plain square of blond after all ) to my hair with a brooch ; I hurrie from under she hand as soon as I could . " stop ! " she cry in . " look at yourself in the mirror : you have not take one peep . " so I turn at the door : I see a robed and veil figure , so unlike my usual self that it see almost the image of a stranger . " ! " call a voice , and I hasten down . I be receive at the foot of the stair by . " ! " he say , " my brain be on fire with impatience , and you tarry so long ! " he take I into the dining - room , survey I keenly all over , pronounce I " fair as a lily , and not only the pride of he life , but the desire of he eye , " and then tell I he would give I but ten minute to eat some breakfast , he ring the bell . one of he lately hire servants , a footman , answer it . " be get the carriage ready ? " " yes , sir . " " be the luggage bring down ? " " they be bring it down , sir . " " go you to the church : see if ( the clergyman ) and the clerk be there : return and tell I . " the church , as the reader know , be but just beyond the gate ; the footman soon return . " be in the vestry , sir , put on he surplice . " " and the carriage ? " " the horse be harness . " " we shall not want it to go to church ; but it must be ready the moment we return : all the box and luggage arrange and strap on , and the coachman in he seat . " " yes , sir . " " , be you ready ? " I rise . there be no groomsman , no bridesmaid , no relative to wait for or marshal : none but and I . stand in the hall as we pass . I would afain have speak to she , but my hand be hold by a grasp of iron : I be hurry along by a stride I could hardly follow ; and to look at 's face be to feel that not a second of delay would be tolerate for any purpose . I wonder what other bridegroom ever look as he do -- so bent up to a purpose , so grimly resolute : or who , under such steadfast brows , ever reveal such flaming and flash eye . I know not whether the day be fair or foul ; in descende the drive , I gaze neither on sky nor earth : my heart be with my eye ; and both seem migrate into 's frame . I want to see the invisible thing on which , as we go along , he appear to fasten a glance fierce and fell . I want to feel the thought whose force he seem breasting and resist . at the churchyard wicket he stop : he discover I be quite out of breath
breath . " be I cruel in my love ? " he say . " delay a instant : lean on I , . " and now I can recall the picture of the grey old house of rise calm before I , of a rook wheel round the steeple , of a ruddy morning sky beyond . I remember something , too , of the green grave - mounds ; and I have not forget , either , two figure of strangers stray amongst the low hillock and read the mementoe grave on the few mossy head - stone . I notice they , because , as they see we , they pass round to the back of the church ; and I doubt not they be go to enter by the side - aisle door and witness the ceremony . by they be not observ ; he be earnestly look at my face from which the blood have , I daresay , momentarily fle : for I feel my forehead dewy , and my cheek and lip cold . when I rally , which I soon do , he walk gently with I up the path to the porch . we enter the quiet and humble temple ; the priest wait in he white surplice at the lowly altar , the clerk beside he . all be still : two shadow only move in a remote corner . my conjecture have be correct : the stranger have slip in before we , and they now stand by the vault of the Rochester , they back towards we , view through the rail the old time - stain marble tomb , where a kneeling angel guard the remains of , slain at in the time of the civil wars , and of , he wife . we place be take at the communion rail . hear a cautious step behind I , I glance over my shoulder : one of the stranger -- a gentleman , evidently -- be advanc up the chancel . the service begin . the explanation of the intent of matrimony be go through ; and then the clergyman come a step further forward , and , bend slightly towards , go on . " I require and charge you both ( as ye will answer at the dreadful day of judgment , when the secret of all heart shall be disclose ) , that if either of you know any impediment why ye may not lawfully be join together in matrimony , ye do now confess it ; for be ye well assure that so many as be couple together otherwise than 's doth allow , be not join together by , neither be they matrimony lawful . " he pause , as the custom be . when be the pause after that sentence ever break by reply ? not , perhaps , once in a hundred year . and the clergyman , who have not lift he eye from he book , and have hold he breath but for a moment , be proceed : he hand be already stretch towards , as he lip unclosed to ask , " will thou have this woman for thy wedded wife ? " -- when a distinct and near voice say - " the marriage can not go on : I declare the existence of a impediment . " the clergyman look up at the speaker and stood mute ; the clerk do the same ; move slightly , as if a earthquake have roll under he foot : take a firmer footing , and not turn he head or eye , he say , " proceed . " profound silence fall when he have utter that word , with deep but low intonation . presently say - " I can not proceed without some investigation into what have be assert , and evidence of its truth or falsehood . " " the ceremony be quite break off , " subjoin the voice behind we . " I be in a condition to prove my allegation : a insuperable impediment to this marriage exist . " hear , but heed not : he stand stubborn and rigid , make no movement but to possess himself of my hand . what a hot and strong grasp he have ! and how like quarried marble be he pale , firm , massive front at this moment ! how he eye shone , still watchful , and yet wild beneath ! seem at a loss . " what be the nature of the impediment ? " he ask . " perhaps it may be get over -- explain away ? " " , " be the answer . " I have call it insuperable , and I speak advisedly . " the speaker come forward and lean on the rail . he continue , utter each word distinctly , calmly , steadily , but not loudly - " it simply consist in the existence of a previous marriage . have a wife now liive . " my nerf vibrate to those low - spoken word as they have never vibrate to thunder -- my blood feel they subtle violence as it have never feel frost or fire ; but I be collect , and in no danger of swooning . I look at : I make he look at I . he whole face be colourless rock : he eye be both spark and flint . he disavow nothing : he seem as if he would defy all thing . without speak , without smiling , without seem to recognise in I a human being , he only twin my waist with he arm and rivet I to he side . " who be you ? " he ask of the intruder . " my name be , a solicitor of -- , . " " and you would
would thrust on I a wife ? " " I would remind you of you lady 's existence , sir , which the law recognise , if you do not . " " favour I with a account of she -- with she name , she parentage , she place of abode . " " certainly . " calmly take a paper from he pocket , and read out in a sort of official , nasal voice :- " affirm and can prove that on the 20th of -- ( a date of fifteen year back ) , , of , in the county of -, and of , in - shire , , be marry to my sister , , daughter of , merchant , and of Antoinet of he wife , a Creole , at -- church , spanish town , . the record of the marriage will be find in the register of that church -- a copy of it be now in my possession . , . ' " " that -- if a genuine document -- may prove I have be marry , but it do not prove that the woman mention therein as my wife be still liive . " " she be live three month ago , " return the lawyer . " how do you know ? " " I have a witness to the fact , whose testimony even you , sir , will scarcely controvert . " " produce he -- or go to hell . " " I will produce he first -- he be on the spot . , have the goodness to step forward . " , on hear the name , set he tooth ; he experience , too , a sort of strong convulsive quiver ; near to he as I be , I feel the spasmodic movement of fury or despair run through he frame . the second stranger , who have hitherto linger in the background , now draw near ; a pale face look over the solicitor 's shoulder -- yes , it be himself . turn and glar at he . he eye , as I have often say , be a black eye : it have now a tawny , nay , a bloody light in its gloom ; and he face flush -- olive cheek and hueless forehead receive a glow as from spreading , ascend heart - fire : and he stir , lift he strong arm -- he could have struck , dash he on the church - floor , shock by blow the breath from he body -- but shrank away , and cry faintly , " ! " fall cool on -- he passion di as if a blight have shrivell it up : he only ask -- " what have you to say ? " a inaudible reply escape 's white lip . " the be in it if you can not answer distinctly . I again demand , what have you to say ? " " sir -- sir , " interrupt the clergyman , " do not forget you be in a sacred place . " then address , he inquire gently , " be you aware , sir , whether or not this gentleman 's wife be still liive ? " " courage , " urge the lawyer , -- " speak out . " " she be now live at , " say , in more articulate tone : " I see she there last . I be she brother . " " at ! " ejaculate the clergyman . " impossible ! I be a old resident in this neighbourhood , sir , and I never hear of a at . " I see a grim smile contort 's lip , and he mutter - " no , by ! I take care that none should hear of it -- or of she under that name . " he muse -- for ten minute he hold counsel with himself : he form he resolve , and announce it - " enough ! all shall bolt out at once , like the bullet from the barrel . Wood , close you book and take off you surplice ; ( to the clerk ) , leave the church : there will be no wedding to - day . " the man obey . continue , hardily and recklessly : " be a ugly word ! -- I mean , however , to be a bigamist ; but fate have out - manoeuvre I , or have check I , -- perhaps the last . I be little better than a devil at this moment ; and , as my pastor there would tell I , deserve no doubt the sternest judgment of , even to the quenchless fire and deathless worm . gentlemen , my plan be break up :- what this lawyer and he client say be true : I have be marry , and the woman to whom I be marry life ! you say you never hear of a Rochester at the house up , ; but I daresay you have many a time inclin you ear to gossip about the mysterious lunatic keep there under watch and ward . some have whisper to you that she be my bastard half - sister : some , my cast - off mistress . I now inform you that she be my wife , whom I marry fifteen year ago , -- by name ; sister of this resolute personage , who be now , with he quivering limb and white cheek , show you what a stout heart man may bear . Cheer up , ! -- never fear I ! -- I ' almost as soon strike a woman as you . be mad ; and she come of a mad family ; idiot and maniac through three generation
generation ! she mother , the , be both a madwoman and a drunkard ! -- as I find out after I have we the daughter : for they be silent on family secret before . , like a dutiful child , copy she parent in both point . I have a charming partner -- pure , wise , modest : you can fancy I be a happy man . I go through rich scene ! oh ! my experience have be heavenly , if you only know it ! but I owe you no further explanation . , , , I invite you all to come up to the house and visit 's patient , and my wife ! you shall see what sort of a being I be cheat into espousing , and judge whether or not I have a right to break the compact , and seek sympathy with something at least human . this girl , " he continue , look at I , " know no more than you , , of the disgusting secret : she think all be fair and legal and never dreamt she be go to be entrap into a feigned union with a defraude wretch , already bound to a bad , mad , and embrute partner ! come all of you -- follow ! " still hold I fast , he leave the church : the three gentleman come after . at the front door of the hall we find the carriage . " take it back to the coach - house , , " say coolly ; " it will not be want to - day . " at we entrance , , , , , advance to meet and greet we . " to the right - about -- every soul ! " cry the master ; " away with you congratulation ! who want they ? not I ! -- they be fifteen year too late ! " he pass on and ascend the stair , still hold my hand , and still beckon the gentleman to follow he , which they do . we mount the first staircase , pass up the gallery , proceed to the third storey : the low , black door , open by 's master - key , admit we to the tapestried room , with its great bed and its pictorial cabinet . " you know this place , , " say we guide ; " she bit and stab you here . " he lift the hanging from the wall , uncover the second door : this , too , he open . in a room without a window , there burn a fire guard by a high and strong fender , and a lamp suspend from the ceiling by a chain . Poole bend over the fire , apparently cook something in a saucepan . in the deep shade , at the farther end of the room , a figure run backward and forward . what it be , whether beast or human being , one could not , at first sight , tell : it grovell , seemingly , on all four ; it snatch and grow like some strange wild animal : but it be cover with clothing , and a quantity of dark , grizzl hair , wild as a mane , hide it be head and face . " good - morrow , ! " say . " how be you ? and how be you charge to - day ? " " we be tolerable , sir , I thank you , " reply , lift the boiling mess carefully on to the hob : " rather snappish , but not ' rageous . " a fierce cry seem to give the lie to she favourable report : the clothed hyeto rise up , and stand tall on its hind - foot . " ah ! sir , she see you ! " exclaim : " you would better not stay . " " only a few moment , : you must allow I a few moment . " " take care then , sir ! -- for 's sake , take care ! " the maniac bellow : she part she shaggy lock from she visage , and gaze wildly at she visitor . I recognise well that purple face , -- those bloate feature . advance . " keep out of the way , " say , thrust she aside : " she have no knife now , I suppose , and I be on my guard . " " one never know what she have , sir : she be so cunning : it be not in mortal discretion to fathom she craft . " " we have better leave she , " whisper . " go to the devil ! " be he brother - in - law 's recommendation . " 'Ware ! " cry . the three gentleman retreate simultaneously . fling I behind he : the lunatic sprang and grapple he throat viciously , and lay she tooth to he cheek : they struggle . she be a big woman , in stature almost equall she husband , and corpulent besides : she show virile force in the contest -- more than once she almost throttle he , athletic as he be . he could have settle she with a well - plan blow ; but he would not strike : he would only wrestle . at last he master she arm ; give he a cord , and he pinion they behind she : with more rope , which be at hand , he bound she to a chair . the operation be perform amidst the fiercest yell and the most convulsive plunge . then turn to the spectator : he look at they with a smile both acrid and desolate . " that be
be my , " say he . " be the sole conjugal embrace I be ever to know -- such be the endearment which be to solace my leisure hour ! and this be what I wish to have " ( lay he hand on my shoulder ) : " this young girl , who stand so grave and quiet at the mouth of hell , look collectedly at the gambol of a demon , I want she just as a change after that fierce ragout . and , look at the difference ! compare these clear eye with the red ball yonder -- this face with that mask -- this form with that bulk ; then judge I , priest of the gospel and man of the law , and remember with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judge ! off with you now . I must shut up my prize . " we all withdrew . stay a moment behind we , to give some further order to . the solicitor address I as he descende the stair . " you , madam , " say he , " be clear from all blame : you uncle will be glad to hear it -- if , indeed , he should be still live -- when return to . " " my uncle ! what of he ? do you know he ? " " do . have be the Funchal correspondent of he house for some year . when you uncle receive you letter intimat the contemplate union between yourself and , , who be stay at to recruit he health , on he way back to , happen to be with he . mention the intelligence ; for he know that my client here be acquaint with a gentleman of the name of . , astonish and distress as you may suppose , reveal the real state of matter . you uncle , I be sorry to say , be now on a sick bed ; from which , consider the nature of he disease -- decline -- and the stage it have reach , it be unlikely he will ever rise . he could not then hasten to himself , to extricate you from the snare into which you have fall , but he implor to lose no time in take step to prevent the false marriage . he refer he to I for assistance . I use all despatch , and be thankful I be not too late : as you , doubtless , must be also . be I not morally certain that you uncle will be dead ere you reach , I would advise you to accompany back ; but as it be , I think you have better remain in till you can hear further , either from or of . have we anything else to stay for ? " he inquire of . " no , no -- let we be go , " be the anxious reply ; and without wait to take leave of , they make they exit at the hall door . the clergyman stay to exchange a few sentence , either of admonition or reproof , with he haughty parishioner ; this duty do , he too depart . I hear he go as I stand at the half - open door of my own room , to which i have now withdrawn . the house clear , I shut myself in , fasten the bolt that none might intrude , and proceed -- not to weep , not to mourn , I be yet too calm for that , but -- mechanically to take off the wedding dress , and replace it by the stuff gown I have worn yesterday , as I think , for the last time . I then sit down : I feel weak and tired . I lean my arm on a table , and my head drop on they . and now I think : till now I have only heard , see , move -- follow up and down where I be lead or drag -- watch event rush on event , disclosure open beyond disclosure : but now , I think . the morning have be a quiet morning enough -- all except the brief scene with the lunatic : the transaction in the church have not be noisy ; there be no explosion of passion , no loud altercation , no dispute , no defiance or challenge , no tear , no sob : a few word have be speak , a calmly pronounced objection to the marriage make ; some stern , short question put by ; answer , explanations give , evidence adduce ; a open admission of the truth have be utter by my master ; then the living proof have be see ; the intruder be go , and all be over . I be in my own room as usual -- just myself , without obvious change : nothing have smite I , or scath I , or maim I . and yet where be the of yesterday ? -- where be she life ? -- where be she prospect ? , who have be a ardent , expectant woman -- almost a bride , be a cold , solitary girl again : she life be pale ; she prospect be desolate . a frost have come at midsummer ; a white storm have whir over ; glaze the ripe apple , drift crush the blowing rose ; on hayfield and cornfield lay a frozen shroud : lane which last night blush full of flower , to - day be pathless with untrodden snow ; and the wood , which twelve hour since wave leafy and flagrant as grove between the tropic , now spread , waste , wild , and white as pine - forests in . my hope be
be all dead -- struck with a subtle doom , such as , in one night , fall on all the first - bear in the land of . I look on my cherished wish , yesterday so bloom and glow ; they lay stark , chill , livid corpse that could never revive . I look at my love : that feel which be my master 's -- which he have create ; it shiver in my heart , like a suffer child in a cold cradle ; sickness and anguish have seize it ; it could not seek 's arm -- it could not derive warmth from he breast . oh , never more could it turn to he ; for faith be blighted -- confidence destroy ! be not to I what he have be ; for he be not what I have think he . I would not ascribe vice to he ; I would not say he have betraye I ; but the attribute of stainless truth be go from he idea , and from he presence I must go : that I perceive well . when -- how -- whither , I could not yet discern ; but he himself , I doubt not , would hurry I from . real affection , it seem , he could not have for I ; it have be only fitful passion : that be balk ; he would want I no more . I should fear even to cross he path now : my view must be hateful to he . oh , how blind have be my eyes ! how weak my conduct ! my eye be cover and close : eddying darkness seem to swim round I , and reflection come in as black and confuse a flow . self -abandoned , relaxed , and effortless , I seem to have lay I down in the dry - up bed of a great river ; I hear a flood loose in remote mountain , and feel the torrent come : to rise I have no will , to flee I have no strength . I lay faint , long to be dead . one idea only still throb life - like within I -- a remembrance of : it beget a unuttered prayer : these word go wander up and down in my rayless mind , as something that should be whisper , but no energy be find to express they - " be not far from I , for trouble be near : there be none to help . " it be near : and as I have lift no petition to to avert it -- as I have neither join my hand , nor bend my knee , nor move my lip -- it come : in full heavy sw the torrent pour over I . the whole consciousness of my life lorn , my love lose , my hope quench , my faith death - struck , sway full and mighty above I in one sullen mass . that bitter hour can not be describe : in truth , " the water come into my soul ; I sank in deep mire : I feel no standing ; I come into deep water ; the flood overflow I . " some time in the afternoon I raise my head , and look round and see the western sun gild the sign of its decline on the wall , I ask , " what be I to do ? " but the answer my mind give -- " leave at once " -- be so prompt , so dread , that I stop my ear . I say I could not bear such word now . " that I be not 's bride be the least part of my woe , " I allege : " that I have wake out of most glorious dream , and find they all void and vain , be a horror I could bear and master ; but that I must leave he decidedly , instantly , entirely , be intolerable . I can not do it . " but , then , a voice within I averr that I could do it and foretold that I should do it . I wrestle with my own resolution : I want to be weak that I might avoid the awful passage of further suffering I see laid out for I ; and , turn tyrant , hold passion by the throat , tell she tauntingly , she have yet but dip she dainty foot in the slough , and swore that with that arm of iron he would thrust she down to unsounded depth of agony . " let I be tear away , " then I cry . " let another help I ! " " no ; you shall tear yourself away , none shall help you : you shall yourself pluck out you right eye ; yourself cut off you right hand : you heart shall be the victim , and you the priest to transfix it . " I rise up suddenly , terror - struck at the solitude which so ruthless a judge haunt , -- at the silence which so awful a voice fill . my head swam as I stand erect . I perceive that I be sicken from excitement and inanition ; neither meat nor drink have pass my lip that day , for I have take no breakfast . and , with a strange pang , I now reflecte that , long as I have be shut up here , no message have be send to ask how I be , or to invite I to come down : not even little have tap at the door ; not even have seek I . " Friends always forget those whom fortune forsake , " I murmure , as I
I undraw the bolt and pass out . I stumble over a obstacle : my head be still dizzy , my sight be dim , and my limb be feeble . I could not soon recover myself . I fall , but not on to the ground : a outstretched arm catch I . I look up -- I be support by , who sit in a chair across my chamber threshold . " you come out at last , " he say . " well , I have be wait for you long , and listen : yet not one movement have I hear , nor one sob : five minute more of that death - like hush , and I should have force the lock like a burglar . so you shin I ? -- you shut yourself up and grieve alone ! I would rather you have come and upbraide I with vehemence . you be passionate . I expect a scene of some kind . I be prepare for the hot rain of tear ; only I want they to be she on my breast : now a senseless floor have receive they , or you drench handkerchief . but I err : you have not weep at all ! I see a white cheek and a faded eye , but no trace of tear . I suppose , then , you heart have be weep blood ? " " well , ! not a word of reproach ? nothing bitter -- nothing poignant ? nothing to cut a feeling or s a passion ? you sit quietly where I have place you , and regard I with a weary , passive look . " " , I never mean to wound you thus . if the man who have but one little ewe lamb that be dear to he as a daughter , that ate of he bread and drank of he cup , and lay in he bosom , have by some mistake slaughter it at the shamble , he would not have rue he bloody blunder more than I now rue mine . will you ever forgive I ? " reader , I forgave he at the moment and on the spot . there be such deep remorse in he eye , such true pity in he tone , such manly energy in he manner ; and besides , there be such unchanged love in he whole look and mien -- I forgave he all : yet not in word , not outwardly ; only at my heart 's core . " you know I be a scoundrel , ? " ere long he inquire wistfully -- wonder , I suppose , at my continued silence and tameness , the result rather of weakness than of will . " yes , sir . " " then tell I so roundly and sharply -- do not spare I . " " I cannot : I be tired and sick . I want some water . " he heav a sort of shuddering sigh , and take I in he arm , carry I downstairs . at first I do not know to what room he have borne I ; all be cloudy to my glazed sight : presently I feel the revive warmth of a fire ; for , summer as it be , I have become icy cold in my chamber . he put wine to my lip ; I taste it and revive ; then I eat something he offer I , and be soon myself . I be in the library -- sit in he chair -- he be quite near . " if I could go out of life now , without too sharp a pang , it would be well for I , " I think ; " then I should not have to make the effort of crack my heart - string in rend they from among 's . I must leave he , it appear . I do not want to leave he -- I can not leave he . " " how be you now , ? " " much better , sir ; I shall be well soon . " " taste the wine again , . " I obey he ; then he put the glass on the table , stand before I , and look at I attentively . suddenly he turn away , with a inarticulate exclamation , full of passionate emotion of some kind ; he walk fast through the room and come back ; he stoop towards I as if to kiss I ; but I remember caress be now forbidden . I turn my face away and put he aside . " what ! -- how be this ? " he exclaim hastily . " oh , I know ! you will not kiss the husband of ? you consider my arm fill and my embrace appropriate ? " " at any rate , there be neither room nor claim for I , sir . " " why , ? I will spare you the trouble of much talking ; I will answer for you -- because I have a wife already , you would reply . -- I guess rightly ? " " yes . " " if you think so , you must have a strange opinion of I ; you must regard I as a plot profligate -- a base and low rake who have be simulat disinterested love in order to draw you into a snare deliberately laid , and strip you of honour and rob you of self - respect . what do you say to that ? I see you can say nothing in the first place , you be faint still , and have enough to do to draw you breath ; in the second place , you can not yet accustom yourself
yourself to accuse and revile I , and besides , the flood - gate of tear be open , and they would rush out if you speak much ; and you have no desire to expostulate , to upbraid , to make a scene : you be think how to Act -- talk you consider be of no use . I know you -- I be on my guard . " " Sir , I do not wish to act against you , " I say ; and my unsteady voice warn I to curtail my sentence . " not in you sense of the word , but in mine you be scheme to destroy I . you have as good as say that I be a marry man -- as a marry man you will shin I , keep out of my way : just now you have refuse to kiss I . you intend to make yourself a complete stranger to I : to live under this roof only as 's governess ; if ever I say a friendly word to you , if ever a friendly feeling incline you again to I , you will say , -- ' that man have nearly make I he mistress : I must be ice and rock to he ; ' and ice and rock you will accordingly become . " I clear and steady my voice to reply : " all be change about I , sir ; I must change too -- there be no doubt of that ; and to avoid fluctuation of feeling , and continual combats with recollection and associations , there be only one way -- Adele must have a new governess , sir . " " oh , will go to school -- I have settle that already ; nor do I mean to torment you with the hideous associations and recollection of -- this accurse place -- this tent of -- this insolent vault , offer the ghastliness of living death to the light of the open sky -- this narrow stone hell , with its one real fiend , worse than a legion of such as we imagine . , you shall not stay here , nor will I . I be wrong ever to bring you to , know as I do how it be haunt . I charge they to conceal from you , before I ever see you , all knowledge of the curse of the place ; merely because I fear never would have a governess to stay if she know with what inmate she be house , and my plan would not permit I to remove the maniac elsewhere -- though I possess a old house , , even more retired and hide than this , where I could have lod she safely enough , have not a scruple about the unhealthiness of the situation , in the heart of a wood , make my conscience recoil from the arrangement . probably those damp walls would soon have ease I of she charge : but to each villain he own vice ; and mine be not a tendency to indirect assassination , even of what I must hate . " Conceal the mad -woman 's neighbourhood from you , however , be something like cover a child with a cloak and lay it down near a upa - tree : that 's vicinage be poisone , and always be . but I will shut up : I will nail up the front door and board the lower window : I will give two hundred a year to live here with my wife , as you term that fearful hag : will do much for money , and she shall have she son , the keeper at , to bear she company and be at hand to give she aid in the paroxysm , when my wife be prompt by she familiar to burn people in they bed at night , to stab they , to bite they flesh from they bone , and so on -- " " , " I interrupt he , " you be inexorable for that unfortunate lady : you speak of she with hate -- with vindictive antipathy . it be cruel -- she can not help be mad . " " , my little darling ( so I will call you , for so you be ) , you do not know what you be talk about ; you misjudge I again : it be not because she be mad I hate she . if you be mad , do you think I should hate you ? " " I do indeed , sir . " " then you be mistaken , and you know nothing about I , and nothing about the sort of love of which I be capable . every atom of you flesh be as dear to I as my own : in pain and sickness it would still be dear . you mind be my treasure , and if it be break , it would be my treasure still : if you rave , my arm should confine you , and not a strait waistcoat -- you grasp , even in fury , would have a charm for I : if you fly at I as wildly as that woman do this morning , I should receive you in a embrace , at least as fond as it would be restrictive . I should not shrink from you with disgust as I do from she : in you quiet moment you should have no watcher and no nurse but I ; and I could hang over you with untiring tenderness , though you give I no smile in return ; and never weary of gaze into you eye , though they have no longer a ray of recognition for I . -- but why do I
I follow that train of idea ? I be talk of remove you from . all , you know , be prepare for prompt departure : to - morrow you shall go . I only ask you to endure one more night under this roof , ; and then , farewell to its misery and terror for ever ! I have a place to repair to , which will be a secure sanctuary from hateful reminiscence , from unwelcome intrusion -- even from falsehood and slander . " " and take Adele with you , sir , " I interrupt ; " she will be a companion for you . " " what do you mean , ? I tell you I would send to school ; and what do I want with a child for a companion , and not my own child , -- a french dancer 's bastard ? why do you importune I about she ! I say , why do you assign to I for a companion ? " " you speak of a retirement , sir ; and retirement and solitude be dull : too dull for you . " " Solitude ! solitude ! " he reiterate with irritation . " I see I must come to a explanation . I do not know what sphynx - like expression be form in you countenance . you be to share my solitude . do you understand ? " I shook my head : it require a degree of courage , excit as he be become , even to risk that mute sign of dissent . he have be walk fast about the room , and he stop , as if suddenly root to one spot . he look at I long and hard : I turn my eye from he , fix they on the fire , and try to assume and maintain a quiet , collect aspect . " now for the hitch in 's character , " he say at last , speak more calmly than from he look I have expect he to speak . " the reel of silk have run smoothly enough so far ; but I always know there would come a knot and a puzzle : here it be . now for vexation , and exasperation , and endless trouble ! by ! I long to exert a fraction of 's strength , and break the entanglement like tow ! " he recommence he walk , but soon again stop , and this time just before I . " ! will you hear reason ? " ( he stoop and approach he lip to my ear ) ; " because , if you will not , I will try violence . " he voice be hoarse ; he look that of a man who be just about to burst a insufferable bond and plunge headlong into wild license . I see that in another moment , and with one impetus of frenzy more , I should be able to do nothing with he . the present -- the pass second of time -- be all I have in which to control and restrain he -- a movement of repulsion , flight , fear would have seal my doom , -- and he . but I be not afraid : not in the least . I feel a inward power ; a sense of influence , which support I . the crisis be perilous ; but not without its charm : such as the indian , perhaps , feel when he slip over the rapid in he canoe . I take hold of he clenched hand , loose the contort finger , and say to he , soothingly - " sit down ; I will talk to you as long as you like , and hear all you have to say , whether reasonable or unreasonable . " he sit down : but he do not get leave to speak directly . I have be struggle with tear for some time : I have take great pain to repress they , because I know he would not like to see I weep . now , however , I consider it well to let they flow as freely and as long as they like . if the flood annoye he , so much the better . so I give way and cry heartily . I hear he earnestly entreat I to be compose . I say I could not while he be in such a passion . " but I be not angry , : I only love you too well ; and you have steel you little pale face with such a resolute , freeze look , I could not endure it . Hush , now , and wipe you eye . " he soften announce that he be subdue ; so I , in my turn , become calm . now he make a effort to rest he head on my shoulder , but I would not permit it . then he would draw I to he : no . " ! ! " he say , in such a accent of bitter sadness it thrill along every nerve I have ; " you do not love I , then ? it be only my station , and the rank of my wife , that you value ? now that you think I disqualify to become you husband , you recoil from my touch as if I be some toad or ape . " these word cut I : yet what could I do or I say ? I ought probably to have do or say nothing ; but I be so torture by a sense of remorse at thus hurt he feeling , I could not control the wish to drop balm where I have wound . " I do love you , " I say ,
, " more than ever : but I must not show or indulge the feeling : and this be the last time I must express it . " " the last time , ! what ! do you think you can live with I , and see I daily , and yet , if you still love I , be always cold and distant ? " " no , sir ; that I be certain I could not ; and therefore I see there be but one way : but you will be furious if I mention it . " " oh , mention it ! if I storm , you have the art of weeping . " " , I must leave you . " " for how long , ? for a few minute , while you smooth you hair -- which be somewhat dishevell ; and bathe you face -- which look feverish ? " " I must leave and . I must part with you for my whole life : I must begin a new existence among strange face and strange scene . " " of course : I tell you you should . I pass over the madness about part from I . you mean you must become a part of I . as to the new existence , it be all right : you shall yet be my wife : I be not marry . you shall be -- both virtually and nominally . I shall keep only to you so long as you and I live . you shall go to a place I have in the south of : a whitewashed villa on the shore of the . there you shall live a happy , and guard , and most innocent life . never fear that I wish to lure you into error -- to make you my mistress . why do you shake you head ? , you must be reasonable , or in truth I shall again become frantic . " he voice and hand quiver : he large nostril dilate ; he eye blaze : still I da to speak . " sir , you wife be live : that be a fact acknowledge this morning by yourself . if I live with you as you desire , I should then be you mistress : to say otherwise be sophistical -- be false . " " , I be not a gentle - temper man -- you forget that : I be not long - enduring ; I be not cool and dispassionate . out of pity to I and yourself , put you finger on my pulse , feel how it throb , and -- beware ! " he bar he wrist , and offer it to I : the blood be forsak he cheek and lip , they be grow livid ; I be distress on all hand . to agitate he thus deeply , by a resistance he so abhor , be cruel : to yield be out of the question . I do what human being do instinctively when they be drive to utter extremity -- look for aid to one higher than man : the word " help I ! " burst involuntarily from my lip . " I be a fool ! " cry suddenly . " I keep tell she I be not marry , and do not explain to she why . I forget she know nothing of the character of that woman , or of the circumstance attend my infernal union with she . oh , I be certain will agree with I in opinion , when she know all that I know ! just put you hand in mine , -- that I may have the evidence of touch as well as sight , to prove you be near I -- and I will in a few word show you the real state of the case . can you listen to I ? " " yes , sir ; for hour if you will . " " I ask only minute . , do you ever hear or know that I be not the eldest son of my house : that i have once a brother older than I ? " " I remember tell I so once . " " and do you ever hear that my father be a avaricious , grasping man ? " " I have understand something to that effect . " " well , , be so , it be he resolution to keep the property together ; he could not bear the idea of divide he estate and leave I a fair portion : all , he resolve , should go to my brother , . yet as little could he endure that a son of he should be a poor man . I must be provide for by a wealthy marriage . he seek I a partner betime . , a West planter and merchant , be he old acquaintance . he be certain he possession be real and vast : he make inquiry . , he find , have a son and daughter ; and he learn from he that he could and would give the latter a fortune of thirty thousand pound : that suffice . when I leave college , I be send out to , to espouse a bride already courte for I . my father say nothing about she money ; but he tell I be the boast of spanish town for she beauty : and this be no lie . I find she a fine woman , in the style of : tall , dark , and majestic . she family wish to secure I because I be of a good race ; and so do she . they show she to I in party , splendidly dress . I seldom see she alone , and
and have very little private conversation with she . she flatter I , and lavishly display for my pleasure she charms and accomplishment . all the man in she circle seem to admire she and envy I . I be dazzl , stimulate : my sense be excited ; and be ignorant , raw , and inexperienc , I think I love she . there be no folly so besot that the idiotic rivalry of society , the prurience , the rashness , the blindness of youth , will not hurry a man to its commission . she relatives encourage I ; competitor pique I ; she allure I : a marriage be achieve almost before I know where I be . oh , I have no respect for myself when I think of that act ! -- a agony of inward contempt master I . I never love , I never esteem , I do not even know she . I be not sure of the existence of one virtue in she nature : I have mark neither modesty , nor benevolence , nor candour , nor refinement in she mind or manners -- and , I marry she :- gross , grovell , mole - ey blockhead that I be ! with less sin I might have -- but let I remember to whom I be speak . " " my bride 's mother I have never see : I understand she be dead . the honeymoon over , I learn my mistake ; she be only mad , and shut up in a lunatic asylum . there be a younger brother , too -- a complete dumb idiot . the elder one , whom you have see ( and whom I can not hate , whilst I abhor all he kindr , because he have some grains of affection in he feeble mind , show in the continue interest he take in he wretched sister , and also in a dog - like attachment he once bear I ) , will probably be in the same state one day . my father and my brother know all this ; but they think only of the thirty thousand pound , and join in the plot against I . " " these be vile discoveries ; but except for the treachery of concealment , I should have make they no subject of reproach to my wife , even when I find she nature wholly alien to mine , she taste obnoxious to I , she cast of mind common , low , narrow , and singularly incapable of be lead to anything higher , expand to anything larger -- when I find that I could not pass a single evening , nor even a single hour of the day with she in comfort ; that kindly conversation could not be sustain between we , because whatever topic I start , immediately receive from she a turn at once coarse and trite , perverse and imbecile -- when I perceive that I should never have a quiet or settled household , because no servant would bear the continue outbreak of she violent and unreasonable temper , or the vexation of she absurd , contradictory , exact order -- even then I restrain myself : I eschew upbraiding , I curtail remonstrance ; I try to deavor my repentance and disgust in secret ; I repress the deep antipathy I feel . " , I will not trouble you with abominable detail : some strong word shall express what I have to say . I live with that woman upstairs four year , and before that time she have try I indeed : she character ripen and develop with frightful rapidity ; she vice spring up fast and rank : they be so strong , only cruelty could check they , and I would not use cruelty . what a pigmy intellect she have , and what giant propensity ! how fearful be the curse those propensity entail on I ! , the true daughter of a infamous mother , drag I through all the hideous and degrading agony which must attend a man bound to a wife at once intemperate and unchaste . " my brother in the interval be dead , and at the end of the four year my father die too . I be rich enough now -- yet poor to hideous indigence : a nature the most gross , impure , deprave I ever see , be associate with mine , and call by the law and by society a part of I . and I could not ry myself of it by any legal proceedings : for the doctor now discover that my wife be mad -- she excess have prematurely develop the germ of insanity . , you do not like my narrative ; you look almost sick -- shall I defer the rest to another day ? " " no , sir , finish it now ; I pity you -- I do earnestly pity you . " " Pity , , from some people be a noxious and insulting sort of tribute , which one be justifi in hurl back in the tooth of those who offer it ; but that be the sort of pity native to callous , selfish heart ; it be a hybrid , egotistical pain at hearing of woe , cross with ignorant contempt for those who have endure they . but that be not you pity , ; it be not the feeling of which you whole face be full at this moment -- with which you eye be now almost overflow -- with which you heart be heaive -- with which you hand be trembl in mine . you pity , my darling , be the suffering mother of love : it be anguish be the very natal pang of the divine passion . I accept
accept it , ; let the daughter have free advent -- my arm wait to receive she . " " now , sir , proceed ; what do you do when you find she be mad ? " " , I approach the verge of despair ; a remnant of self - respect be all that intervene between I and the gulf . in the eyes of the world , I be doubtless covered with grimy dishonour ; but I resolve to be clean in my own sight -- and to the last I repudiate the contamination of she crime , and wrench myself from connection with she mental defect . still , society associate my name and person with hers ; I yet see she and hear she daily : something of she breath ( faugh ! ) mix with the air I breathe ; and beside , I remember I have once be she husband -- that recollection be then , and be now , inexpressibly odious to I ; moreover , I know that while she liv I could never be the husband of another and better wife ; and , though five year my senior ( she family and she father have lie to I even in the particular of she age ) , she be likely to live as long as I , be as robust in frame as she be infirm in mind . thus , at the age of twenty - six , I be hopeless . " one night I have be awaken by she yell -- ( since the medical man have pronounce she mad , she have , of course , be shut up ) -- it be a fiery west indian night ; one of the description that frequently precede the hurricane of those climates . be unable to sleep in bed , I get up and open the window . the air be like sulphur - steam -- I could find no refreshment anywhere . come buzzing in and hum sullenly round the room ; the sea , which I could hear from thence , rumble dull like a earthquake -- black cloud be cast up over it ; the moon be set in the wave , broad and red , like a hot cannon - ball -- she throw she last bloody glance over a world quivering with the ferment of tempest . I be physically influence by the atmosphere and scene , and my ear be fill with the curse the maniac still shriek out ; wherein she momentarily mingl my name with such a tone of demon - hate , with such language ! -- no professed harlot ever have a fouler vocabulary than she : though two room off , I hear every word -- the thin partition of the house oppose but slight obstruction to she wolfish cry . " ' this life , ' say I at last , 'is hell : this be the air -- those be the sound of the bottomless pit ! I have a right to deliver myself from it if I can . the suffering of this mortal state will leave I with the heavy flesh that now cumber my soul . of the fanatic 's burn eternity I have no fear : there be not a future state worse than this present one -- let I break away , and go home to ! ' " I say this whilst I knelt down at , and unlock a trunk which contain a brace of load pistol : I mean to shoot myself . I only entertain the intention for a moment ; for , not be insane , the crisis of exquisite and unalloyed despair , which have originate the wish and design of self - destruction , be past in a second . " a wind fresh from blow over the ocean and rush through the open casement : the storm break , stream , thunder , blaze , and the air grow pure . I then fram and fix a resolution . while I walk under the dripping orange - tree of my wet garden , and amongst its drench pomegranate and pine - apple , and while the refulgent dawn of the tropic kindle round I -- I reason thus , -- and now listen ; for it be true wisdom that consol I in that hour , and show I the right path to follow . " the sweet wind from be still whisper in the refresh leave , and the be thunder in glorious liberty ; my heart , dry up and scorch for a long time , swell to the tone , and fill with living blood -- my be longe for renewal -- my soul thirst for a pure dratch . I see hope revive -- and feel regeneration possible . from a flowery arch at the bottom of my garden I gaze over the sea -- bluer than the sky : the old world be beyond ; clear prospect open thus :- " 'Go , ' say , ' and live again in : there it be not know what a sully name you bear , nor what a filthy burden be bound to you . you may take the maniac with you to ; confine she with due attendance and precaution at : then travel yourself to what clime you will , and form what new tie you like . that woman , who have so abuse you long -suffering , so sully you name , so outrage you honour , so blight you youth , be not you wife , nor be you she husband . see that she be care for as she condition demand , and you have do all that and humanity require of you . let she identity , she connection with yourself , be bury in oblivion : you be bound
bound to impart they to no living being . place she in safety and comfort : shelter she degradation with secrecy , and leave she . ' " I act precisely on this suggestion . my father and brother have not make my marriage know to they acquaintance ; because , in the very first letter I write to apprise they of the union -- have already begin to experience extreme disgust of its consequence , and , from the family character and constitution , see a hideous future open to I -- I add a urgent charge to keep it secret : and very soon the infamous conduct of the wife my father have select for I be such as to make he blush to own she as he daughter - in - law . far from desire to publish the connection , he become as anxious to conceal it as myself . " to , then , I convey she ; a fearful voyage I have with such a monster in the vessel . be I when I at last get she to , and see she safely lod in that third - storey room , of whose secret inner cabinet she have now for ten year make a wild 's -- a goblin 's cell . I have some trouble in find a attendant for she , as it be necessary to select one on whose fidelity dependence could be place ; for she raving would inevitably betray my secret : besides , she have lucid interval of day -- sometimes week -- which she fill up with abuse of I . at last I hire from the . she and the surgeon , ( who dress 's wound that night he be stab and worried ) , be the only two I have ever admit to my confidence . may indeed have suspect something , but she could have gain no precise knowledge as to fact . have , on the whole , prove a good keeper ; though , owe partly to a fault of she own , of which it appear nothing can cure she , and which be incident to she harassing profession , she vigilance have be more than once lull and baffle . the lunatic be both cunning and malignant ; she have never fail to take advantage of she guardian 's temporary lapse ; once to secrete the knife with which she stab she brother , and twice to possess herself of the key of she cell , and issue therefrom in the night - time . on the first of these occasion , she perpetrate the attempt to burn I in my bed ; on the second , she pay that ghastly visit to you . I thank , who watch over you , that she then spend she fury on you wedding apparel , which perhaps bring back vague reminiscence of she own bridal day : but on what might have happen , I can not endure to reflect . when I think of the thing which fly at my throat this morning , hang it be black and scarlet visage over the nest of my dove , my blood curdle . " " and what , sir , " I ask , while he pause , " do you do when you have settle she here ? where do you go ? " " what do I do , ? I transform myself into a will - of '- the - wisp . where do I go ? I pursue wandering as wild as those of the - spirit . I seek the continent , and go devious through all its lands . my fix desire be to seek and find a good and intelligent woman , whom I could love : a contrast to the fury I leave at -- " " but you could not marry , sir . " " I have determined and be convinced that I could and ink . it be not my original intention to deceive , as I have deceive you . I mean to tell my tale plainly , and make my proposal openly : and it appear to I so absolutely rational that I should be consider free to love and be love , I never doubt some woman might be find willing and able to understand my case and accept I , in spite of the curse with which I be burden . " " well , sir ? " " when you be inquisitive , , you always make I smile . you open you eye like a eager bird , and make every now and then a restless movement , as if answer in speech do not flow fast enough for you , and you want to read the tablet of one 's heart . but before I go on , tell I what you mean by you ' well , sy ? ' it be a small phrase very frequent with you ; and which many a time have draw I on and on through interminable talk : I do not very well know why . " " I mean , -- what next ? how do you proceed ? what come of such a event ? " " precisely ! and what do you wish to know now ? " " whether you find any one you like : whether you ask she to marry you ; and what she say . " " I can tell you whether I find any one I like , and whether I ask she to marry I : but what she say be yet to be record in the book of . for ten long year I rove about , liive first in one capital , then another : sometimes in ; oftener in ; occasionally in , , and . provide with plenty of money
money and the passport of a old name , I could choose my own society : no circle be close against I . I seek my ideal of a woman amongst English lady , french countess , italian signora , and german grafinnen . I could not find she . sometimes , for a fleeting moment , I think I catch a glance , hear a tone , beheld a form , which announce the realisation of my dream : but I be presently undeserved . you be not to suppose that I desire perfection , either of mind or person . I long only for what suit I -- for the antipode of the Creole : and I long vainly . amongst they all I find not one whom , have I be ever so free , I -- warn as I be of the risk , the horror , the loathing of incongruous union -- would have ask to marry I . disappointment make I reckless . I try dissipation -- never debauchery : that I hate , and hate . that be my indian 's attribute : root disgust at it and she restrain I much , even in pleasure . any enjoyment that border on riot seem to approach I to she and she vex , and I eschew it . " yet I could not live alone ; so I try the companionship of mistress . the first I choose be -- another of those step which make a man spurn himself when he recall they . you already know what she be , and how my liaison with she terminate . she have two successor : a italian , , and a german , ; both consider singularly handsome . what be they beauty to I in a few week ? be unprincipled and violent : I tire of she in three month . be honest and quiet ; but heavy , mindless , and unimpressible : not one whit to my taste . I be glad to give she a sufficient sum to set she up in a good line of business , and so get decently rid of she . but , , I see by you face you be not form a very favourable opinion of I just now . you think I a unfeeling , loose - principle rake : do not you ? " " I do not like you so well as I have do sometimes , indeed , sir . do it not seem to you in the least wrong to live in that way , first with one mistress and then another ? you talk of it as a mere matter of course . " " it be with I ; and I do not like it . it be a grovelling fashion of existence : I should never like to return to it . hire a mistress be the next worse thing to buy a slave : both be often by nature , and always by position , inferior : and to live familiarly with inferior be degrad . I now hate the recollection of the time I pass with , , and . " I feel the truth of these word ; and I draw from they the certain inference , that if I be so far to forget myself and all the teaching that have ever be instil into I , as -- under any pretext -- with any justification -- through any temptation -- to become the successor of these poor girl , he would one day regard I with the same feeling which now in he mind desecrate they memory . I do not give utterance to this conviction : it be enough to feel it . I impress it on my heart , that it might remain there to serve I as aid in the time of trial . " now , , why do not you say ' well , sir ? ' I have not do . you be look grave . you disapprove of I still , I see . but let I come to the point . last , rid of all mistress -- in a harsh , bitter frame of mind , the result of a useless , rove , lonly life -- corrod with disappointment , sourly dispose against all man , and especially against all womankind ( for I begin to regard the notion of a intellectual , faithful , loving woman as a mere dream ) , recall by business , I come back to . " on a frosty winter afternoon , I ride in sight of . Abhor spot ! I expect no peace -- no pleasure there . on a stile in I see a quiet little figure sit by itself . I pass it as negligently as I do the pollard willow opposite to it : I have no presentiment of what it would be to I ; no inward warn that the arbitress of my life -- my genius for good or evil -- wait there in humble guise . I do not know it , even when , on the occasion of 's accident , it come up and gravely offer I help . childish and slender creature ! it seem as if a linnet have hopp to my foot and propose to bear I on its tiny wing . I be surly ; but the thing would not go : it stand by I with strange perseverance , and look and speak with a sort of authority . I must be aide , and by that hand : and aid I be . " when once I have press the frail shoulder , something new -- a fresh sap and sense -- stole into my frame . it be well i have learn that this elf must return to I -- that it belong to my
my house down below -- or I could not have feel it pass away from under my hand , and see it vanish behind the dim hedge , without singular regret . I hear you come home that night , , though probably you be not aware that I think of you or watch for you . the next day i observ you -- myself unseen -- for half - a - hour , while you play with in the gallery . it be a snowy day , I recollect , and you could not go out of door . I be in my room ; the door be ajar : I could both listen and watch . claim you outward attention for a while ; yet I fancie you thought be elsewhere : but you be very patient with she , my little ; you talk to she and amuse she a long time . when at last she leave you , you lapse at once into deep reverie : you betake yourself slowly to pace the gallery . now and then , in pass a casement , you glance out at the thick - fall snow ; you listen to the sobbing wind , and again you pace gently on and dream . I think those day visions be not dark : there be a pleasurable illumination in you eye occasionally , a soft excitement in you aspect , which tell of no bitter , bilious , hypochondriac brood : you look reveal rather the sweet musing of youth when its spirit follow on willing wing the flight of hope up and on to a ideal heaven . the voice of , speak to a servant in the hall , wake you : and how curiously you smile to and at yourself , ! there be much sense in you smile : it be very shrewd , and seem to make light of you own abstraction . it seem to say -- ' my fine vision be all very well , but I must not forget they be absolutely unreal . I have a rosy sky and a green flowery in my brain ; but without , I be perfectly aware , lie at my foot a rough tract to travel , and around I gather black tempest to encounter . ' you run downstairs and demand of some occupation : the weekly house account to make up , or something of that sort , I think it be . I be vex with you for get out of my sight . " impatiently I wait for evening , when I might summon you to my presence . a unusual -- to I -- a perfectly new character I suspect be yours : I desire to search it deeper and know it better . you enter the room with a look and air at once shy and independent : you be quaintly dress -- much as you be now . I make you talk : ere long I find you full of strange contrast . you garb and manner be restrict by rule ; you air be often diffident , and altogether that of one refin by nature , but absolutely unused to society , and a good deal afraid of make herself disadvantageously conspicuous by some solecism or blunder ; yet when address , you lift a keen , a daring , and a glow eye to you interlocutor 's face : there be penetration and power in each glance you give ; when ply by close question , you find ready and round answer . very soon you seem to get used to I : I believe you feel the existence of sympathy between you and you grim and cross master , ; for it be astonishing to see how quickly a certain pleasant ease tranquillise you manner : snarl as I would , you show no surprise , fear , annoyance , or displeasure at my moroseness ; you watch I , and now and then smile at I with a simple yet sagacious grace I can not describe . I be at once content and stimulate with what I see : I like what I have see , and wish to see more . yet , for a long time , I treat you distantly , and seek you company rarely . I be a intellectual epicure , and wish to prolong the gratification of make this novel and piquant acquaintance : beside , I be for a while trouble with a haunt fear that if I handle the flower freely its bloom would fake -- the sweet charm of freshness would leave it . I do not then know that it be no transitory blossom , but rather the radiant resemblance of one , cut in a indestructible gem . moreover , I wish to see whether you would seek I if I shunn you -- but you do not ; you keep in the schoolroom as still as you own desk and easel ; if by chance I meet you , you pass I as soon , and with as little token of recognition , as be consistent with respect . you habitual expression in those day , , be a thoughtful look ; not despondent , for you be not sickly ; but not buoyant , for you have little hope , and no actual pleasure . I wonder what you think of I , or if you ever think of I , and resolve to find this out . " I resume my notice of you . there be something glad in you glance , and genial in you manner , when you converse : I see you have a social heart ; it be the silent schoolroom -- it be the tedium of you life -- that make you mournful . I permit myself the delight of be kind to
to you ; kindness stir emotion soon : you face become soft in expression , you tone gentle ; I like my name pronounce by you lip in a grateful happy accent . I use to enjoy a chance meeting with you , , at this time : there be a curiious hesitation in you manner : you glance at I with a slight trouble -- a hovering doubt : you do not know what my caprice might be -- whether I be go to play the master and be stern , or the friend and be benignant . I be now too fond of you often to simulate the first whim ; and , when I stretch my hand out cordially , such bloom and light and bliss rise to you young , wistful feature , I have much ado often to avoid strain you then and there to my heart . " " do not talk any more of those day , sir , " I interrupt , furtively dash away some tear from my eye ; he language be torture to I ; for I know what I must do -- and do soon -- and all these reminiscence , and these revelation of he feeling only make my work more difficult . " no , , " he return : " what necessity be there to dwell on the past , when the present be so much surer -- the so much brighter ? " I shudder to hear the infatuated assertion . " you see now how the case stand -- do you not ? " he continue . " after a youth and manhood pass half in unutterable misery and half in dreary solitude , I have for the first time find what I can truly love -- I have find you . you be my sympathy -- my better self -- my good angel . I be bound to you with a strong attachment . I think you good , gift , lovely : a fervent , a solemn passion be conceive in my heart ; it lean to you , draw you to my centre and spring of life , wrap my existence about you , and , kindl in pure , powerful flame , fuse you and I in one . " it be because I feel and know this , that I resolve to marry you . to tell I that I have already a wife be empty mockery : you know now that I have but a hideous demon . I be wrong to attempt to deceive you ; but I fear a stubbornness that exist in you character . I fear early instilled prejudice : I want to have you safe before hazard confidence . this be cowardly : I should have appeal to you nobleness and magnanimity at first , as I do now -- open to you plainly my life of agony -- describe to you my hunger and thirst after a higher and worthier existence -- show to you , not my Resolution ( that word be weak ) , but my resistless bent to love faithfully and well , where I be faithfully and well love in return . then I should have ask you to accept my pledge of fidelity and to give I yours . -- give it I now . " a pause . " why be you silent , ? " I be experience a ordeal : a hand of fiery iron grasp my vital . terrible moment : full of struggle , blackness , burn ! not a human be that ever liv could wish to be love better than I be love ; and he who thus love I I absolutely worship : and I must renounce love and idol . one drear word comprise my intolerable duty -- " ! " " , you understand what I want of you ? just this promise -- 'I will be yours , . ' " " , I will not be yours . " another long silence . " ! " recommence he , with a gentleness that break I down with grief , and turn I stone - cold with ominous terror -- for this still voice be the pant of a lion rise -- " , do you mean to go one way in the world , and to let I go another ? " " I do . " " " ( bend towards and embrace I ) , " do you mean it now ? " " I do . " " and now ? " softly kiss my forehead and cheek . " I do , " extricat myself from restraint rapidly and completely . " oh , , this be bitter ! this -- this be wick . it would not be wick to love I . " " it would to obey you . " a wild look raise he brows -- cross he feature : he rise ; but he forebore yet . I lay my hand on the back of a chair for support : I shook , I fear -- but I resolve . " one instant , . give one glance to my horrible life when you be gone . all happiness will be tear away with you . what then be leave ? for a wife I have but the maniac upstair : as well might you refer I to some corpse in yonder churchyard . what shall I do , ? where turn for a companion and for some hope ? " " do as I do : trust in and yourself . believe in heaven . hope to meet again there . " " then you will not yield ? " " no . " " then you condemn I to live wretch and to die accurse ? " he voice rise . " I advise
advise you to live sinless , and I wish you to die tranquil . " " then you snatch love and innocence from I ? you fl I back on lust for a passion -- vice for a occupation ? " " , I no more assign this fate to you than I grasp at it for myself . we be bear to strive and endure -- you as well as I : do so . you will forget I before I forget you . " " you make I a liar by such language : you sully my honour . I declare I could not change : you tell I to my face I shall change soon . and what a distortion in you judgament , what a perversity in you idea , be prove by you conduct ! be it better to drive a fellow - creature to despair than to transgress a mere human law , no man be injure by the breach ? for you have neither relative nor acquaintance whom you need fear to offend by live with I ? " this be true : and while he speak my very conscience and reason turn traitor against I , and charge I with crime in resist he . they speak almost as loud as feeling : and that clamoure wildly . " oh , comply ! " it say . " think of he misery ; think of he danger -- look at he state when leave alone ; remember he headlong nature ; consider the recklessness follow on despair -- soothe he ; save he ; love he ; tell he you love he and will be he . who in the world care for you ? or who will be injure by what you do ? " still indomitable be the reply -- " I care for myself . the more solitary , the more friendless , the more unsustained I be , the more I will respect myself . I will keep the law give by ; sanction by man . I will hold to the principle receive by I when I be sane , and not mad -- as I be now . law and principles be not for the time when there be no temptation : they be for such moments as this , when body and soul rise in mutiny against they rigour ; stringent be they ; inviolate they shall be . if at my individual convenience I might break they , what would be they worth ? they have a worth -- so I have always believe ; and if I can not believe it now , it be because I be insane -- quite insane : with my vein run fire , and my heart beat faster than I can count its throb . Preconceive opinion , foregone determination , be all I have at this hour to stand by : there I plant my foot . " I do . , read my countenance , see I have do so . he fury be wrotch to the highest : he must yield to it for a moment , whatever follow ; he cross the floor and seize my arm and grasp my waist . he seem to deavor I with he flaming glance : physically , I feel , at the moment , powerless as stubble expose to the dratch and glow of a furnace : mentally , I still possess my soul , and with it the certainty of ultimate safety . the soul , fortunately , have a interpreter -- often a unconscious , but still a truthful interpreter -- in the eye . my eye rise to he ; and while I look in he fierce face I give a involuntary sigh ; he gripe be painful , and my over -taxed strength almost exhaust . " never , " say he , as he ground he tooth , " never be anything at once so frail and so indomitable . a mere ree she feel in my hand ! " ( and he shook I with the force of he hold . ) " I could bend she with my finger and thumb : and what good would it do if I bend , if I uptore , if I crush she ? consider that eye : consider the resolute , wild , free thing look out of it , defy I , with more than courage -- with a stern triumph . whatever I do with its cage , I can not get at it -- the savage , beautiful creature ! if I tear , if I rmend the slight prison , my outrage will only let the captive loose . Conqueror I might be of the house ; but the inmate would escape to heave before I could call myself possessor of its clay dwelling - place . and it be you , spirit -- with will and energy , and virtue and purity -- that I want : not alo you britle frame . of yourself you could come with soft flight and nestle against my heart , if you would : seize against you will , you will elude the grasp like a essence -- you will vanish ere I inhale you fragrance . oh ! come , , come ! " as he say this , he release I from he clutch , and only look at I . the look be far worse to resist than the frantic strain : only a idiot , however , would have succumb now . I have da and baffle he fury ; I must elude he sorrow : I retire to the door . " you be go , ? " " I be go , sir . " " you be leave I ? " " yes . " " you will not come ? you will
will not be my comforter , my rescuer ? my deep love , my wild woe , my frantic prayer , be all nothing to you ? " what unutterable patho be in he voice ! how hard it be to reiterate firmly , " I be go . " " ! " " ! " " withdraw , then , -- I consent ; but remember , you leave I here in anguish . go up to you own room ; think over all I have say , and , , cast a glance on my suffering -- think of I . " he turn away ; he throw himself on he face on the sofa . " oh , ! my hope -- my love -- my life ! " break in anguish from he lip . then come a deep , strong sob . I have already gain the door ; but , reader , I walk back -- walk back as determinedly as I have retreate . I knelt down by he ; I turn he face from the cushion to I ; I kiss he cheek ; I smoothe he hair with my hand . " bless you , my dear master ! " I say . " keep you from harm and wrong -- direct you , solace you -- reward you well for you past kindness to I . " " 's love would have be my best reward , " he answer ; " without it , my heart be broken . but will give I she love : yes -- nobly , generously . " up the blood rush to he face ; forth flash the fire from he eye ; erect he spring ; he hold he arm out ; but I evad the embrace , and at once quit the room . " farewell ! " be the cry of my heart as I leave he . despair add , " farewell for ever ! " that night I never think to sleep ; but a slumber fell on I as soon as I lay down in bed . I be transport in thought to the scene of childhood : I dreamt I lay in the red -room at ; that the night be dark , and my mind impress with strange fear . the light that long ago have strike I into syncope , recal in this vision , see glidingly to mount the wall , and tremblingly to pause in the centre of the obscured ceiling . I lift up my head to look : the roof resolve to cloud , high and dim ; the gleam be such as the moon impart to vapour she be about to sever . I watch she come -- watch with the strangest anticipation ; as though some word of doom be to be write on she disk . she break forth as never moon yet burst from cloud : a hand first penetrat the sable fold and wave they away ; then , not a moon , but a white human form shone in the azure , inclin a glorious brow earthward . it gaze and gaze on I . it speak to my spirit : immeasurably distant be the tone , yet so near , it whisper in my heart - " my daughter , flee temptation . " " mother , I will . " so I answer after I have wake from the trance - like dream . it be yet night , but night be short : soon after midnight , dawn come . " it can not be too early to commence the task I have to fulfil , " think I . I rise : I be dress ; for I have take off nothing but my shoe . I know where to find in my drawer some linen , a locket , a ring . in seek these article , I encounter the bead of a pearl necklace have force I to accept a few day ago . I leave that ; it be not mine : it be the visionary bride 's who have melt in air . the other article i make up in a parcel ; my purse , contain twenty shilling ( it be all I have ) , I put in my pocket : I tie on my straw bonnet , pin my shawl , take the parcel and my slipper , which I would not put on yet , and stole from my room . " farewell , kind ! " I whisper , as I glide past she door . " farewell , my darling ! " I say , as I glance towards the nursery . no thought could be admit of enter to embrace she . I have to deceive a fine ear : for atch I know it might now be listen . I would have get past 's chamber without a pause ; but my heart momentarily stop its beat at that threshold , my foot be force to stop also . no sleep be there : the inmate be walk restlessly from wall to wall ; and again and again he sigh while I listen . there be a heaven -- a temporary heaven -- in this room for I , if I choose : I have but to go in and to say - " , I will love you and live with you through life till death , " and a fount of rapture would spre to my lip . I think of this . that kind master , who could not sleep now , be wait with impatience for day . he would send for I in the morning ; I should be gone . he would have I seek for : vainly . he would feel himself forsake ; he love reject : he would suffer ;
; perhaps grow desperate . I think of this too . my hand move towards the lock : I catch it back , and glide on . Drearily I wound my way downstairs : I know what I have to do , and I do it mechanically . I seek the key of the side - door in the kitchen ; I seek , too , a phial of oil and a feather ; I oil the key and the lock . I get some water , I get some bread : for perhaps I should have to walk far ; and my strength , sorely shaken of late , must not break down . all this I do without one sound . I open the door , pass out , shut it softly . glimmer in the yard . the great gate be close and lock ; but a wicket in one of they be only latch . through that I depart : it , too , I shut ; and now I be out of . a mile off , beyond the field , lay a road which stretch in the contrary direction to ; a road I have never travel , but often notice , and wonder where it lead : thither I bend my step . no reflection be to be allow now : not one glance be to be cast back ; not even one forward . not one thought be to be give either to the past or the future . the first be a page so heavenly sweet -- so deadly sad -- that to read one line of it would dissolve my courage and break down my energy . the last be a awful blank : something like the world when the deluge be go by . I skirt field , and hedge , and lane till after sunrise . I believe it be a lovely summer morning : I know my shoe , which I have put on when I leave the house , be soon wet with dew . but I look neither to rise sun , nor smile sky , nor wake nature . he who be take out to pass through a fair scene to the scaffold , think not of the flower that smile on he road , but of the block and axe - edge ; of the disseverment of bone and vein ; of the grave gap at the end : and I think of drear flight and homeless wander -- and oh ! with agony I think of what I leave . I could not help it . I think of he now -- in he room -- watch the sunrise ; hope I should soon come to say I would stay with he and be he . I longe to be he ; I pante to return : it be not too late ; I could yet spare he the bitter pang of bereavement . as yet my flight , I be sure , be undiscovered . I could go back and be he comforter -- he pride ; he redeemer from misery , perhaps from ruin . oh , that fear of he self - abandonment -- far worse than my abandonment -- how it goad I ! it be a bar arrow - head in my breast ; it tore I when I try to extract it ; it sicken I when remembrance thrust it farther in . bird begin singe in brake and copse : bird be faithful to they mate ; bird be emblem of love . what be I ? in the midst of my pain of heart and frantic effort of principle , I abhor myself . I have no solace from self - approbation : none even from self - respect . I have injured -- wounded -- leave my master . I be hateful in my own eye . still I could not turn , nor retrace one step . must have lead I on . as to my own will or conscience , impassioned grief have trample one and stifle the other . I be weep wildly as I walk along my solitary way : fast , fast I go like one delirious . a weakness , begin inwardly , extend to the limb , seize I , and I fall : I lay on the ground some minute , press my face to the wet turf . I have some fear -- or hope -- that here I should die : but I be soon up ; crawl forward on my hand and knee , and then again raise to my foot -- as eager and as determined as ever to reach the road . when I get there , I be force to sit to rest I under the hedge ; and while I sit , I hear wheel , and see a coach come on . I stand up and lift my hand ; it stop . I ask where it be go : the driver name a place a long way off , and where I be sure have no connection . I ask for what sum he would take I there ; he say thirty shilling ; I answer I have but twenty ; well , he would try to make it do . he further give I leave to get into the inside , as the vehicle be empty : I enter , be shut in , and it roll on its way . Gentle reader , may you never feel what I then feel ! may you eye never shed such stormy , scalding , heart - wrung tear as pour from mine . may you never appeal to in prayer so hopeless and so agonised as in that hour leave my lip ; for never may you , like I , dread to be the instrument of
of evil to what you wholly love . two day be pass . it be a summer evening ; the coachman have set I down at a place call ; he could take I no farther for the sum I have give , and I be not possess of another shilling in the world . the coach be a mile off by this time ; I be alone . at this moment I discover that I forget to take my parcel out of the pocket of the coach , where I have place it for safety ; there it remain , there it must remain ; and now , I be absolutely destitute . be no town , nor even a hamlet ; it be but a stone pillar set up where four roads meet : whitewash , I suppose , to be more obvious at a distance and in darkness . four arm spring from its summit : the nearest town to which these point be , accord to the inscription , distant ten mile ; the farthest , above twenty . from the well - know name of these town I learn in what county I have light ; a north - midland shire , dusk with moorland , ridge with mountain : this I see . there be great moor behind and on each hand of I ; there be wave of mountain far beyond that deep valley at my foot . the population here must be thin , and I see no passenger on these roads : they stretch out east , west , north , and south -- white , broad , lonely ; they be all cut in the moor , and the heather grow deep and wild to they very verge . yet a chance traveller might pass by ; and I wish no eye to see I now : stranger would wonder what I be do , linger here at the sign - post , evidently objectless and lose . I might be question : I could give no answer but what would sound incredible and excite suspicion . not a tie hold I to human society at this moment -- not a charm or hope call I where my fellow - creature be -- none that see I would have a kind thought or a good wish for I . I have no relative but the universal mother , : I will seek she breast and ask repose . I struck straight into the heath ; I hold on to a hollow I see deeply furrow the brown moorside ; I wad knee - deep in it be dark growth ; I turn with its turnings , and find a moss - blacken granite crag in a hidden angle , I sit down under it . high bank of moor be about I ; the crag protect my head : the sky be over that . some time pass before I feel tranquil even here : I have a vague dread that wild cattle might be near , or that some sportsman or poacher might discover I . if a gust of wind sweep the waste , I look up , fear it be the rush of a bull ; if a plover whistle , I imagine it a man . find my apprehension unfounded , however , and calm by the deep silence that reign as evening decline at nightfall , I take confidence . as yet I have not think ; I have only listen , watch , dread ; now I regain the faculty of reflection . what be I to do ? where to go ? oh , intolerable question , when I could do nothing and go nowhere ! -- when a long way must yet be measure by my weary , trembl limb before I could reach human habitation -- when cold charity must be entreate before I could get a lodging : reluctant sympathy importuned , almost certain repulse incur , before my tale could be listen to , or one of my want relieve ! I touch the heath , it be dry , and yet warm with the beat of the summer day . I look at the sky ; it be pure : a kindly star twinkle just above the chasm ridge . the dew fall , but with propitious softness ; no breeze whisper . seem to I benign and good ; I think she love I , outcast as I be ; and I , who from man could anticipate only mistrust , rejection , insult , cling to she with filial fondness . to - night , at least , I would be she guest , as I be she child : my mother would lodge I without money and without price . I have one morsel of bread yet : the remnant of a roll I have buy in a town we pass through at noon with a stray penny -- my last coin . I see ripe bilberry gleam here and there , like jet bead in the heath : I gather a handful and eat they with the bread . my hunger , sharp before , be , if not satisfied , appease by this hermit 's meal . I say my evening prayer at its conclusion , and then choose my couch . beside the crag the heath be very deep : when I lay down my foot be bury in it ; rise high on each side , it leave only a narrow space for the night - air to invade . I fold my shawl double , and spread it over I for a coverlet ; a low , mossy swell be my pillow . thus lod , I be not , at least -- at the commencement of the night , cold . my rest might have be blissful enough , only
only a sad heart break it . it plain of its gaping wound , its inward bleed , its riven chords . it tremble for and he doom ; it bemoan he with bitter pity ; it demand he with ceaseless longing ; and , impotent as a bird with both wing break , it still quiver its shattered pinion in vain attempt to seek he . wear out with this torture of thought , I rise to my knee . night be come , and she planets be risen : a safe , still night : too serene for the companionship of fear . we know that be everywhere ; but certainly we feel he presence most when he work be on the grandest scale spread before we ; and it be in the unclouded night - sky , where he worlds wheel they silent course , that we read clearest he infinitude , he omnipotence , he omnipresence . I have risen to my knee to pray for . look up , I , with tear - dim eye , see the mighty milky - way . Remembere what it be -- what countless system there sweep space like a soft trace of light -- I feel the might and strength of . sure be I of he efficiency to save what he have make : convince I grow that neither earth should perish , nor one of the soul it treasure . I turn my prayer to thanksgive : the source of be also the saviour of spirit . be safe ; he be 's , and by would he be guard . I again nestle to the breast of the hill ; and ere long in sleep forget sorrow . but next day , come to I pale and bare . Long after the little bird have leave they nests ; long after be have come in the sweet prime of day to gather the heath honey before the dew be dry -- when the long morning shadow be curtail , and the sun fill earth and sky -- I get up , and I look round I . what a still , hot , perfect day ! what a golden desert this spread moor ! everywhere sunshine . I wish I could live in it and on it . I see a lizard run over the crag ; I see a bee busy among the sweet bilberry . I would fain at the moment have become bee or lizard , that I might have find fitting nutriment , permanent shelter here . but I be a human being , and have a human be 's want : I must not linger where there be nothing to supply they . I rise ; I look back at the bed I have leave . of the future , I wish but this -- that my have that night think good to require my soul of I while I sleep ; and that this weary frame , absolve by death from further conflict with fate , have now but to decay quietly , and mingle in peace with the soil of this wilderness . life , however , be yet in my possession , with all its requirement , and pain , and responsibility . the burden must be carry ; the want provide for ; the suffering endure ; the responsibility fulfil . I set out . regain , I follow a road which lead from the sun , now fervent and high . by no other circumstance have I will to decide my choice . I walk a long time , and when I think I have nearly do enough , and might conscientiously yield to the fatigue that almost overpower I -- might relax this force action , and , sit down on a stone I see near , submit resistlessly to the apathy that clog heart and limb -- I hear a bell chime -- a church bell . I turn in the direction of the sound , and there , amongst the romantic hill , whose change and aspect I have cease to note a hour ago , I see a hamlet and a spire . all the valley at my right hand be full of pasture - field , and cornfield , and wood ; and a glitter stream run zig-zag through the varied shade of green , the mellow grain , the sombre woodland , the clear and sunny lea . recall by the rumbling of wheel to the road before I , I see a heavily - laden waggon labour up the hill , and not far beyond be two cow and they drover . human life and human labour be near . I must struggle on : strive to live and bend to toil like the rest . about two o'clock p.m . I enter the village . at the bottom of its one street there be a little shop with some cake of bread in the window . I covet a cake of bread . with that refreshment I could perhaps regain a degree of energy : without it , it would be difficult to proceed . the wish to have some strength and some vigour return to I as soon as I be amongst my fellow - being . I feel it would be degrad to faint with hunger on the causeway of a hamlet . have I nothing about I I could offer in exchange for one of these roll ? I consider . I have a small silk handkerchief tie round my throat ; I have my glove . I could hardly tell how man and woman in extremity of destitution proceed . I do not know whether either of these article would be accept : probably they would not ; but I must try . I enter the shop : a woman be there .
. see a respectably - dress person , a lady as she suppose , she come forward with civility . how could she serve I ? I be seize with shame : my tongue would not utter the request I have prepare . I da not offer she the half - worn glove , the crease handkerchief : beside , I feel it would be absurd . I only beg permission to sit down a moment , as I be tired . Disappoint in the expectation of a customer , she coolly acced to my request . she point to a seat ; I sank into it . I feel sorely urge to weep ; but conscious how unseasonable such a manifestation would be , I restrain it . I ask she " if there be any dressmaker or plain-workwoman in the village ? " " yes ; two or three . quite as many as there be employment for . " I reflect . I be drive to the point now . I be bring face to face with necessity . I stand in the position of one without a resource , without a friend , without a coin . I must do something . what ? I must apply somewhere . where ? " do she know of any place in the neighbourhood where a servant be want ? " " Nay ; she could not say . " " what be the chief trade in this place ? what do most of the people do ? " " some be farm labourer ; a good deal work at 's needle - factory , and at the foundry . " " employ woman ? " " Nay ; it be man 's work . " " and what do the woman do ? " " I knee not , " be the answer . " some do one thing , and some another . poor folk mun get on as they can . " she seem to be tired of my question : and , indeed , what clae have I to importune she ? a neighbour or two come in ; my chair be evidently want . I take leave . I pass up the street , look as I go at all the house to the right hand and to the left ; but I could discover no pretext , nor see a inducement to enter any . I ramble round the hamlet , go sometimes to a little distance and return again , for a hour or more . much exhaust , and suffer greatly now for want of food , I turn aside into a lane and sit down under the hedge . Ere many minute have elapse , I be again on my foot , however , and again search something -- a resource , or at least a informant . a pretty little house stand at the top of the lane , with a garden before it , exquisitely neat and brilliantly bloom . I stop at it . what business have I to approach the white door or touch the glittering knocker ? in what way could it possibly be the interest of the inhabitant of that dwell to serve I ? yet I draw near and knock . a mild -looking , cleanly - attire young woman open the door . in such a voice as might be expect from a hopeless heart and faint frame -- a voice wretchedly low and falter -- I ask if a servant be want here ? " no , " say she ; " we do not keep a servant . " " can you tell I where I could get employment of any kind ? " I continue . " I be a stranger , without acquaintance in this place . I want some work : no matter what . " but it be not she business to think for I , or to seek a place for I : besides , in she eye , how doubtful must have appear my character , position , tale . she shook she head , she " be sorry she could give I no information , " and the white door close , quite gently and civilly : but it shut I out . if she have hold it open a little longer , I believe I should have beg a piece of bread ; for I be now bring low . I could not bear to return to the sordid village , where , besides , no prospect of aid be visible . I should have long rather to deviate to a wood I see not far off , which appear in its thick shade to offer invite shelter ; but I be so sick , so weak , so gnaw with nature 's craving , instinct keep I roam round abodes where there be a chance of food . Solitude would be no solitude -- rest no rest -- while the vulture , hunger , thus sank beak and talon in my side . I draw near house ; I leave they , and come back again , and again I wander away : always repell by the consciousness of have no claim to ask -- no right to expect interest in my isolated lot . , the afternoon advanced , while I thus wander about like a lose and starve dog . in cross a field , I see the church spire before I : I hasten towards it . near the churchyard , and in the middle of a garden , stand a well - build though small house , which I have no doubt be the parsonage . I remember that strangers who arrive at a place where they have no friend , and who want employment , sometimes apply to the clergyman for introduction and aid . it be
be the clergyman 's function to help -- at least with advice -- those who wish to help themselves . I seem to have something like a right to seek counsel here . Renew then my courage , and gather my feeble remains of strength , I push on . I reach the house , and knock at the kitchen - door . a old woman open : I ask be this the parsonage ? " yes . " " be the clergyman in ? " " no . " " would he be in soon ? " " no , he be go from home . " " to a distance ? " " not so far -- happen three mile . he have be call away by the sudden death of he father : he be at now , and would very likely stay there a fortnight longer . " " be there any lady of the house ? " " Nay , there be natch but she , and she be housekeeper ; " and of she , reader , I could not bear to ask the relief for want of which I be sink ; I could not yet beg ; and again I crawle away . once more I take off my handkerchief -- once more I think of the cake of bread in the little shop . oh , for but a crust ! for but one mouthful to allay the pang of famine ! Instinctively I turn my face again to the village ; I find the shop again , and I go in ; and though other be there besides the woman I venture the request -- " would she give I a roll for this handkerchief ? " she look at I with evident suspicion : " Nay , she never sell stuff I ' that way . " almost desperate , I ask for half a cake ; she again refuse . " how could she tell where I have get the handkerchief ? " she say . " would she take my glove ? " " no ! what could she do with they ? " , it be not pleasant to dwell on these detail . some say there be enjoyment in look back to painful experience past ; but at this day I can scarcely bear to review the time to which I allude : the moral degradation , blent with the physical suffering , form too distresse a recollection ever to be willingly dwelt on . I blame none of those who repulse I . I feel it be what be to be expect , and what could not be help : a ordinary beggar be frequently a object of suspicion ; a well - dress beggar inevitably so . to be sure , what I beg be employment ; but whose business be it to provide I with employment ? not , certainly , that of person who see I then for the first time , and who know nothing about my character . and as to the woman who would not take my handkerchief in exchange for she bread , why , she be right , if the offer appear to she sinister or the exchange unprofitable . let I condense now . I be sick of the subject . a little before dark I pass a farm - house , at the open door of which the farmer be sit , eat he supper of bread and cheese . I stop and say - " will you give I a piece of bread ? for I be very hungry . " he cast on I a glance of surprise ; but without answering , he cut a thick slice from he loaf , and give it to I . I imagine he do not think I be a beggar , but only a eccentric sort of lady , who have take a fancy to he brown loaf . as soon as I be out of sight of he house , I sit down and eat it . I could not hope to get a lodging under a roof , and seek it in the wood I have before allude to . but my night be wretch , my rest break : the ground be damp , the air cold : besides , intruder pass near I more than once , and I have again and again to change my quarter ; no sense of safety or tranquillity befriend I . towards mor it rain ; the whole of the follow day be wet . do not ask I , reader , to give a minute account of that day ; as before , I seek work ; as before , I be repulse ; as before , I starve ; but once do food pass my lip . at the door of a cottage I see a little girl about to throw a mess of cold porridge into a pig trough . " will you give I that ? " I ask . she star at I . " mother ! " she exclaim , " there be a woman want I to give she these porridge . " " well lass , " reply a voice withing , " give it she if she be a beggar . ' pig do not want it . " the girl empty the stiffen mould into my hand , and I devoure it ravenously . as the wet twilight deepen , I stop in a solitary bridle - path , which I have be pursue a hour or more . " my strength be quite fail I , " I say in a soliloquy . " I feel I can not go much farther . shall I be a outcast again this night ? while the rain descend so , must I lay my head on
on the cold , drench ground ? I fear I can not do otherwise : for who will receive I ? but it will be very dreadful , with this feeling of hunger , faintness , chill , and this sense of desolation -- this total prostration of hope . in all likelihood , though , I should die before morning . and why can not I reconcile myself to the prospect of death ? why do I struggle to retain a valueless life ? because I know , or believe , be live : and then , to die of want and cold be a fate to which nature can not submit passively . oh , ! sustain I a little longer ! ! -- direct I ! " my glaze eye wander over the dim and misty landscape . I see I have stray far from the village : it be quite out of sight . the very cultivation surround it have disappear . I have , by cross -way and by - path , once more drawn near the tract of moorland ; and now , only a few field , almost as wild and unproductive as the heath from which they be scarcely reclaim , lay between I and the dusky hill . " well , I would rather die yonder than in a street or on a frequented road , " I reflect . " and far better that crow and raven -- if any raven there be in these region -- should pick my flesh from my bone , than that they should be prison in a workhouse coffin and moulder in a pauper 's grave . " to the hill , then , I turn . I reach it . it remain now only to find a hollow where I could lie down , and feel at least hidden , if not secure . but all the surface of the waste look level . it show no variation but of tint : green , where rush and moss overgrow the marsh ; black , where the dry soil bore only heath . as it be get , I could still see these change , though but as mere alternation of light and shade ; for colou have fad with the daylight . my eye still rove over the sullen swell and along the moor - edge , vanish amidst the wildest scenery , when at one dim point , far in among the marsh and the ridge , a light spring up . " that be a ignis fatuus , " be my first thought ; and I expect it would soon vanish . it burn on , however , quite steadily , neither reced nor advancing . " be it , then , a bonfire just kind ? " I question . I watch to see whether it would spread : but no ; as it do not diminish , so it do not enlarge . " it may be a candle in a house , " I then conjecture ; " but if so , I can never reach it . it be much too far away : and be it within a yard of I , what would it avail ? I should but knock at the door to have it shut in my face . " and I sank down where I stand , and hide my face against the ground . I lay still a while : the night - wind swept over the hill and over I , and die moaning in the distance ; the rain fall fast , wett I afresh to the skin . could I but have stiffen to the still frost -- the friendly numbness of death -- it might have pelt on ; I should not have feel it ; but my yet liive flesh shudder at its chilling influence . I rise ere long . the light be yet there , shin dim but constant through the rain . I try to walk again : I drag my exhausted limb slowly towards it . it lead I aslant over the hill , through a wide bog , which would have be impassable in winter , and be splashy and shake even now , in the height of summer . here I fall twice ; but as often I rise and rally my faculty . this light be my forlorn hope : I must gain it . have cross the marsh , I see a trace of white over the moor . I approach it ; it be a road or a track : it lead straight up to the light , which now beam from a sort of knoll , amidst a clump of tree -- fir , apparently , from what I could distinguish of the character of they form and foliage through the gloom . my star vanish as I draw near : some obstacle have intervene between I and it . I put out my hand to feel the dark mass before I : I discriminate the rough stone of a low wall -- above it , something like palisade , and within , a high and prickly hedge . I grope on . again a whitish object gleam before I : it be a gate -- a wicket ; it move on its hinge as I touch it . on each side stand a sable bush - holly or yew . enter the gate and pass the shrub , the silhouette of a house rise to view , black , low , and rather long ; but the guiding light shone nowhere . all be obscurity . be the inmate retire to rest ? I fear it must be so . in seek the door , I turn a angle : there shoot out the friendly gleam again , from the lozenged pane of a very small
small latticed window , within a foot of the ground , make still smaller by the growth of ivy or some other creeping plant , whose leave cluster thick over the portion of the house wall in which it be set . the aperture be so screen and narrow , that curtain or shutter have be deem unnecessary ; and when I stoop down and put aside the spray of foliage shoot over it , I could see all withing . I could see clearly a room with a sand floor , clean scour ; a dresser of , with pewter plate range in row , reflect the redness and radiance of a glow peat - fire . I could see a clock , a white deal table , some chair . the candle , whose ray have be my beacon , burn on the table ; and by its light a elderly woman , somewhat rough - look , but scrupulously clean , like all about she , be knitt a stocking . I notice these object cursorily only -- in they there be nothing extraordinary . a group of more interest appear near the hearth , sit still amidst the rosy peace and warmth suffuse it . two young , graceful woman -- lady in every point -- sat , one in a low rocking - chair , the other on a lower stool ; both wear deep mourning of crape and bombazeen , which sombre garb singularly set off very fair neck and face : a large old pointer dog rest its massive head on the knee of one girl -- in the lap of the other be cushion a black cat . a strange place be this humble kitchen for such occupant ! who be they ? they could not be the daughter of the elderly person at the table ; for she look like a rustic , and they be all delicacy and cultivation . I have nowhere seen such face as theirs : and yet , as I gaze on they , I seem intimate with every lineament . I can not call they handsome -- they be too pale and grave for the word : as they each bend over a book , they look thoughtful almost to severity . a stand between they support a second candle and two great volume , to which they frequently refer , compare they , seemingly , with the smaller book they hold in they hand , like people consult a dictionary to aid they in the task of translation . this scene be as silent as if all the figure have be shadow and the firelit apartment a picture : so hush be it , I could hear the cinder fall from the grate , the clock tick in its obscure corner ; and I even fancie I could distinguish the click - click of the woman 's knitting - needle . when , therefore , a voice break the strange stillness at last , it be audible enough to I . " , , " say one of the absorb student ; " and old be together in the night - time , and be tell a dream from which he have awaken in terror -- listen ! " and in a low voice she read something , of which not one word be intelligible to I ; for it be in a unknown tongue -- neither nor . whether it be or I could not tell . " that be strong , " she say , when she have finish : " I relish it . " the other girl , who have lift she head to listen to she sister , repeat , while she gaze at the fire , a line of what have be read . at a later day , I know the language and the book ; therefore , I will here quote the line : though , when I first hear it , it be only like a stroke on sound brass to I -- convey no meaning :- " ' trat hervor , anzusehe wie die . ' good ! good ! " she exclaim , while she dark and deep eye sparkle . " there you have a dim and mighty archangel fitly set before you ! the line be worth a hundred page of fustian . ' Ich wage die in meine und die Werke mit dem Gewichte meine Grimms . ' I like it ! " both be again silent . " be there ony country where they talk I ' that way ? " ask the old woman , look up from she knitting . " yes , -- a far larger country than , where they talk in no other way . " " well , for sure case , I knee not how they can understand t ' one t'other : and if either of ' ye go there , ye could tell what they say , I guess ? " " we could probably tell something of what they say , but not all -- for we be not as clever as you think we , . we do not speak German , and we can not read it without a dictionary to help we . " " and what good do it do you ? " " we mean to teach it some time -- or at least the element , as they say ; and then we shall get more money than we do now . " " like : but give ower study ; ye have do enough for to - night . " " I think we have : at least I be tired . , be you ? " " Mortally : after all , it be tough work fagge away at a language with no master but a lexicon . " " it be
be , especially such a language as this crabbed but glorious . I wonder when will come home . " " surely he will not be long now : it be just ten ( look at a little gold watch she draw from she girdle ) . it rain fast , : will you have the goodness to look at the fire in the parlour ? " the woman rise : she open a door , through which I dimly see a passage : soon I hear she stir a fire in a inner room ; she presently come back . " ah , childer ! " say she , " it fair trouble I to go into ' room now : it look so lonesome wi' the chair empty and set back in a corner . " she wip she eye with she apron : the two girl , grave before , look sad now . " but he be in a better place , " continue : " we should not wish he here again . and then , nobody need to have a quieter death nor he have . " " you say he never mention we ? " inquire one of the ladie . " he have not time , bairn : he be go in a minute , be you father . he have be a bit ailing like the day before , but natch to signify ; and when ask if he would like either o ' ye to be send for , he fair laugh at he . he begin again with a bit of a heaviness in he head the next day -- that be , a fortnight sin' -- and he go to sleep and niver wake : he wor a'most stark when you brother go into t ' chamber and fand he . ah , childer ! that be t ' last of ' t ' old stock -- for ye and be like of different soart to they ' at be gone ; for all you mother wor mich I ' you way , and a'most as book - learn . she wor the pictur ' of ' ye , : be more like you father . " I think they so similar I could not tell where the old servant ( for such I now conclude she to be ) see the difference . both be fair complexioned and slenderly make ; both possess face full of distinction and intelligence . one , to be sure , have hair a shade darker than the other , and there be a difference in they style of wear it ; 's pale brown lock be part and braide smooth : 's duskier tress cover she neck with thick curl . the clock struck ten . " ye will want you supper , I be sure , " observe ; " and so will when he come in . " and she proceed to prepare the meal . the lady rise ; they seem about to withdraw to the parlour . till this moment , I have be so intent on watch they , they appearance and conversation have excite in I so kee a interest , I have half - forget my own wretch position : now it recur to I . more desolate , more desperate than ever , it seem from contrast . and how impossible do it appear to touch the inmate of this house with concern on my behalf ; to make they believe in the truth of my want and woe -- to induce they to vouchsafe a rest for my wandering ! as I grope out the door , and knock at it hesitatingly , I feel that last idea to be a mere chimera . open . " what do you want ? " she inquire , in a voice of surprise , as she survey I by the light of the candle she hold . " may I speak to you mistress ? " I say . " you have better tell I what you have to say to they . where do you come from ? " " I be a stranger . " " what be you business here at this hour ? " " I want a night 's shelter in a out - house or anywhere , and a morsel of bread to eat . " , the very feeling I dread , appear in 's face . " I will give you a piece of bread , " she say , after a pause ; " but we can not take in a vagrant to lodge . it be not likely . " " do let I speak to you mistress . " " no , not I . what can they do for you ? you should not be rove about now ; it look very ill . " " but where shall I go if you drive I away ? what shall I do ? " " oh , I will warrant you know where to go and what to do . mind you do not do wrong , that be all . here be a penny ; now go -- " " a penny can not feed I , and I have no strength to go farther . do not shut the door :- oh , do not , for 's sake ! " " I must ; the rain be drive in -- " " tell the young lady . let I see they - " " indeed , I will not . you be not what you ought to be , or you would not make such a noise . move off . " " but I must die if I be turn away . " " not you . I be fear have you have some ill plan agate , that bring
bring you about folk 's house at this time of ' night . if you have any follower -- housebreaker or such like -- anywhere near , you may tell they we be not by ourselves in the house ; we have a gentleman , and dog , and gun . " here the honest but inflexible servant clap the door to and bolt it within . this be the climax . a pang of exquisite suffering -- a throe of true despair -- rent and heav my heart . wear out , indeed , I be ; not another step could I stir . I sank on the wet doorstep : I groane -- I wring my hand -- I weep in utter anguish . oh , this spectre of death ! oh , this last hour , approach in such horror ! Alas , this isolation -- this banishment from my kind ! not only the anchor of hope , but the footing of fortitude be gone -- at least for a moment ; but the last I soon endeavoure to regain . " I can but die , " I say , " and I believe in . let I try to wait he will in silence . " these word I not only think , but utter ; and thrust back all my misery into my heart , I make a effort to compel it to remain there -- dumb and still . " all man must die , " say a voice quite close at hand ; " but all be not condemn to meet a lingering and premature doom , such as yours would be if you perish here of want . " " who or what speak ? " I ask , terrify at the unexpected sound , and incapable now of derive from any occurrence a hope of aid . a form be near -- what form , the pitch - dark night and my enfeeble vision prevent I from distinguishing . with a loud long knock , the new - comer appeal to the door . " be it you , ? " cry . " yes -- yes ; open quickly . " " well , how wet and cold you must be , such a wild night as it be ! come in -- you sister be quite uneasy about you , and I believe there be bad folk about . there have be a beggar- woman -- I declare she be not go yet ! -- lay down there . get up ! for shame ! off , I say ! " " Hush , ! I have a word to say to the woman . you have do you duty in excluding , now let I do mine in admit she . I be near , and listen to both you and she . I think this be a peculiar case -- I must at least examine into it . young woman , rise , and pass before I into the house . " with difficulty I obey he . presently I stand within that clean , bright kitchen -- on the very hearth -- trembl , sicken ; conscious of a aspect in the last degree ghastly , wild , and weather - beaten . the two lady , they brother , , the old servant , be all gaze at I . " . , who be it ? " I hear one ask . " I can not tell : I find she at the door , " be the reply . " she do look white , " say . " as white as clay or death , " be respond . " she will fall : let she sit . " and indeed my head swam : I drop , but a chair receive I . I still possess my sense , though just now I could not speak . " perhaps a little water would restore she . Hannah , fetch some . but she be wear to nothing . how very thin , and how very bloodless ! " " a mere spectre ! " " be she ill , or only famish ? " " Famish , I think . , be that milk ? give it I , and a piece of bread . " ( I know she by the long curl which I see droop between I and the fire as she bend over I ) break some bread , dip it in milk , and put it to my lip . she face be near mine : I see there be pity in it , and I feel sympathy in she hurried breathing . in she simple word , too , the same balm - like emotion speak : " try to eat . " " yes -- try , " repeat gently ; and 's hand remove my sodden bonnet and lifte my head . I taste what they offer I : feebly at first , eagerly soon . " not too much at first -- restrain she , " say the brother ; " she have have enough . " and he withdraw the cup of milk and the plate of bread . " a little more , -- look at the avidity in she eye . " " no more at present , sister . try if she can speak now -- ask she she name . " I feel I could speak , and I answer -- " my name be . " anxious as ever to avoid discovery , I have before resolve to assume a alias . " and where do you live ? where be you friend ? " I be silent . " can we send for any one you know ? " I shook my head . " what account can you give of yourself ? "
" somehow , now that I have once cross the threshold of this house , and once be bring face to face with its owner , I feel no longer outcast , vagrant , and disown by the wide world . I da to put off the mendicant -- to resume my natural manner and character . I begin once more to know myself ; and when demand a account -- which at present I be far too weak to render -- I say after a brief pause - " Sir , I can give you no detail to - night . " " but what , then , " say he , " do you expect I to do for you ? " " nothing , " I reply . my strength suffice for but short answer . take the word - " do you mean , " she ask , " that we have now give you what aid you require ? and that we may dismiss you to the moor and the rainy night ? " I look at she . she have , I think , a remarkable countenance , instinct both with power and goodness . I take sudden courage . answer she compassionate gaze with a smile , I say -- " I will trust you . if I be a masterless and stray dog , I know that you would not turn I from you hearth to - night : as it be , I really have no fear . do with I and for I as you like ; but excuse I from much discourse -- my breath be short -- I feel a spasm when I speak . " all three survey I , and all three be silent . " Hannah , " say , at last , " let she sit there at present , and ask she no question ; in ten minute more , give she the remainder of that milk and bread . and , let we go into the parlour and talk the matter over . " they withdraw . very soon one of the lady return -- I could not tell which . a kind of pleasant stupor be steal over I as I sit by the genial fire . in a undertone she give some direction to . Ere long , with the servant 's aid , I contrive to mount a staircase ; my dripping clothes be remove ; soon a warm , dry bed receive I . I thank -- experience amidst unutterable exhaustion a glow of grateful joy -- and slept . the recollection of about three day and night succeed this be very dim in my mind . I can recall some sensation felt in that interval ; but few thought fram , and no action perform . I know I be in a small room and in a narrow bed . to that bed I seem to have grow ; I lay on it motionless as a stone ; and to have tear I from it would have be almost to kill I . I take no note of the lapse of time -- of the change from morning to noon , from noon to evening . I observ when any one enter or leave the apartment : I could even tell who they be ; I could understand what be say when the speaker stand near to I ; but I could not answer ; to open my lip or move my limb be equally impossible . Hannah , the servant , be my most frequent visitor . she come disturb I . I have a feeling that she wish I away : that she do not understand I or my circumstance ; that she be prejudice against I . and appear in the chamber once or twice a day . they would whisper sentences of this sort at my bedside - " it be very well we take she in . " " yes ; she would certainly have be find dead at the door in the morning have she be leave out all night . I wonder what she have go through ? " " strange hardship , I imagine -- poor , emaciate , pallid wanderer ? " " she be not a uneducated person , I should think , by she manner of speak ; she accent be quite pure ; and the clothes she take off , though splash and wet , be little worn and fine . " " she have a peculiar face ; fleshless and haggard as it be , I rather like it ; and when in good health and animated , I can fancy she physiognomy would be agreeable . " never once in they dialogue do I hear a syllable of regret at the hospitality they have extend to I , or of suspicion of , or aversion to , myself . I be comforte . come but once : he look at I , and say my state of lethargy be the result of reaction from excessive and protract fatigue . he pronounce it needless to send for a doctor : nature , he be sure , would manage best , leave to herself . he say every nerve have be overstrain in some way , and the whole system must sleep torpid a while . there be no disease . he imagine my recovery would be rapid enough when once commence . these opinion he deliver in a few word , in a quiet , low voice ; and add , after a pause , in the tone of a man little accustom to expansive comment , " rather a unusual physiognomy ; certainly , not indicative of vulgarity or degradation . " " far otherwise , " respond . " to speak truth , , my heart rather warm to the poor little soul
soul . I wish we may be able to benefit she permanently . " " that be hardly likely , " be the reply . " you will find she be some young lady who have have a misunderstanding with she friend , and have probably injudiciously leave they . we may , perhaps , succeed in restore she to they , if she be not obstinate : but I trace line of force in she face which make I sceptical of she tractability . " he stand consider I some minute ; then add , " she look sensible , but not at all handsome . " " she be so ill , . " " or well , she would always be plain . the grace and harmony of beauty be quite want in those feature . " on the third day I be better ; on the fourth , I could speak , move , rise in bed , and turn . have bring I some gruel and dry toast , about , as I suppose , the dinner - hour . I have eat with relish : the food be good -- void of the feverish flavour which have hithertoo poisone what I have swallow . when she leave I , I feel comparatively strong and revive : ere long satiety of repose and desire for action stir I . I wish to rise ; but what could I put on ? only my damp and bemire apparel ; in which i have sleep on the ground and fall in the marsh . I feel asham to appear before my benefactor so clad . I be spare the humiliation . on a chair by the bedside be all my own thing , clean and dry . my black silk frock hang against the wall . the trace of the bog be remove from it ; the crease leave by the wet smoothe out : it be quite decent . my very shoe and stocking be purify and render presentable . there be the means of wash in the room , and a comb and brush to smooth my hair . after a weary process , and rest every five minute , I succeed in dress myself . my clothes hang loose on I ; for I be much waste , but I cover deficiency with a shawl , and once more , clean and respectable look -- no speck of the dirt , no trace of the disorder I so hate , and which seem so to degrade I , leave -- I crept down a stone staircase with the aid of the banister , to a narrow low passage , and find my way presently to the kitchen . it be full of the fragrance of new bread and the warmth of a generous fire . be bake . Prejudice , it be well know , be most difficult to eradicate from the heart whose soil have never be loose or fertilise by education : they grow there , firm as weed among stone . have be cold and stiff , indeed , at the first : latterly she have begin to relent a little ; and when she see I come in tidy and well - dress , she even smile . " what , you have get up ! " she say . " you be better , then . you may sit you down in my chair on the hearthstone , if you will . " she point to the rocking - chair : I take it . she bustle about , examine I every now and then with the corner of she eye . turn to I , as she take some loave from the oven , she ask bluntly - " do you ever go a - begge afore you come here ? " I be indignant for a moment ; but remember that anger be out of the question , and that I have indeed appear as a beggar to she , I answer quietly , but still not without a certain mark firmness - " you be mistaken in suppose I a beggar . I be no beggar ; any more than yourself or you young lady . " after a pause she say , " I dunnut understand that : you have like no house , nor no brass , I guess ? " " the want of house or brass ( by which I suppose you mean money ) do not make a beggar in you sense of the word . " " be you book - learn ? " she inquire presently . " yes , very . " " but you have never be to a boarding - school ? " " I be at a boarding - school eight year . " she open she eye wide . " whatever can not ye keep yourself for , then ? " " I have keep myself ; and , I trust , shall keep myself again . what be you go to do with these gooseberry ? " I inquire , as she bring out a basket of the fruit . " Mak ' 'em into pies . " " give they to I and I will pick they . " " Nay ; I dunnut want ye to do nuy . " " but I must do something . let I have they . " she consent ; and she even bring I a clean towel to spread over my dress , " lest , " as she say , " I should mucky it . " " ye have not be use to sarvant 's wark , I see by you hand , " she remark . " happen ye have be a dressmaker ? " " no , you be wrong . and now , never mind what I have be :
: do not trouble you head further about I ; but tell I the name of the house where we be . " " some call it , and some call it . " " and the gentleman who live here be call ? " " Nay ; he do not live here : he be only stay a while . when he be at home , he be in he own parish at . " " that village a few mile off ? " aye . " " and what be he ? " " he be a parson . " I remember the answer of the old housekeeper at the parsonage , when I have ask to see the clergyman . " this , then , be he father 's residence ? " " aye ; old live here , and he father , and grandfather , and gurt ( great ) grandfather afore he . " " the name , then , of that gentleman , be ? " " aye ; be like he kirsten name . " " and he sister be call and ? " " yes . " " they father be dead ? " " dead three week sin ' of a stroke . " " they have no mother ? " " the mistress have be dead this mony a year . " " have you live with the family long ? " " I have live here thirty year . I nurse they all three . " " that prove you must have be a honest and faithful servant . I will say so much for you , though you have have the incivility to call I a beggar . " she again regard I with a surprised stare . " I believe , " she say , " I be quite misto 'en in my thought of you : but there be so mony cheat go about , you mun forgie I . " " and though , " I continue , rather severely , " you wish to turn I from the door , on a night when you should not have shut out a dog . " " well , it be hard : but what can a body do ? I think more of ' th ' childer nor of mysel : poor thing ! they have like nobody to tak ' care on th'ey but I . I be like to look sharpish . " I maintain a grave silence for some minute . " you munnut think too hardly of I , " she again remark . " but I do think hardly of you , " I say ; " and I will tell you why -- not so much because you refuse to give I shelter , or regard I as a impostor , as because you just now make it a species of reproach that I have no ' brass ' and no house . some of the best people that ever liv have be as destitute as I be ; and if you be a , you ought not to consider poverty a crime . " " no more I ought , " say she : " tell I so too ; and I see I wor wrang -- but I have clear a different notion on you now to what I have . you look a raight down dacent little crater . " " that will do -- I forgive you now . shake hand . " she put she floury and horny hand into mine ; another and heartier smile illumin she rough face , and from that moment we be friend . be evidently fond of talk . while I pick the fruit , and she make the paste for the pie , she proceed to give I sundry detail about she deceased master and mistress , and " the childer , " as she call the young people . , she say , be a plain man enough , but a gentleman , and of as ancient a family as could be find . have belong to the Rivers ever since it be a house : and it be , she affir , " aboon two hundred year old -- for all it look but a small , humble place , natch to compare wi' 's grand hall down I ' . but she could remember 's father a journeyman needlemaker ; and wor gentry I ' th ' owd day of ' thg henrys , as onybody might see by look into th ' register I ' vestry . " still , she allow , " the owd maister be like other folk -- natch mich out o' t ' common way : stark mad of ' shooting , and far , and sich like . " the mistress be different . she be a great reader , and study a deal ; and the " bairn " have take after she . there be nothing like they in these part , nor ever have been ; they have like learn , all three , almost from the time they could speak ; and they have always be " of a mak ' of they own . " , when he grow up , would go to college and be a parson ; and the girl , as soon as they leave school , would seek place as governess : for they have tell she they father have some year ago lose a great deal of money by a man he have trust turn bankrupt ; and as he be now not rich enough to give they fortune , they must provide for themselves . they have liv very little at home for a long while , and be only come now to stay a few week on account of they father 's death ; but
but they do so like and , and all these moor and hill about . they have be in , and many other grand town ; but they always say there be no place like home ; and then they be so agreeable with each other -- never fall out nor " threape . " she do not know where there be such a family for be unite . have finish my task of gooseberry picking , I ask where the two lady and they brother be now . " go over to for a walk ; but they would be back in half - a - hour to tea . " they return within the time have allot they : they enter by the kitchen door . , when he see I , merely bow and pass through ; the two lady stop : , in a few word , kindly and calmly express the pleasure she feel in see I well enough to be able to come down ; take my hand : she shook she head at I . " you should have wait for my leave to descmend , " she say . " you still look very pale -- and so thin ! poor child ! -- poor girl ! " have a voice tone , to my ear , like the cooing of a dove . she possess eye whose gaze I delighte to encounter . she whole face seem to I full of charm . 's countenance be equally intelligent -- she feature equally pretty ; but she expression be more reserve , and she manners , though gentle , more distant . look and speak with a certain authority : she have a will , evidently . it be my nature to feel pleasure in yielding to a authority support like hers , and to bend , where my conscience and self - respect permit , to a active will . " and what business have you here ? " she continue . " it be not you place . and I sit in the kitchen sometimes , because at home we like to be free , even to license -- but you be a visitor , and must go into the parlour . " " I be very well here . " " not at all , with bustle about and cover you with flour . " " , the fire be too hot for you , " interpose . " to be sure , " add she sister . " come , you must be obedient . " and still hold my hand she make I rise , and lead I into the inner room . " sit there , " she say , place I on the sofa , " while we take we thing off and get the tea ready ; it be another privilege we exercise in we little moorland home -- to prepare we own meal when we be so inclined , or when be bake , brew , wash , or iron . " she close the door , leave I solus with , who sit opposite , a book or newspaper in he hand . I examine first , the parlour , and then its occupant . the parlour be rather a small room , very plainly furnish , yet comfortable , because clean and neat . the old - fashioned chair be very bright , and the walnut - wood table be like a look - glass . a few strange , antique portrait of the man and woman of other day decorate the stain wall ; a cupboard with glass door contain some book and a ancient set of china . there be no superfluous ornament in the room -- not one modern piece of furniture , save a brace of workbox and a lady 's desk in rosewood , which stand on a side - table : everything -- include the carpet and curtain -- look at once well wear and well save . -- sit as still as one of the dusty picture on the wall , keep he eye fix on the page he peruse , and he lip mutely seal -- be easy enough to examine . have he be a statue instead of a man , he could not have be easier . he be young -- perhaps from twenty - eight to thirty -- tall , slender ; he face rivet the eye ; it be like a face , very pure in outline : quite a straight , classic nose ; quite a Athenian mouth and ching . it be seldom , indeed , a english face come so near the antique model as do he . he might well be a little shocked at the irregularity of my lineament , he own be so harmonious . he eye be large and blue , with brown lash ; he high forehead , colourless as ivory , be partially streak over by careless lock of fair hair . this be a gentle delineation , be it not , reader ? yet he whom it describe scarcely impress one with the idea of a gentle , a yielding , a impressible , or even of a placid nature . Quiescent as he now sit , there be something about he nostril , he mouth , he brow , which , to my perceptions , indicate element within either restless , or hard , or eager . he do not speak to I one word , nor even direct to I one glance , till he sister return . , as she pass in and out , in the course of prepare tea , bring I a little cake , bake on the top of the oven . " eat that now , " she say : " you must be hungry . say you have have nothing but
but some gruel since breakfast . " I do not refuse it , for my appetite be awakened and keen . now close he book , approach the table , and , as he take a seat , fix he blue pictorial - look eye full on I . there be a unceremonious directness , a searching , decide steadfastness in he gaze now , which tell that intention , and not diffidence , have hitherto keep it avert from the stranger . " you be very hungry , " he say . " I be , sir . " it be my way -- it always be my way , by instinct -- ever to meet the brief with brevity , the direct with plainness . " it be well for you that a low fever have force you to abstain for the last three day : there would have be danger in yielding to the craving of you appetite at first . now you may eat , though still not immoderately . " " I trust I shall not eat long at you expense , sir , " be my very clumsily -contrived , unpolished answer . " no , " he say coolly : " when you have indicate to we the residence of you friend , we can write to they , and you may be restore to home . " " that , I must plainly tell you , be out of my power to do ; be absolutely without home and friend . " the three look at I , but not distrustfully ; I feel there be no suspicion in they glance : there be more of curiosity . I speak particularly of the young lady . 's eye , though clear enough in a literal sense , in a figurative one be difficult to fathom . he seem to use they rather as instrument to search other people 's thought , than as agent to reveal he own : the which combination of keenness and reserve be considerably more calculate to embarrass than to encourage . " do you mean to say , " he ask , " that you be completely isolate from every connection ? " " I do . not a tie link I to any living thing : not a claim do I possess to admittance under any roof in . " " a most singular position at you age ! " here I see he glance direct to my hand , which be fold on the table before I . I wonder what he seek there : he word soon explain the quest . " you have never be marry ? you be a spinster ? " laugh . " why , she can not he above seventeen or eighteen year old , , " say she . " I be near nineteen : but I be not marry . no . " I feel a burn glow mount to my face ; for bitter and agitat recollection be awaken by the allusion to marriage . they all see the embarrassment and the emotion . and relieve I by turn they eye elsewhere than to my crimsoned visage ; but the colder and sterner brother continue to gaze , till the trouble he have excite force out tear as well as colour . " where do you last reside ? " he now ask . " you be too inquisitive , , " murmure in a low voice ; but he lean over the table and require a answer by a second firm and piercing look . " the name of the place where , and of the person with whom I liv , be my secret , " I reply concisely . " which , if you like , you have , in my opinion , a right to keep , both from and every other questioner , " remark . " yet if I know nothing about you or you history , I can not help you , " he say . " and you need help , do you not ? " " I need it , and I seek it so far , sir , that some true philanthropist will put I in the way of get work which I can do , and the remuneration for which will keep I , if but in the barest necessary of life . " " I know not whether I be a true philanthropist ; yet I be willing to aid you to the utmost of my power in a purpose so honest . first , then , tell I what you have be accustom to do , and what you can do . " I have now swallow my tea . I be mightily refresh by the beverage ; as much so as a giant with wine : it give new tone to my unstrung nerve , and enable I to address this penetrate young judge steadily . " , " I say , turn to he , and look at he , as he look at I , openly and without diffidence , " you and you sister have do I a great service -- the greatest man can do he fellow - being ; you have rescue I , by you noble hospitality , from death . this benefit confer give you a unlimited claim on my gratitude , and a claim , to a certain extent , on my confidence . I will tell you as much of the history of the wanderer you have harbour , as I can tell without compromise my own peace of mind -- my own security , moral and physical , and that of other . " I be a orphan , the daughter of a clergyman . my parent die before I could know they . I be brotch up a dependant ; educate in
in a charitable institution . I will even tell you the name of the establishment , where I pass six year as a pupil , and two as a teacher -- , - shire : you will have hear of it , ? -- the be the treasurer . " " I have hear of , and I have see the school . " " I leave nearly a year since to become a private governess . I obtain a good situation , and be happy . this place I be oblige to leave four day before I come here . the reason of my departure I can not and ought not to explain : it would be useless , dangerous , and would sound incredible . no blame attach to I : I be as free from culpability as any one of you three . miserable I be , and must be for a time ; for the catastrophe which drive I from a house I have find a paradise be of a strange and direful nature . I observ but two point in plan my departure -- speed , secrecy : to secure these , I have to leave behind I everything I possess except a small parcel ; which , in my hurry and trouble of mind , I forget to take out of the coach that bring I to . to this neighbourhood , then , I come , quite destitute . I sleep two night in the open air , and wander about two day without cross a threshold : but twice in that space of time do I taste food ; and it be when bring by hunger , exhaustion , and despair almost to the last gasp , that you , , forbade I to perish of want at you door , and take I under the shelter of you roof . I know all you sister have do for I since -- for I have not be insensible during my see torpor -- and I owe to they spontaneous , genuine , genial compassion as large a debt as to you evangelical charity . " " do not make she talk any more now , , " say , as I pause ; " she be evidently not yet fit for excitement . come to the sofa and sit down now , . " I give a involuntary half start at hear the alias : I have forget my new name . , whom nothing seem to escape , notice it at once . " you say you name be ? " he observ . " I do say so ; and it be the name by which I think it expedient to be call at present , but it be not my real name , and when I hear it , it sound strange to I . " " you real name you will not give ? " " no : I fear discovery above all thing ; and whatever disclosure would lead to it , I avoid . " " you be quite right , I be sure , " say . " now do , brother , let she be at peace a while . " but when . have muse a few moment he recommence as imperturbably and with as much acuman as ever . " you would not like to be long dependent on we hospitality -- you would wish , I see , to dispense as soon as may be with my sister ' compassion , and , above all , with my Charity ( I be quite sensible of the distinction draw , nor do I resent it -- it be just ) : you desire to be independent of we ? " " I do : I have already say so . show I how to work , or how to seek work : that be all I now ask ; then let I go , if it be but to the meanest cottage ; but till then , allow I to stay here : I dread another essay of the horror of homeless destitution . " " indeed you shall stay here , " say , put she white hand on my head . " you shall , " repeat , in the tone of undemonstrative sincerity which seem natural to she . " my sister , you see , have a pleasure in keep you , " say , " as they would have a pleasure in keeping and cherish a half - freeze bird , some wintry wind might have drive through they casement . I feel more inclination to put you in the way of keep yourself , and shall endeavou to do so ; but observe , my sphere be narrow . I be but the incumbent of a poor country parish : my aid must be of the humblest sort . and if you be inclin to despise the day of small thing , seek some more efficient succour than such as I can offer . " " she have already say that she be willing to do anything honest she can do , " answer for I ; " and you know , , she have no choice of helper : she be force to put up with such crusty people as you . " " I will be a dressmaker ; I will be a plain-workwoman ; I will be a servant , a nurse - girl , if I can be no better , " I answer . " right , " say , quite coolly . " if such be you spirit , I promise to aid you , in my own time and way . " he now resume the book with which he have be occupy before tea . I soon withdraw , for I have talk as much , and sit up
up as long , as my present strength would permit . the more I know of the inmate of , the better I like they . in a few day I have so far recover my health that I could sit up all day , and walk out sometimes . I could join with and in all they occupations ; converse with they as much as they wish , and aid they when and where they would allow I . there be a revive pleasure in this intercourse , of a kind now taste by I for the first time -- the pleasure arise from perfect congeniality of taste , sentiment , and principle . I like to read what they like to read : what they enjoy , delighte I ; what they approve , I reverence . they love they sequester home . I , too , in the grey , small , antique structure , with its low roof , it be latticed casement , its moulder wall , it be avenue of aged fir -- all grow aslant under the stress of mountain wind ; its garden , dark with yew and hobably -- and where no flower but of the hardiest species would bloom -- find a charm both potent and permanent . they cling to the purple moor behind and around they dwelling -- to the hollow vale into which the pebbly bridle - path lead from they gate descende , and which wound between fern - bank first , and then amongst a few of the wildest little pasture - field that ever bordere a wilderness of heath , or give sustenance to a flock of grey moorland sheep , with they little mossy - faced lamb :- they cling to this scene , I say , with a perfect enthusiasm of attachment . I could comprehend the feeling , and share both its strength and truth . I see the fascination of the locality . I feel the consecration of its loneliness : my eye feast on the outline of swell and sweep -- on the wild colouring communicate to ridge and dell by moss , by heath - bell , by flower - sprinkle turf , by brilliant bracken , and mellow granite crag . these detail be just to I what they be to they -- so many pure and sweet source of pleasure . the strong blast and the soft breeze ; the rough and the halcyon day ; the hour of sunrise and sunset ; the moonlight and the clouded night , develop for I , in these region , the same attraction as for they -- wound round my faculty the same spell that entranc theirs . indoors we agree equally well . they be both more accomplished and better read than I be ; but with eagerness I follow in the path of knowledge they have trodden before I . I devoure the book they lent I : then it be full satisfaction to discuss with they in the evening what I have peruse during the day . think fit thought ; opinion meet opinion : we coincide , in short , perfectly . if in we trio there be a superior and a leader , it be . physically , she far excel I : she be handsome ; she be vigorous . in she animal spirit there be a affluence of life and certainty of flow , such as excit my wonder , while it baffle my comprehension . I could talk a while when the evening commence , but the first gush of vivacity and fluency go , I be fain to sit on a stool at 's foot , to rest my head on she knee , and listen alternately to she and , while they sound thoroughly the topic on which I have but touch . offer to teach I german . I like to learn off she : I see the part of instructress pleased and sui she ; that of scholar please and sui I no less . we nature dovetail : mutual affection -- of the strongest kind -- be the result . they discover I could draw : they pencil and colour - box be immediately at my service . my skill , greater in this one point than theirs , surprise and charme they . would sit and watch I by the hour together : then she would take lesson ; and a docile , intelligent , assiduous pupil she make . thus occupy , and mutually entertained , day pass like hour , and week like day . as to , the intimacy which have arisen so naturally and rapidly between I and he sister do not extend to he . one reason of the distance yet observ between we be , that he be comparatively seldom at home : a large proportion of he time appear devoted to visit the sick and poor among the scattered population of he parish . no weather seem to hinder he in these pastoral excursion : rain or fair , he would , when he hour of morning study be over , take he hat , and , follow by he father 's old pointer , , go out on he mission of love or duty -- I scarcely know in which light he regard it . sometimes , when the day be very unfavourable , he sister would expostulate . he would then say , with a peculiar smile , more solemn than cheerful -- " and if I let a gust of wind or a sprinkling of rain turn I aside from these easy task , what preparation would such sloth be for the future I propose to myself ? " and 's general answer to this question be a sigh , and some minute of apparently mournful meditation . but besides he frequent absence , there
there be another barrier to friendship with he : he see of a reserve , a abstract , and even of a brooding nature . Zealous in he ministerial labour , blameless in he life and habit , he yet do not appear to enjoy that mental serenity , that inward content , which should be the reward of every sincere and practical philanthropist . often , of a evening , when he sit at the window , he desk and papers before he , he would cease read or write , rest he ching on he hand , and deliver himself up to I know not what course of think ; but that it be pertur and excit might be see in the frequent flash and changeful dilation of he eye . I think , moreover , that be not to he that treasury of delight it be to he sister . he express once , and but once in my hearing , a strong sense of the rug charm of the hill , and a inborn affection for the dark roof and hoary wall he call he home ; but there be more of gloom than pleasure in the tone and word in which the sentiment be manifest ; and never do he seem to robe the moor for the sake of they soothing silence -- never seek out or dwell upon the thousand peaceful delight they could yield . Incommunicative as he be , some time elapse before I have a opportunity of gauge he mind . I first get a idea of its calibre when I hear he preach in he own church at . I wish I could describe that sermon : but it be past my power . I can not even render faithfully the effect it produce on I . it begin calm -- and indeed , as far as delivery and pitch of voice go , it be calm to the end : a earnestly feel , yet strictly restrain zeal breathe soon in the distinct accent , and prompt the nervous language . this grow to force -- compress , condense , control . the heart be thrill , the mind astonished , by the power of the preacher : neither be soften . throughout there be a strange bitterness ; a absence of consolatory gentleness ; stern allusion to Calvinistic doctrine -- election , predestination , reprobation -- be frequent ; and each reference to these point sound like a sentence pronounce for doom . when he have do , instead of feel better , calmer , more enlighten by he discourse , I experience a inexpressible sadness ; for it see to I -- I know not whether equally so to other -- that the eloquence to which i have be listen have sprung from a depth where lay turbid dregs of disappointment -- where move troubling impulse of insatiate yearning and disquieting aspiration . I be sure -- pure -lived , conscientious , zealous as he be -- have not yet find that peace of which passeth all understanding : he have no more found it , I think , than have I with my conceale and racking regret for my broken idol and lose elysium -- regret to which I have latterly avoid refer , but which possess I and tyrannise over I ruthlessly . a month be gone . and be soon to leave , and return to the far different life and scene which await they , as governess in a large , fashionable , south - of - city , where each hold a situation in family by whose wealthy and haughty member they be regard only as humble dependant , and who neither know nor seek out they innate excellence , and appreciate only they acquire accomplishment as they appreciate the skill of they cook or the taste of they waiting - woman . have say nothing to I yet about the employment he have promise to obtain for I ; yet it become urgent that I should have a vocation of some kind . one morning , be leave alone with he a few minute in the parlour , I venture to approach the window - recess -- which he table , chair , and desk consecrate as a kind of study -- and I be go to speak , though not very well know in what word to frame my inquiry -- for it be at all time difficult to break the ice of reserve glassing over such nature as he -- when he save I the trouble by be the first to commence a dialogue . look up as I draw near -- " you have a question to ask of I ? " he say . " yes ; I wish to know whether you have hear of any service I can offer myself to undertake ? " " I find or devise something for you three week ago ; but as you see both useful and happy here -- as my sister have evidently become attached to you , and you society give they unusual pleasure -- I deem it inexpedient to break in on you mutual comfort till they approach departure from should render yours necessary . " " and they will go in three day now ? " I say . " yes ; and when they go , I shall return to the parsonage at : will accompany I ; and this old house will be shut up . " I wait a few moment , expect he would go on with the subject first broach : but he seem to have enter another train of reflection : he look denote abstraction from I and my business . I be oblige to recall he to a theme which be of necessity one of close and anxious interest to I . " what be the employment you
you have in view , ? I hope this delay will not have increase the difficulty of secure it . " " oh , no ; since it be a employment which depend only on I to give , and you to accept . " he again pause : there seem a reluctance to continue . I grow impatient : a restless movement or two , and a eager and exact glance fasten on he face , convey the feeling to he as effectually as word could have do , and with less trouble . " you need be in no hurry to hear , " he say : " let I frankly tell you , I have nothing eligible or profitable to suggest . before I explain , recall , if you please , my notice , clearly give , that if I help you , it must be as the blind man would help the lame . I be poor ; for I find that , when I have pay my father 's debt , all the patrimony remain to I will be this crumble grange , the row of scathed fir behind , and the patch of moorish soil , with the yew - tree and hobably - bushes in front . I be obscure : River be a old name ; but of the three sole descendant of the race , two earn the dependant 's crust among strangers , and the third consider himself a alien from he native country -- not only for life , but in death . yes , and deem , and be bound to deem , himself honoure by the lot , and aspire but after the day when the cross of separation from fleshly tie shall be laid on he shoulders , and when the head of that church -militant of whose humblest member he be one , shall give the word , ' rise , follow I ! ' " say these word as he pronounce he sermon , with a quiet , deep voice ; with a unflushed cheek , and a coruscat radiance of glance . he resume - " and since I be myself poor and obscure , I can offer you but a service of poverty and obscurity . you may even think it degrad -- for I see now you habits have be what the world call refin : you taste lean to the ideal , and you society have at least be amongst the educated ; but I consider that no service degrade which can better we race . I hold that the more arid and unreclaim the soil where the labourer 's task of tillage be appoint he -- the scantier the meed he toil bring -- the higher the honour . he , under such circumstance , be the destiny of the pioneer ; and the first pioneer of the be the Apostles -- they captain be , the Redeemer , himself . " " well ? " I say , as he again pause -- " proceed . " he look at I before he proceed : indeed , he seem leisurely to read my face , as if its feature and line be character on a page . the conclusion draw from this scrutiny he partially express in he succeeding observation . " I believe you will accept the post I offer you , " say he , " and hold it for a while : not permanently , though : any more than I could permanently keep the narrow and narrowing -- the tranquil , hide office of English country incumbent ; for in you nature be a alloy as detrimental to repose as that in mine , through of a different kind . " " do explain , " I urge , when he halt once more . " I will ; and you shall hear how poor the proposal be , -- how trivial -- how cramping . I shall not stay long at , now that my father be dead , and that I be my own master . I shall leave the place probably in the course of a twelve - month ; but while I do stay , I will exert myself to the utmost for its improvement . , when I come to it two year ago , have no school : the child of the poor be exclude from every hope of progress . I establish one for boy : I mean now to open a second school for girl . I have hire a building for the purpose , with a cottage of two room attach to it for the mistress 's house . she salary will be thirty pound a year : she house be already furnished , very simply , but sufficientely , by the kindness of a lady , ; the only daughter of the sole rich man in my parish -- , the proprietor of a needle - factory and iron - foundry in the valley . the same lady pay for the education and clothing of a orphan from the workhouse , on condition that she shall aid the mistress in such menial office connect with she own house and the school as she occupation of teaching will prevent she have time to discharge in person . will you be this mistress ? " he put the question rather hurriedly ; he seem half to expect a indignant , or at least a disdainful rejection of the offer : not know all my thought and feeling , though guess some , he could not tell in what light the lot would appear to I . in truth it be humble -- but then it be shelter , and I want a safe asylum : it be plodd -- but then , compare with that of a governess in a rich house , it be independent
independent ; and the fear of servitude with strangers enter my soul like iron : it be not ignoble -- not unworthy -- not mentally degrad , I make my decision . " I thank you for the proposal , , and I accept it with all my heart . " " but you comprehend I ? " he say . " it be a village school : you scholar will be only poor girl -- cottager ' child -- at the best , farmer ' daughter . Knitting , sew , read , write , cipher , will be all you will have to teach . what will you do with you accomplishment ? what , with the largest portion of you mind -- sentiment -- taste ? " " save they till they be want . they will keep . " " you know what you undertake , then ? " " I do . " he now smile : and not a bitter or a sad smile , but one well please and deeply gratify . " and when will you commence the exercise of you function ? " " I will go to my house to - morrow , and open the school , if you like , next week . " " very well : so be it . " he rise and walk through the room . stand still , he again look at I . he shook he head . " what do you disapprove of , ? " I ask . " you will not stay at long : no , no ! " " why ? what be you reason for say so ? " " I read it in you eye ; it be not of that description which promise the maintenance of a even tenor in life . " " I be not ambitious . " he start at the word " ambitious . " he repeat , " no . what make you think of ambition ? who be ambitious ? I know I be : but how do you find it out ? " " I be speak of myself . " " well , if you be not ambitious , you be -- " he pause . " what ? " " I be go to say , impassion : but perhaps you would have misunderstood the word , and be displease . I mean , that human affections and sympathy have a most powerful hold on you . I be sure you can not long be content to pass you leisure in solitude , and to devote you work hour to a monotonous labour wholly void of stimulus : any more than I can be content , " he add , with emphasis , " to live here bury in morass , pend in with mountain -- my nature , that give I , contraven ; my faculty , heaven - bestow , paralyse -- make useless . you hear now how I contradict myself . I , who preach contentment with a humble lot , and justifi the vocation even of hewer of wood and drawer of water in 's service -- I , he ordain minister , almost rave in my restlessness . well , propensity and principles must be reconcile by some means . " he leave the room . in this brief hour I have lear not more of he than in the whole previous month : yet still he puzzl I . and become more sad and silent as the day approach for leave they brother and they home . they both try to appear as usual ; but the sorrow they have to struggle against be one that could not be entirely conquer or conceal . intimate that this would be a different parting from any they have ever yet know . it would probably , as far as . be concerned , be a parting for year : it might be a parting for life . " he will sacrifice all to he long - fram resolve , " she say : " natural affection and feeling more potent still . look quiet , ; but he hide a fever in he vital . you would think he gentle , yet in some thing he be inexorable as death ; and the worst of it be , my conscience will hardly permit I to dissuade he from he severe decision : certainly , I can not for a moment blame he for it . it be right , noble , : yet it break my heart ! " and the tear gush to she fine eye . bend she head low over she work . " we be now without father : we shall soon be without home and brother , " she murmure , at that moment a little accident superven , which seem decree by fate purposely to prove the truth of the adage , that " misfortunes never come singly , " and to add to they distress the vexing one of the slip between the cup and the lip . pass the window read a letter . he enter . " we uncle be dead , " say he . both the sister seem struck : not shock or appal ; the tiding appear in they eye rather momentous than afflicting . " dead ? " repeat . " yes . " she rivet a search gaze on she brother 's face . " and what then ? " she demand , in a low voice . " what then , ? " he reply , maintain a marble immobility of feature . " what then ? why -- nothing . read . " he throw the letter into she lap . she glance over it , and hand it to . peruse it in silence , and return it to she brother . all
all three look at each other , and all three smile -- a dreary , pensive smile enough . " amen ! we can yet live , " say at last . " at any rate , it make we no worse off than we be before , " remark . " only it force rather strongly on the mind the picture of what might have , " say , " and contrast it somewhat too vividly with what be . " he fold the letter , lock it in he desk , and again go out . for some minute no one spoke . then turn to I . " , you will wonder at we and we mystery , " she say , " and think we hard - hear being not to be more move at the death of so near a relation as a uncle ; but we have never see he or know he . he be my mother 's brother . my father and he quarrell long ago . it be by he advice that my father risk most of he property in the speculation that ruin he . mutual recrimination pass between they : they part in anger , and be never reconcile . my uncle engage afterwards in more prosperous undertaking : it appear he realise a fortune of twenty thousand pound . he be never marry , and have no near kindred but ourselves and one other person , not more closely related than we . my father always cherish the idea that he would ato for he error by leave he possession to we ; that letter inform we that he have bequeath every penny to the other relation , with the exception of thirty guinea , to be divide between , , and , for the purchase of three mourning ring . he have a right , of course , to do as he please : and yet a momentary damp be cast on the spirit by the receipt of such news . and I would have esteem ourselves rich with a thousand pound each ; and to such a sum would have be valuable , for the good it would have enable he to do . " this explanation give , the subject be drop , and no further reference make to it by either or he sister . the next day i leave for . the day after , and quit it for distant b - . in a week , and repair to the parsonage : and so the old grange be abandon . my home , then , when I at last find a home , -- be a cottage ; a little room with whitewashed wall and a sand floor , contain four painted chair and a table , a clock , a cupboard , with two or three plate and dish , and a set of tea - thing in delf . above , a chamber of the same dimension as the kitchen , with a deal bedstead and chest of drawer ; small , yet too large to be fill with my scanty wardrobe : though the kindness of my gentle and generous friend have increase that , by a modest stock of such thing as be necessary . it be evening . I have dismiss , with the fee of a orange , the little orphan who serve I as a handmaid . I be sit alone on the hearth . this morning , the village school open . I have twenty scholar . but three of the number can read : none write or cipher . several knit , and a few sew a little . they speak with the broadest accent of the district . at present , they and I have a difficulty in understanding each other 's language . some of they be unmannered , rough , intractable , as well as ignorant ; but other be docile , have a wish to learn , and evince a disposition that please I . I must not forget that these coarsely - clad little peasant be of flesh and blood as good as the scion of gentlest genealogy ; and that the germ of native excellence , refinement , intelligence , kind feel , be as likely to exist in they heart as in those of the best - bear . my duty will be to develop these germ : surely I shall find some happiness in discharge that office . much enjoyment I do not expect in the life open before I : yet it will , doubtless , if I regulate my mind , and exert my power as I ought , yield I enough to live on from day to day . be I very gleeful , settled , content , during the hour I pass in yonder bare , humble schoolroom this morning and afternoon ? not to deceive myself , I must reply -- no : I feel desolate to a degree . I feel -- yes , idiot that I be -- I feel degraded . I doubte I have take a step which sank instead of raise I in the scale of social existence . I be weakly dismay at the ignorance , the poverty , the coarseness of all I hear and see round I . but let I not hate and despise myself too much for these feeling ; I know they to be wrong -- that be a great step gai ; I shall strive to overcome they . to -morrow , I trust , I shall get the better of they partially ; and in a few week , perhaps , they will be quite subdue . in a few month , it be possible , the happiness of see progress , and a change for the better in my scholar may substitute gratification for disgust . meantime
meantime , let I ask myself one question -- which be better ? -- to have surrendere to temptation ; listen to passion ; make no painful effort -- no struggle ; -- but to have sunk down in the silken snare ; fall asleep on the flower cover it ; wake in a southern clime , amongst the luxuries of a pleasure villa : to have be now live in , 's mistress ; delirious with he love half my time -- for he would -- oh , yes , he would have love I well for a while . he do love I -- no one will ever love I so again . I shall never more know the sweet homage give to beauty , youth , and -- for never to any one else shall I seem to possess these charms . he be fond and proud of I -- it be what no man besides will ever be . -- but where be I wander , and what be I say , and above all , feel ? whether be it better , I ask , to be a slave in a fool 's paradise at -- fevere with delusive bliss one hour -- suffocat with the bitterest tear of remorse and shame the next -- or to be a village-schoolmistress , free and honest , in a breezy mountain nook in the healthy heart of ? yes ; I feel now that I be right when I adhere to principle and law , and scorn and crush the insane prompting of a frenzied moment . direct I to a correct choice : I thank he providence for the guidance ! have bring my eventide musing to this point , I rise , go to my door , and look at the sunset of the harvest - day , and at the quiet field before my cottage , which , with the school , be distant half a mile from the village . the bird be singe they last strain - " the air be mild , the dew be balm . " while I look , I think myself happy , and be surprised to find myself ere long weeping -- and why ? for the doom which have reave I from adhesion to my master : for he I be no more to see ; for the desperate grief and fatal fury -- consequence of my departure -- which might now , perhaps , be drag he from the path of right , too far to leave hope of ultimate restoration thither . at this thought , I turn my face aside from the lovely sky of eve and lonely vale of -- I say Lonely , for in that bend of it visible to I there be no building apparent save the church and the parsonage , half - hide in tree , and , quite at the extremity , the roof of , where the rich and he daughter liv . I hide my eye , and lean my head against the stone frame of my door ; but soon a slight noise near the wicket which shut in my tiny garden from the meadow beyond it make I look up . a dog -- old , 's pointer , as I see in a moment -- be push the gate with he nose , and himself lean upon it with fold arm ; he brow knit , he gaze , grave almost to displeasure , fix on I . I ask he to come in . " no , I can not stay ; I have only bring you a little parcel my sister leave for you . I think it contain a colour - box , pencil , and paper . " I approach to take it : a welcome gift it be . he examine my face , I think , with austerity , as I come near : the trace of tear be doubtless very visible upon it . " have you find you first day 's work harder than you expect ? " he ask . " oh , no ! on the contrary , I think in time I shall get on with my scholar very well . " " but perhaps you accommodation -- you cottage -- you furniture -- have disappoint you expectation ? they be , in truth , scanty enough ; but -- " I interrupt - " my cottage be clean and weather - proof ; my furniture sufficient and commodious . all I see have make I thankful , not despondent . I be not absolutely such a fool and sensualist as to regret the absence of a carpet , a sofa , and silver plate ; besides , five week ago I have nothing -- I be a outcast , a beggar , a vagrant ; now I have acquaintance , a home , a business . I wonder at the goodness of ; the generosity of my friend ; the bounty of my lot . I do not repine . " " but you feel solitude a oppression ? the little house there behind you be dark and empty . " " I have hardly have time yet to enjoy a sense of tranquillity , much less to grow impatient under one of loneliness . " " very well ; I hope you feel the content you express : at any rate , you good sense will tell you that it be too soon yet to yield to the vacillating fear of 's wife . what you have leave before I see you , of course I do not know ; but I counsel you to resist firmly every temptation which would incline you to look back : pursue you present career steadily , for some month at least . " " it be what I mean to do
do , " I answer . continue - " it be hard work to control the workings of inclination and turn the bent of nature ; but that it may be do , I know from experience . have give we , in a measure , the power to make we own fate ; and when we energie seem to demand a sustenance they can not get -- when we will strain after a path we may not follow -- we need neither starve from inanition , nor stand still in despair : we have but to seek another nourishment for the mind , as strong as the forbidden food it longe to taste -- and perhaps purer ; and to how out for the adventurous foot a road as direct and broad as the one Fortune have block up against we , if rougher than it . " a year ago I be myself intensely miserable , because I think I have make a mistake in enter the ministry : it be uniform duty weary I to death . I burn for the more active life of the world -- for the more exciting toil of a literary career -- for the destiny of a artist , author , orator ; anything rather than that of a priest : yes , the heart of a politician , of a soldier , of a votary of glory , a lover of renown , a luster after power , beat under my curate 's surplice . I consider ; my life be so wretched , it must be change , or I must die . after a season of darkness and struggle , light broke and relief fall : my cramp existence all at once spread out to a plain without bound -- my power hear a call from heaven to rise , gather they full strength , spread they wing , and mount beyond ken . have a errand for I ; to bear which afar , to deliver it well , skill and strength , courage and eloquence , the best qualification of soldier , statesman , and orator , be all need : for these all centre in the good missionary . " a missionary I resolve to be . from that moment my state of mind change ; the fetter dissolve and drop from every faculty , leave nothing of bondage but it be gall soreness -- which time only can heal . my father , indeed , impos the determination , but since he death , I have not a legitimate obstacle to contend with ; some affair settle , a successor for provide , a entanglement or two of the feeling break through or cut asunder -- a last conflict with human weakness , in which I know I shall overcome , because I have vow that I will overcome -- and I leave for the . " he say this , in he peculiar , subdu , yet emphatic voice ; look , when he have cease speak , not at I , but at the setting sun , at which I look too . both he and I have we back towards the path lead up the field to the wicket . we have hear no step on that grass - grow track ; the water run in the vale be the one lull sound of the hour and scene ; we might well then start when a gay voice , sweet as a silver bell , exclaim - " good evening , . and good evening , old . you dog be quicker to recognise he friend than you be , sir ; he prick he ear and wag he tail when I be at the bottom of the field , and you have you back towards I now . " it be true . though have start at the first of those musical accent , as if a thunderbolt have split a cloud over he head , he stand yet , at the close of the sentence , in the same attitude in which the speaker have surprise he -- he arm rest on the gate , he face direct towards the west . he turn at last , with measure deliberation . a vision , as it seem to I , have risen at he side . there appear , within three foot of he , a form clad in pure white -- a youthful , graceful form : full , yet fine in contour ; and when , after bend to caress , it lift up its head , and throw back a long veil , there bloom under he glance a face of perfect beauty . perfect beauty be a strong expression ; but I do not retrace or qualify it : as sweet feature as ever the temperate clime of mould ; as pure hue of rose and lily as ever she humid gale and vapoury sky generate and screen , justifi , in this instance , the term . no charm be want , no defect be perceptible ; the young girl have regular and delicate lineament ; eye shape and colour as we see they in lovely picture , large , and dark , and full ; the long and shadowy eyelash which encircle a fine eye with so soft a fascination ; the pencilled brow which give such clearness ; the white smooth forehead , which add such repose to the livelier beautie of tint and ray ; the cheek oval , fresh , and smooth ; the lip , fresh too , ruddy , healthy , sweetly form ; the even and gleam tooth without flaw ; the small dimple ching ; the ornament of rich , plenteous tress -- all advantage , in short , which , combine , realise the ideal of beauty , be fully hers . I wonder , as
as I look at this fair creature : I admire she with my whole heart . nature have surely form she in a partial mood ; and , forget she usual stint step - mother dole of gift , have endow this , she darl , with a grand - dame 's bounty . what do think of this earthly angel ? I naturally ask myself that question as I see he turn to she and look at she ; and , as naturally , I seek the answer to the inquiry in he countenance . he have already withdraw he eye from the , and be look at a humble tuft of daisie which grow by the wicket . " a lovely evening , but late for you to be out alone , " he say , as he crush the snowy head of the close flower with he foot . " oh , I only come home from - " ( she mention the name of a large town some twenty mile distant ) " this afternoon . tell I you have open you school , and that the new mistress be come ; and so I put on my bonnet after tea , and run up the valley to see she : this be she ? " point to I . " it be , " say . " do you think you shall like ? " she ask of I , with a direct and naive simplicity of tone and manner , please , if child - like . " I hope I shall . I have many inducement to do so . " " do you find you scholar as attentive as you expect ? " " . " " do you like you house ? " " very much . " " have I furnish it nicely ? " " very nicly , indeed . " " and make a good choice of a attendant for you in ? " " you have indeed . she be teachable and handy . " ( this then , I think , be , the heiress ; favour , it seem , in the gift of fortune , as well as in those of nature ! what happy combination of the planet preside over she birth , I wonder ? ) " I shall come up and help you to teach sometimes , " she add . " it will be a change for I to visit you now and then ; and I like a change . , I have be so gay during my stay at - . last night , or rather this morning , I be dance till two o'clock . the - th regiment be statione there since the riot ; and the officer be the most agreeable man in the world : they put all we young knife -grinder and scissor merchant to shame . " it seem to I that 's under lip protrude , and he upper lip curl a moment . he mouth certainly look a good deal compress , and the lower part of he face unusually stern and square , as the laugh girl give he this information . he lift he gaze , too , from the daisie , and turn it on she . a unsmiling , a searching , a mean gaze it be . she answer it with a second laugh , and laughter well become she youth , she ros , she dimple , she bright eye . as he stand , mute and grave , she again fall to caresse . " poor love I , " say she . " he be not stern and distant to he friend ; and if he could speak , he would not be silent . " as she patt the dog 's head , bend with native grace before he young and austere master , I see a glow rise to that master 's face . I see he solemn eye melt with sudden fire , and flicker with resistless emotion . Flush and kind thus , he look nearly as beautiful for a man as she for a woman . he chest heav once , as if he large heart , weary of despotic constriction , have expand , despite the will , and make a vigorous bound for the attainment of liberty . but he curb it , I think , as a resolute rider would curb a rearing steed . he respond neither by word nor movement to the gentle advance make he . " say you never come to see we now , " continue , look up . " you be quite a stranger at . he be alone this evening , and not very well : will you return with I and visit he ? " " it be not a seasonable hour to intrude on , " answer . " not a seasonable hour ! but I declare it be . it be just the hour when most want company : when the work be close and he have no business to occupy he . now , , do come . why be you so very shy , and so very sombre ? " she fill up the hiatus he silence leave by a reply of she own . " I forget ! " she exclaim , shak she beautiful curle head , as if shock at herself . " I be so giddy and thoughtless ! do excuse I . it have slip my memory that you have good reason to be indispose for joining in my chatter . and have leave you , and be shut up , and you be so lonely . I be sure i pity you . do come and see papa . " " not to - night , , not to - night . " speak almost like
like a automaton : himself only know the effort it cost he thus to refuse . " well , if you be so obstinate , I will leave you ; for I dare not stay any longer : the dew begin to fall . good evening ! " she hold out she hand . he just touche it . " good evening ! " he repeat , in a voice low and hollow as a echo . she turn , but in a moment return . " be you well ? " she ask . well might she put the question : he face be blanch as she gown . " quite well , " he enunciate ; and , with a bow , he leave the gate . she go one way ; he another . she turn twice to gaze after he as she trip fairy - like down the field ; he , as he strode firmly across , never turn at all . this spectacle of another 's suffering and sacrifice rapt my thought from exclusive meditation on my own . have designate she brother " inexorable as death . " she have not exaggerate . I continue the labour of the village - school as actively and faithfully as I could . it be truly hard work at first . some time elapse before , with all my effort , I could comprehend my scholar and they nature . wholly untatch , with faculty quite torpid , they seem to I hopelessly dull ; and , at first sight , all dull alike : but I soon find I be mistaken . there be a difference amongst they as amongst the educate ; and when I get to know they , and they I , this difference rapidly develop itself . they amazement at I , my language , my rule , and way , once subside , I find some of these heavy - look , gape rustic wake up into sharp - wit girl enough . many show themselves oblige , and amiable too ; and I discover amongst they not a few example of natural politeness , and innate self - respect , as well as of excellent capacity , that win both my goodwill and my admiration . these soon take a pleasure in do they work well , in keep they person neat , in learn they tasnks regularly , in acquire quiet and orderly manners . the rapidity of they progress , in some instance , be even surprising ; and a honest and happy pride I take in it : besides , I begin personally to like some of the best girl ; and they like I . I have amongst my scholar several farmer ' daughter : young woman grow , almost . these could already read , write , and sew ; and to they I teach the element of grammar , geography , history , and the finer kind of needlework . I find estimable character amongst they -- character desirous of information and dispose for improvement -- with whom I pass many a pleasant evening hour in they own home . they parent then ( the farmer and he wife ) load I with attention . there be a enjoyment in accept they simple kindness , and in repay it by a consideration -- a scrupulous regard to they feeling -- to which they be not , perhaps , at all time accustom , and which both char and benefit they ; because , while it elevate they in they own eye , it make they emulous to merit the deferential treatment they receive . I feel I become a favourite in the neighbourhood . whenever I go out , I hear on all side cordial salutation , and be welcome with friendly smile . to live amidst general regard , though it be but the regard of work people , be like " sit in sunshine , calm and sweet ; " serene inward feeling bud and bloom under the ray . at this period of my life , my heart far oftener swell with thankfulness than sank with dejection : and yet , reader , to tell you all , in the midst of this calm , this useful existence -- after a day pass in honourable exertion amongst my scholar , a evening spend in draw or read contentedly alone -- I use to rush into strange dream at night : dream many - coloured , agitated , full of the ideal , the stirring , the stormy -- dream where , amidst unusual scene , charge with adventure , with agitat risk and romantic chance , I still again and again meet , always at some excit crisis ; and then the sense of be in he arm , hear he voice , meet he eye , touch he hand and cheek , love he , be love by he -- the hope of pass a lifetime at he side , would be renew , with all its first force and fire . then I awoke . then I recall where I be , and how situate . then I rise up on my curtainless bed , trembl and quiver ; and then the still , dark night witness the convulsion of despair , and hear the burst of passion . by nine o'clock the next morning I be punctually open the school ; tranquil , settle , prepare for the steady duty of the day . keep she word in come to visit I . she call at the school be generally make in the course of she morning ride . she would canter up to the door on she pony , follow by a mounted livery servant . anything more exquisite than she appearance , in she purple habit , with she 's cap of black velvet place gracefully
gracefully above the long curl that kiss she cheek and float to she shoulders , can scarcely be imagine : and it be thus she would enter the rustic building , and glide through the dazzled rank of the village child . she generally come at the hour when be engage in give he daily catechising lesson . keenly , I fear , do the eye of the visitress pierce the young pastor 's heart . a sort of instinct seem to warn he of she entrance , even when he do not see it ; and when he be look quite away from the door , if she appear at it , he cheek would glow , and he marble - see feature , though they refuse to relax , change indescribably , and in they very quiescence become expressive of a repressed fervour , stronger than work muscle or darting glance could indicate . of course , she know she power : indeed , he do not , because he could not , conceal it from she . in spite of he stoicism , when she go up and address he , and smile gaily , encouragingly , even fondly in he face , he hand would tremble and he eye burn . he seem to say , with he sad and resolute look , if he do not say it with he lip , " I love you , and I know you prefer I . it be not despair of success that keep I dumb . if I offer my heart , I believe you would accept it . but that heart be already laid on a sacred altar : the fire be arrange round it . it will soon be no more than a sacrifice consume . " and then she would pout like a disappointed child ; a pensive cloud would soften she radiant vivacity ; she would withdraw she hand hastily from he , and turn in transient petulance from he aspect , at once so heroic and so martyr - like . , no doubt , would have give the world to follow , recall , retain she , when she thus leave he ; but he would not give one chance of heaven , nor relinquish , for the elysium of she love , one hope of the true , eternal paradise . besides , he could not bind all that he have in he nature -- the rover , the aspirant , the poet , the priest -- in the limit of a single passion . he could not -- he would not -- renounce he wild field of mission warfare for the parlour and the peace of . I lear not so much from himself in a inroad I once , despite he reserve , have the daring to make on he confidence . already honoure I with frequent visit to my cottage . I have learn she whole character , which be without mystery or disguise : she be coquettish but not heartless ; exact , but not worthlessly selfish . she have be indulge from she birth , but be not absolutely spoil . she be hasty , but good - humoured ; vain ( she could not help it , when every glance in the glass show she such a flush of loveliness ) , but not affect ; liberal - hand ; innocent of the pride of wealth ; ingenuous ; sufficiently intelligent ; gay , lively , and unthinking : she be very charming , in short , even to a cool observer of she own sex like I ; but she be not profoundly interesting or thoroughly impressive . a very different sort of mind be hers from that , for instance , of the sister of . still , I like she almost as I like my pupil ; except that , for a child whom we have watch over and teach , a closer affection be engender than we can give a equally attractive adult acquaintance . she have take a amiable caprice to I . she say I be like , only , certainly , she allow , " not one - tenth so handsome , though I be a nice neat little soul enough , but he be a angel . " I be , however , good , clever , compose , and firm , like he . I be a lusus natura , she affirm , as a village schoolmistress : she be sure my previous history , if know , would make a delightful romance . one evening , while , with she usual child - like activity , and thoughtless yet not offensive inquisitiveness , she be rummage the cupboard and the table - drawer of my little kitchen , she discover first two french book , a volume of , a german grammar and dictionary , and then my draw - material and some sketch , include a pencil - head of a pretty little cherub - like girl , one of my scholar , and sundry view from nature , take in the of and on the surround moor . she be first transfix with surprise , and then electrify with delight . " have I do these picture ? do I know French and German ? what a love -- what a miracle I be ! I draw better than she master in the first school in - . would I sketch a portrait of she , to show to papa ? " " with pleasure , " I reply ; and I feel a thrill of artist - delight at the idea of copy from so perfect and radiant a model . she have then on a dark - blue silk dress ; she arm and she neck be bare ; she only ornament be she chestnut tress , which wave over
over she shoulders with all the wild grace of natural curl . I take a sheet of fine card - board , and draw a careful outline . I promise myself the pleasure of colour it ; and , as it be get late then , I tell she she must come and sit another day . she make such a report of I to she father , that himself accompany she next evening -- a tall , massive - featured , middle - aged , and grey - head man , at whose side he lovely daughter look like a bright flower near a hoary turret . he appear a taciturn , and perhaps a proud personage ; but he be very kind to I . the sketch of 's portrait please he highly : he say I must make a finish picture of it . he insist , too , on my come the next day to spend the evening at . I go . I find it a large , handsome residence , show abundant evidence of wealth in the proprietor . be full of glee and pleasure all the time I stay . she father be affable ; and when he enter into conversation with I after tea , he express in strong term he approbation of what I have do in school , and say he only fear , from what he see and hear , I be too good for the place , and would soon quit it for one more suitable . " indeed , " cry , " she be clever enough to be a governess in a high family , papa . " I think I would far rather be where I be than in any high family in the land . spoke of -- of the family -- with great respect . he say it be a very old name in that neighbourhood ; that the ancestor of the house be wealthy ; that all have once belong to they ; that even now he consider the representative of that house might , if he like , make a alliance with the best . he account it a pity that so fine and talente a young man should have form the design of go out as a missionary ; it be quite throw a valuable life away . it appear , then , that she father would throw no obstacle in the way of 's union with . evidently regard the young clergyman 's good birth , old name , and sacr profession as sufficient compensation for the want of fortune . it be the 5th of , and a holiday . my little servant , after help I to clean my house , be gone , well satisfi with the fee of a penny for she aid . all about I be spotless and bright -- scour floor , polish grate , and well - rub chair . I have also make myself neat , and have now the afternoon before I to spend as I would . the translation of a few page of German occupy a hour ; then I get my palette and pencil , and fall to the more soothing , because easier occupation , of complete 's miniature . the head be finish already : there be but the background to tind and the drapery to shade off ; a touch of carmine , too , to add to the ripe lip -- a soft curl here and there to the tress -- a deeper tinge to the shadow of the lash under the azured eyelid . I be absorb in the execution of these nice detail , when , after one rapid tap , my door unclosed , admit . " I be come to see how you be spend you holiday , " he say . " not , I hope , in thought ? no , that be well : while you draw you will not feel lonely . you see , I mistrust you still , though you have borne up wonderfully so far . I have bring you a book for evening solace , " and he lay on the table a new publication -- a poem : one of those genuine productions so often vouchsaf to the fortunate public of those day -- the golden age of modern literature . ! the reader of we era be less favoured . but courage ! I will not pause either to accuse or repine . I know poetry be not dead , nor genius lose ; nor have Mammon gain power over either , to bind or slay : they will both assert they existence , they presence , they liberty and strength again one day . powerful angel , safe in heaven ! they smile when sordid soul triumph , and feeble one weep over they destruction . Poetry destroy ? banish ? no ! Mediocrity , no : do not let envy prompt you to the thought . no ; they not only live , but reign and redeem : and without they divine influence spread everywhere , you would be in hell -- the hell of you own meanness . while I be eagerly glance at the bright page of " " ( for " " it be ) , stoop to examine my drawing . he tall figure spring erect again with a start : he say nothing . I look up at he : he shunn my eye . I know he thought well , and could read he heart plainly ; at the moment I feel calmer and cooler than he : I have then temporarily the advantage of he , and I conceive a inclination to do he some good , if I could . " with all he firmness and self - control , " think I , " he task himself too
too far : lock every feeling and pang within -- expressis , confess , impart nothing . I be sure it would benefit he to talk a little about this sweet , whom he think he ought not to marry : I will make he talk . " I say first , " take a chair , . " but he answer , as he always do , that he could not stay . " very well , " I respond , mentally , " stand if you like ; but you shall not go just yet , I be determine : solitude be at least as bad for you as it be for I . I will try if I can not discover the secret spring of you confidence , and find a aperture in that marble breast through which I can she one drop of the balm of sympathy . " " be this portrait like ? " I ask bluntly . " like ! like whom ? I do not observe it closely . " " you do , . " he almost start at my sudden and strange abruptness : he look at I astonished . " oh , that be nothing yet , " I mutter within . " I do not mean to be baffle by a little stiffness on you part ; I be prepared to go to considerable length . " I continue , " you observe it closely and distinctly ; but I have no objection to you look at it again , " and I rise and place it in he hand . " a well - execute picture , " he say ; " very soft , clear colouring ; very graceful and correct drawing . " " yes , yes ; I know all that . but what of the resemblance ? who be it like ? " Mastere some hesitation , he answer , " , I presume . " " of course . and now , sir , to reward you for the accurate guess , I will promise to paint you a careful and faithful duplicate of this very picture , provide you admit that the gift would be acceptable to you . I do not wish to throw away my time and trouble on a offer you would deem worthless . " he continue to gaze at the picture : the longer he look , the firmer he hold it , the more he seem to covet it . " it be like ! " he murmure ; " the eye be well manage : the colour , light , expression , be perfect . it smile ! " " would it comfort , or would it wound you to have a similar painting ? tell I then . when you be at , or at the cape , or in , would it be a consolation to have that memento in you possession ? or would the sight of it bring recollection calculate to enervate and distress ? " he now furtively raise he eye : he glance at I , irresolute , disturb : he again survey the picture . " that I should like to have it be certain : whether it would be judicious or wise be another question . " I have ascertaine that really prefer he , and that she father be not likely to oppose the match , I -- less exalt in my view than -- have be strongly dispose in my own heart to advocate they union . it seem to I that , should he become the possessor of 's large fortune , he might do as much good with it as if he go and lay he genius out to wither , and he strength to waste , under a tropical sun . with this persuasion I now answer - " as far as I can see , it would be wiser and more judicious if you be to take to yourself the original at once . " by this time he have sit down : he have laid the picture on the table before he , and with he brow support on both hand , hang fondly over it . I discern he be now neither angry nor shock at my audacity . I see even that to be thus frankly address on a subject he have deem unapproachable -- to hear it thus freely handle -- be begin to be feel by he as a new pleasure -- a unhoped - for relief . reserve people often really need the frank discussion of they sentiment and grief more than the expansive . the sternest - seem stoic be human after all ; and to " burst " with boldness and good - will into " the silent sea " of they soul be often to confer on they the first of obligation . " she like you , I be sure , " say I , as I stand behind he chair , " and she father respect you . moreover , she be a sweet girl -- rather thoughtless ; but you would have sufficient thought for both yourself and she . you ought to marry she . " " do she like I ? " he ask . " certainly ; better than she like any one else . she talk of you continually : there be no subject she enjoy so much or touch upon so often . " " it be very pleasant to hear this , " he say -- " very : go on for another quarter of a hour . " and he actually take out he watch and lay it upon the table to measure the time . " but where be the use of go on , " I ask , " when you be probably prepare some iron blow of contradiction ,
, or for a fresh chain to fetter you heart ? " " do not imagine such hard thing . Fancy I yield and melte , as I be do : human love rise like a freshly opened fountain in my mind and overflow with sweet inundation all the field I have so carefully and with such labour prepare -- so assiduously sow with the seed of good intention , of self - deny plan . and now it be deluge with a nectarous flood -- the young germ swamp -- delicious poison canker they : now I see myself stretch on a ottoman in the drawing - room at at my bride 's foot : she be talk to I with she sweet voice -- gaze down on I with those eye you skilful hand have copy so well -- smile at I with these coral lip . she be mine -- I be hers -- this present life and pass world suffice to I . Hush ! say nothing -- my heart be full of delight -- my sense be entranc -- let the time I mark pass in peace . " I humour he : the watch tick on : he breathe fast and low : I stand silent . Amidst this hush the quartet s ; he replace the watch , laid the picture down , rise , and stand on the hearth . " now , " say he , " that little space be give to delirium and delusion . I rest my temple on the breast of temptation , and put my neck voluntarily under she yoke of flower . I taste she cup . the pillow be burn : there be a asp in the garland : the wine have a bitter taste : she promise be hollow -- she offer false : I see and know all this . " I gaze at he in . " it be strange , " pursue he , " that while I love so wildly -- with all the intensity , indeed , of a first passion , the object of which be exquisitely beautiful , graceful , fascinating -- I experience at the same time a calm , unwarped consciousness that she would not make I a good wife ; that she be not the partner suite to I ; that I should discover this within a year after marriage ; and that to twelve month ' rapture would succeed a lifetime of regret . this I know . " " indeed ! " I could not help ejaculat . " while something in I , " he go on , " be acutely sensible to she charms , something else be as deeply impressed with she defects : they be such that she could sympathise in nothing I aspire to -- co - operate in nothing I undertake . Rosamond a sufferer , a labourer , a female apostle ? Rosamond a missionary 's wife ? no ! " " but you need not be a missionary . you might relinquish that scheme . " " Relinquish ! what ! my vocation ? my great work ? my foundation lay on earth for a mansion in heaven ? my hope of be number in the band who have merge all ambitions in the glorious one of better they race -- of carry knowledge into the realm of ignorance -- of substitute peace for war -- freedom for bondage -- religion for superstition -- the hope of heaven for the fear of hell ? must I relinquish that ? it be dearer than the blood in my vein . it be what I have to look forward to , and to live for . " after a considerable pause , I say -- " and ? be she disappointment and sorrow of no interest to you ? " " be ever surround by suitor and flatterer : in less than a month , my image will be efface from she heart . she will forget I ; and will marry , probably , some one who will make she far happier than I should do . " " you speak coolly enough ; but you suffer in the conflict . you be waste away . " " no . if I get a little thing , it be with anxiety about my prospect , yet unsettled -- my departure , continually procrastinate . only this morning , I receive intelligence that the successor , whose arrival I have be so long expecting , can not be ready to replace I for three month to come yet ; and perhaps the three month may extend to six . " " you tremble and become flushed whenever enter the schoolroom . " again the surprised expression cross he face . he have not imagine that a woman would dare to speak so to a man . for I , I feel at home in this sort of discourse . I could never rest in communication with strong , discreet , and refin mind , whether male or female , till I have pass the outwork of conventional reserve , and cross the threshold of confidence , and win a place by they heart 's very hearthstone . " you be original , " say he , " and not timid . there be something brave in you spirit , as well as penetrat in you eye ; but allow I to assure you that you partially misinterpret my emotion . you think they more profound and potent than they be . you give I a larger allowance of sympathy than I have a just claim to . when I colour , and when I shade before , I do not pity myself . I scorn the weakness . I know it be ignoble : a mere fever of the flesh : not , I declare ,
, the convulsion of the soul . that be just as fix as a rock , firm set in the depth of a restless sea . know I to be what I be -- a cold hard man . " I smile incredulously . " you have take my confidence by storm , " he continue , " and now it be much at you service . I be simply , in my original state -- stripp of that blood - bleach robe with which cover human deformity -- a cold , hard , ambitious man . natural affection only , of all the sentiment , have permanent power over I . , and not feel , be my guide ; my ambition be unlimited : my desire to rise higher , to do more than other , insatiable . I honour endurance , perseverance , industry , talent ; because these be the means by which man achieve great end and mount to lofty eminence . I watch you career with interest , because I consider you a specimen of a diligent , orderly , energetic woman : not because I deeply compassionate what you have go through , or what you still suffer . " " you would describe yourself as a mere pagan philosopher , " I say . " no . there be this difference between I and deistic philosopher : I believe ; and I believe the Gospel . you miss you epithet . I be not a pagan , but a philosopher -- a follower of the sect of . as he disciple I adopt he pure , he merciful , he benignant doctrine . I advocate they : I be swear to spread they . won in youth to religion , she have cultivate my original quality thus :- from the minute germ , natural affection , she have develop the overshadowing tree , philanthropy . from the wild stringy root of human uprightness , she have rear a due sense of the justice . of the ambition to win power and reny for my wretched self , she have form the ambition to spread my master 's kingdom ; to achieve victory for the standard of the cross . so much have religion do for I ; turn the original material to the best account ; pruning and training nature . but she could not eradicate nature : nor will it be eradicate ' till this mortal shall put on immortality . ' " have say this , he take he hat , which lay on the table beside my palette . once more he look at the portrait . " she be lovely , " he murmure . " she be well name the rose of the World , indeed ! " " and may I not paint one like it for you ? " " ? no . " he draw over the picture the sheet of thin paper on which I be accustom to rest my hand in painting , to prevent the cardboard from be sully . what he suddenly see on this blank paper , it be impossible for I to tell ; but something have catch he eye . he take it up with a snatch ; he look at the edge ; then shoot a glance at I , inexpressibly peculiar , and quite incomprehensible : a glance that seem to take and make note of every point in my shape , face , and dress ; for it traverse all , quick , keen as lightning . he lip parte , as if to speak : but he check the come sentence , whatever it be . " what be the matter ? " I ask . " nothing in the world , " be the reply ; and , replace the paper , I see he dexterously tear a narrow slip from the margin . it disappear in he glove ; and , with one hasty nod and " good - afternoon , " he vanish . " well ! " I exclaim , use a expression of the district , " that cap the globe , however ! " I , in my turn , scrutinise the paper ; but see nothing on it save a few dingy stains of paint where I have try the tint in my pencil . I ponder the mystery a minute or two ; but find it insolvable , and be certain it could not be of much moment , I dismiss , and soon forget it . go , it be begin to snow ; the whirling storm continue all night . the next day a keen wind bring fresh and blinding fall ; by twilight the valley be drift up and almost impassable . I have close my shutter , laid a mat to the door to prevent the snow from blowing in under it , trim my fire , and after sit nearly a hour on the hearth listen to the muff fury of the tempest , I light a candle , take down " , " and begin - " day set on 's castle steep , and 's fair river broad and deep , and 's mountain lone ; the massive towers , the donjon keep , the flanking wall that round they sweep , in yellow lustre shone " - I soon forget storm in music . I hear a noise : the wind , I think , shook the door . no ; it be . , who , lift the latch , come in out of the frozen hurricane -- the howling darkness -- and stand before I : the cloak that cover he tall figure all white as a glacier . I be almost in consternation , so little have I expect any guest from the block - up vale that night . " any ill news ?
? " I demand . " have anything happen ? " " no . how very easily alarm you be ! " he answer , remove he cloak and hang it up against the door , towards which he again coolly push the mat which he entrance have derange . he stamp the snow from he boot . " I shall sully the purity of you floor , " say he , " but you must excuse I for once . " then he approach the fire . " I have have hard work to get here , I assure you , " he observe , as he warm he hand over the flame . " one drift take I up to the waist ; happily the snow be quite soft yet . " " but why be you come ? " I could not forbear say . " rather a inhospitable question to put to a visitor ; but since you ask it , I answer simply to have a little talk with you ; I get tired of my mute book and empty room . besides , since yesterday I have experience the excitement of a person to whom a tale have be half - told , and who be impatient to hear the sequel . " he sit down . I recall he singular conduct of yesterday , and really I begin to fear he wit be touch . if he be insane , however , he be a very cool and collect insanity : I have never see that handsome - feature face of he look more like chisell marble than it do just now , as he put aside he snow - wet hair from he forehead and let the firelight shine free on he pale brow and cheek as pale , where it grieve I to discover the hollow trace of care or sorrow now so plainly grave . I wait , expect he would say something I could at least comprehend ; but he hand be now at he ching , he finger on he lip : he be think . it struck I that he hand look waste like he face . a perhaps uncalled - for gush of pity come over my heart : I be move to say - " I wish or would come and live with you : it be too bad that you should be quite alone ; and you be recklessly rash about you own health . " " not at all , " say he : " I care for myself when necessary . I be well now . what do you see amiss in I ? " this be say with a careless , abstract indifference , which show that my solicitude be , at least in he opinion , wholly superfluous . I be silence . he still slowly move he finger over he upper lip , and still he eye dwelt dreamily on the glow grate ; think it urgent to say something , I ask he presently if he feel any cold dratch from the door , which be behind he . " no , no ! " he respond shortly and somewhat testily . " well , " I reflect , " if you will not talk , you may be still ; I will let you alone now , and return to my book . " so I snuff the candle and resum the perusal of " . " he soon stir ; my eye be instantly draw to he movement ; he only take out a morocco pocket - book , thence produce a letter , which he read in silence , fold it , put it back , relapse into meditation . it be vain to try to read with such a inscrutable fixture before I ; nor could I , in impatience , consent to be dumb ; he might rebuff I if he like , but talk I would . " have you hear from and lately ? " " not since the letter I show you a week ago . " " there have not be any change make about you own arrangement ? you will not be summon to leave sooner than you expect ? " " I fear not , indeed : such chance be too good to befall I . " baffle so far , I change my ground . I bethotch myself to talk about the school and my scholar . " 's mother be better , and come back to the school this morning , and I shall have four new girl next week from the -- they would have come to - day but for the snow . " " indeed ! " " pay for two . " " do he ? " " he mean to give the whole school a treat at . " " I know . " " be it you suggestion ? " " no . " " whose , then ? " " he daughter 's , I think . " " it be like she : she be so good - nature . " " yes . " again come the blank of a pause : the clock struck eight stroke . it arouse he ; he uncross he leg , sit erect , turn to I . " leave you book a moment , and come a little nearer the fire , " he say . wonder , and of my wonder find no end , I comply . " half - a - hour ago , " he pursue , " I speak of my impatience to hear the sequel of a tale : on reflection , I find the matter will be better manage by my assume the narrator 's part , and convert you into a listener . before commence , it be but fair to warn
warn you that the story will sound somewhat hackney in you ear ; but stale detail often regain a degree of freshness when they pass through new lip . for the rest , whether trite or novel , it be short . " twenty year ago , a poor curate -- never mind he name at this moment -- fall in love with a rich man 's daughter ; she fall in love with he , and marry he , against the advice of all she friend , who consequently disown she immediately after the wedding . before two year pass , the rash pair be both dead , and laid quietly side by side under one slab . ( I have see they grave ; it form part of the pavement of a huge churchyard surround the grim , soot - black old cathedral of a overgrown manufacturing town in - shire . ) they leave a daughter , which , at its very birth , receive in she lap -- cold as that of the snow - drift I almost stick fast in to - night . carry the friendless thing to the house of its rich maternal relation ; it be rear by a aunt - in - law , call ( I come to name now ) of . you start -- do you hear a noise ? I daresay it be only a rat scrambl along the rafter of the adjoining schoolroom : it be a barn before I have it repair and alte , and barn be generally haunt by rat . -- to proceed . . keep the orphan ten year : whether it be happy or not with she , I can not say , never have be tell ; but at the end of that time she transfer it to a place you know -- be no other than , where you so long reside yourself . it seem she career there be very honourable : from a pupil , she become a teacher , like yourself -- really it strike I there be parallel point in she history and yours -- she leave it to be a governess : there , again , you fate be analogous ; she undertake the education of the ward of a certain . " " ! " I interrupt . " I can guess you feeling , " he say , " but restrain they for a while : I have nearly finish ; hear I to the end . of 's character I know nothing , but the one fact that he profess to offer honourable marriage to this young girl , and that at the very altar she discover he have a wife yet alive , though a lunatic . what he subsequent conduct and proposal be be a matter of pure conjecture ; but when a event transpire which render inquiry after the governess necessary , it be discover she be go -- no one could tell when , where , or how . she have leave in the night ; every research after she course have be vain : the country have be scour far and wide ; no vestige of information could be gather respect she . yet that she should be find be become a matter of serious urgency : advertisement have be put in all the papers ; I myself have receive a letter from one , a solicitor , communicate the detail I have just impart . be it not a odd tale ? " " just tell I this , " say I , " and since you know so much , you surely can tell it I -- what of ? how and where be he ? what be he do ? be he well ? " " I be ignorant of all concerning : the letter never mention he but to narrate the fraudulent and illegal attempt I have advert to . you should rather ask the name of the governess -- the nature of the event which require she appearance . " " do no one go to , then ? do no one see ? " " I suppose not . " " but they write to he ? " " of course . " " and what do he say ? who have he letter ? " " intimate that the answer to he application be not from , but from a lady : it be sign ' . ' " I feel cold and dismay : my worst fear then be probably true : he have in all probability leave and rush in reckless desperation to some former haunt on the continent . and what opiate for he severe suffering -- what object for he strong passion -- have he seek there ? I da not answer the question . oh , my poor master -- once almost my husband -- whom I have often call " my dear ! " " he must have be a bad man , " observ . " you do not know he -- do not pronounce a opinion upon he , " I say , with warmth . " very well , " he answer quietly : " and indeed my head be otherwise occupy than with he : I have my tale to finish . since you will not ask the governess 's name , I must tell it of my own accord . stay ! I have it here -- it be always more satisfactory to see important point write down , fairly commit to black and white . " and the pocket - book be again deliberately produce , open , seek through ; from one of its compartment be extracte a shabby slip of paper , hastily tear off : I recognise in its texture and its stain of ultra-marine , and lake , and vermillion , the ravished
ravished margin of the portrait - cover . he get up , hold it close to my eye : and I read , trace in indian ink , in my own handwriting , the word " " -- the work doubtless of some moment of abstraction . " write to I of a : " he say , " the advertisement demand a : I know a . -- I confess I have my suspicions , but it be only yesterday afternoon they be at once resolve into certainty . you own the name and renounce the alias ? " " yes -- yes ; but where be ? he perhaps know more of than you do . " " be in . I should doubt he know anything at all about ; it be not in he be interested . meantime , you forget essential point in pursue trifle : you do not inquire why seek after you -- what he want with you . " " well , what do he want ? " " merely to tell you that you uncle , of , be dead ; that he have leave you all he property , and that you be now rich -- merely that -- nothing more . " " I ! -- rich ? " " yes , you , rich -- quite a heiress . " Silence succeed . " you must prove you identity of course , " resume presently : " a step which will offer no difficulty ; you can then enter on immediate possession . you fortune be ves in the english fund ; have the will and the necessary document . " here be a new card turn up ! it be a fine thing , reader , to be lift in a moment from indigence to wealth -- a very fine thing ; but not a matter one can comprehend , or consequently enjoy , all at once . and then there be other chance in life far more thrilling and rapture-give : this be solid , a affair of the actual world , nothing ideal about it : all its associations be solid and sober , and its manifestation be the same . one do not jump , and spring , and shout hurrah ! at hearing one have get a fortune ; one begin to consider responsibility , and to ponder business ; on a base of steady satisfaction rise certain grave care , and we contain ourselves , and brood over we bliss with a solemn brow . besides , the word , , go side by side with the word , , . my uncle I have hear be dead -- my only relative ; ever since be make aware of he existence , I have cherish the hope of one day see he : now , I never should . and then this money come only to I : not to I and a rejoicing family , but to my isolated self . it be a grand boon doubtless ; and independence would be glorious -- yes , I feel that -- that think swell my heart . " you unbend you forehead at last , " say . " I think have look at you , and that you be turn to stone . perhaps now you will ask how much you be worth ? " " how much am I worth ? " " oh , a trifle ! nothing of course to speak of -- twenty thousand pound , I think they say -- but what be that ? " " twenty thousand pound ? " here be a new stunner -- I have be calculate on four or five thousand . this news actually take my breath for a moment : , whom I have never hear laugh before , laugh now . " well , " say he , " if you have commit a murder , and I have tell you you crime be discover , you could scarcely look more aghast . " " it be a large sum -- do not you think there be a mistake ? " " no mistake at all . " " perhaps you have read the figure wrong -- it may be two thousand ! " " it be write in letter , not figure , -- twenty thousand . " I again feel rather like a individual of but average gastronomical power sit down to alone at a table spread with provision for a hundred . rise now and put he cloak on . " if it be not such a very wild night , " he say , " I would send down to keep you company : you look too desperately miserable to be leave alone . but , poor woman ! could not stride the drift so well as I : she leg be not quite so long : so I must e'en leave you to you sorrow . good -night . " he be lift the latch : a sudden thought occur to I . " stop one minute ! " I cry . " well ? " " it puzzle I to know why write to you about I ; or how he know you , or could fancy that you , live in such a out - of - the - way place , have the power to aid in my discovery . " " oh ! I be a clergyman , " he say ; " and the clergy be often appeal to about odd matters . " again the latch rattle . " no ; that do not satisfy I ! " I exclaim : and indeed there be something in the hasty and unexplanatory reply which , instead of allaying , pique my curiosity more than ever . " it be a very strange piece of business , " I
I add ; " I must know more about it . " " another time . " " no ; to - night ! -- to -night ! " and as he turn from the door , I place myself between it and he . he look rather embarrassed . " you certainly shall not go till you have tell I all , " I say . " I would rather not just now . " " you shall ! -- you must ! " " I would rather or infor you . " of course these objection wrotch my eagerness to a climax : gratify it must be , and that without delay ; and I tell he so . " but I apprise you that I be a hard man , " say he , " difficult to persuade . " " and I be a hard woman , -- impossible to put off . " " and then , " he pursue , " I be cold : no fervour infect I . " " whereas I be hot , and fire dissolve ice . the blaze there have thaw all the snow from you cloak ; by the same token , it have stream on to my floor , and make it like a trample street . as you hope ever to be forgive , , the high crime and misdemeanour of spoiling a sand kitchen , tell I what I wish to know . " " well , then , " he say , " I yield ; if not to you earnestness , to you perseverance : as stone be wear by continual dropping . besides , you must know some day , -- as well now as later . you name be ? " " of course : that be all settle before . " " you be not , perhaps , aware that I be you nameake ? -- that I be christen ? " " no , indeed ! I remember now see the letter comprise in you initial write in book you have at different time lent I ; but I never ask for what name it stand . but what then ? surely -- " I stop : I could not trust myself to entertain , much less to express , the thought that rush upon I -- that embody itself , -- that , in a second , stand out a strong , solid probability . circumstance knit themselves , fit themselves , shoot into order : the chain that have be lie hitherto a formless lump of link be draw out straight , -- every ring be perfect , the connection complete . I know , by instinct , how the matter stood , before have say another word ; but I can not expect the reader to have the same intuitive perception , so I must repeat he explanation . " my mother 's name be ; she have two brothers ; one a clergyman , who marry , of ; the other , , , merchant , late of , . , be 's solicitor , write to we last to inform we of we uncle 's death , and to say that he have leave he property to he brother the clergyman 's orphan daughter , overlook we , in consequence of a quarrel , never forgive , between he and my father . he write again a few week since , to intimate that the heiress be lose , and ask if we know anything of she . a name casually write on a slip of paper have enable I to find she out . you know the rest . " again he be go , but I set my back against the door . " do let I speak , " I say ; " let I have one moment to draw breath and reflect . " I pause -- he stand before I , hat in hand , look compose enough . I resume - " you mother be my father 's sister ? " " yes . " " my aunt , consequently ? " he bow . " my uncle be you uncle ? you , , and be he sister 's child , as I be he brother 's child ? " " Undeniably . " " you three , then , be my cousin ; half we blood on each side flow from the same source ? " " we be cousin ; yes . " I survey he . it seem I have find a brother : one I could be proud of , -- one I could love ; and two sister , whose quality be such , that , when I know they but as mere stranger , they have inspire I with genuine affection and admiration . the two girl , on whom , knee down on the wet ground , and look through the low , latticed window of kitchen , I have gaze with so bitter a mixture of interest and despair , be my near kinswoman ; and the young and stately gentleman who have find I almost die at he threshold be my blood relation . Glorious discovery to a lonely wretch ! this be wealth indeed ! -- wealth to the heart ! -- a mine of pure , genial affection . this be a blessing , bright , vivid , and exhilarating ; -- not like the ponderous gift of gold : rich and welcome enough in its way , but sober from its weight . I now clap my hand in sudden joy -- my pulse bound , my vein thrill . " oh , I be glad ! -- I be glad ! " I exclaim . smile . " do I not say you neglect essential point to pursue trifle ? " he ask .
. " you be serious when I tell you you have get a fortune ; and now , for a matter of no moment , you be excited . " " what can you mean ? it may be of no moment to you ; you have sister and do not care for a cousin ; but I have nobody ; and now three relation , -- or two , if you do not choose to be count , -- be bear into my world full - grow . I say again , I be glad ! " I walk fast through the room : I stop , half suffocate with the thought that rise faster than I could receive , comprehend , settle they :- thought of what might , could , would , and should be , and that ere long . I look at the blank wall : it seem a sky thick with ascending star , -- every one light I to a purpose or delight . those who have save my life , whom , till this hour , I have love barrenly , I could now benefit . they be under a yoke , -- I could free they : they be scatter , -- I could reunite they : the independence , the affluence which be mine , might be theirs too . be we not four ? twenty thousand pound share equally would be five thousand each , justice -- enough and to spare : justice would be do , -- mutual happiness secure . now the wealth do not weigh on I : now it be not a mere bequest of coin , -- it be a legacy of life , hope , enjoyment . how I look while these idea be take my spirit by storm , I can not tell ; but I perceive soon that have place a chair behind I , and be gently attempt to make I sit down on it . he also advise I to be compose ; I scorn the insinuation of helplessness and distraction , shook off he hand , and begin to walk about again . " write to and to - morrow , " I say , " and tell they to come home directly . say they would both consider themselves rich with a thousand pound , so with five thousand they will do very well . " " tell I where I can get you a glass of water , " say ; " you must really make a effort to tranquillise you feeling . " " Nonsense ! and what sort of a effect will the bequest have on you ? will it keep you in , induce you to marry , and settle down like a ordinary mortal ? " " you wander : you head become confused . I have be too abrupt in communicate the news ; it have excite you beyond you strength . " " ! you quite put I out of patience : I be rational enough ; it be you who misunderstand , or rather who affect to misunderstand . " " perhaps , if you explain yourself a little more fully , I should comprehend better . " " ! what be there to explain ? you can not fail to see that twenty thousand pound , the sum in question , divide equally between the nephew and three niece of we uncle , will give five thousand to each ? what I want be , that you should write to you sister and tell they of the fortune that have accrue to they . " " to you , you mean . " " I have intimate my view of the case : I be incapable of take any other . I be not brutally selfish , blindly unjust , or fiendishly ungrateful . besides , I be resolve I will have a home and connection . I like , and I will live at ; I like and , and I will attach myself for life to and . it would please and benefit I to have five thousand pound ; it would torment and oppress I to have twenty thousand ; which , moreover , could never be mine in justice , though it might in law . I abandon to you , then , what be absolutely superfluous to I . let there be no opposition , and no discussion about it ; let we agree amongst each other , and decide the point at once . " " this be act on first impulse ; you must take day to consider such a matter , ere you word can be regard as valid . " " oh ! if all you doubt be my sincerity , I be easy : you see the justice of the case ? " " I do see a certain justice ; but it be contrary to all custom . besides , the entire fortune be you right : my uncle gain it by he own effort ; he be free to leave it to whom he would : he leave it to you . after all , justice permit you to keep it : you may , with a clear conscience , consider it absolutely you own . " " with I , " say I , " it be fully as much a matter of feel as of conscience : I must indulge my feeling ; I so seldom have have a opportunity of do so . be you to argue , object , and annoy I for a year , I could not forego the delicious pleasure of which I have catch a glimpse -- that of repay , in part , a mighty obligation , and win to myself lifelong friend . " " you think so now , " rejoin , " because you do
do not know what it be to possess , nor consequently to enjoy wealth : you can not form a notion of the importance twenty thousand pound would give you ; of the place it would enable you to take in society ; of the prospect it would open to you : you cannot -- " " and you , " I interrupt , " can not at all imagine the craving I have for fraternal and sisterly love . I never have a home , I never have brothers or sister ; I must and will have they now : you be not reluctant to admit I and own I , be you ? " " , I will be you brother -- my sister will be you sister -- without stipulat for this sacrifice of you just right . " " ? yes ; at the distance of a thousand leagu ! sisters ? yes ; slave amongst strangers ! I , wealthy -- gorge with gold I never earn and do not merit ! you , penniless ! famous equality and fraternisation ! close union ! intimate attachment ! " " but , , you aspiration after family tie and domestic happiness may be realise otherwise than by the means you contemplate : you may marry . " " Nonsense , again ! ! I do not want to marry , and never shall marry . " " that be say too much : such hazardous affirmation be a proof of the excitement under which you labour . " " it be not say too much : I know what I feel , and how averse be my inclination to the bare thought of marriage . no one would take I for love ; and I will not be regard in the light of a mere money speculation . and I do not want a stranger -- unsympathising , alien , different from I ; I want my kindred : those with whom I have full fellow - feeling . say again you will be my brother : when you utter the word I be satisfied , happy ; repeat they , if you can , repeat they sincerely . " " I think I can . I know I have always love my own sister ; and I know on what my affection for they be grounde , -- respect for they worth and admiration of they talents . you too have principle and mind : you taste and habit resemble 's and 's ; you presence be always agreeable to I ; in you conversation I have already for some time find a salutary solace . I feel I can easily and naturally make room in my heart for you , as my third and youngest sister . " " thank you : that content I for to - night . now you have better go ; for if you stay longer , you will perhaps irritate I afresh by some mistrustful scruple . " " and the school , ? it must now be shut up , I suppose ? " " no . I will retain my post of mistress till you get a substitute . " he smile approbation : we shook hand , and he take leave . I need not narrate in detail the further struggle I have , and argument I use , to get matter regard the legacy settle as I wish . my task be a very hard one ; but , as I be absolutely resolve -- as my cousin see at length that my mind be really and immutably fix on make a just division of the property -- as they must in they own heart have feel the equity of the intention ; and must , beside , have be innately conscious that in my place they would have do precisely what I wish to do -- they yield at length so far as to consent to put the affair to arbitration . the judge chosen be and a able lawyer : both coincide in my opinion : I carry my point . the instrument of transfer be draw out : , , , and I , each become possessed of a competency . it be near by the time all be settle : the season of general holiday approach . I now close school , take care that the parting should not be barren on my side . good fortune opend the hand as well as the heart wonderfully ; and to give somewhat when we have largely receive , be but to afford a vent to the unusual ebullition of the sensation . I have long felt with pleasure that many of my rustic scholar like I , and when we part , that consciousness be confirm : they manifest they affection plainly and strongly . deep be my gratification to find I have really a place in they unsophisticated heart : I promise they that never a week should pass in future that I do not visit they , and give they a hour 's teaching in they school . come up as , have see the class , now number sixty girl , file out before I , and lock the door , I stand with the key in my hand , exchange a few word of special farewell with some half - dozen of my best scholar : as decent , respectable , modest , and well - inform young woman as could be find in the rank of the british peasantry . and that be say a great deal ; for after all , the british peasantry be the best teach , best mannered , most self - respecte of any in : since those day I have see paysanne and ; and the best of they see to I ignorant , coarse , and besot , compare with
with my girl . " do you consider you have get you reward for a season of exertion ? " ask , when they be gone . " do not the consciousness of have do some real good in you day and generation give pleasure ? " " doubtless . " " and you have only toil a few month ! would not a life devote to the task of regenerat you race be well spend ? " " yes , " I say ; " but I could not go on for ever so : I want to enjoy my own faculty as well as to cultivate those of other people . I must enjoy they now ; do not recall either my mind or body to the school ; I be out of it and dispose for full holiday . " he look grave . " what now ? what sudden eagerness be this you evince ? what be you go to do ? " " to be active : as active as I can . and first I must beg you to set at liberty , and get somebody else to wait on you . " " do you want she ? " " yes , to go with I to . and will be at home in a week , and I want to have everything in order against they arrival . " " I understand . I think you be for fly off on some excursion . it be better so : shall go with you . " " tell she to be ready by to - morrow then ; and here be the schoolroom key : I will give you the key of my cottage in the morning . " he take it . " you give it up very gleefully , " say he ; " I do not quite understand you light -heartedness , because I can not tell what employment you propose to yourself as a substitute for the one you be relinquish . what aim , what purpose , what ambition in life have you now ? " " my first aim will be to clean ( do you comprehend the full force of the expression ? ) -- to CLEAN from chamber to cellar ; my next to rub it up with be - wax , oil , and a indefinite number of clot , till it glitter again ; my third , to arrange every chair , table , bed , carpet , with mathematical precision ; afterwards I shall go near to ruin you in coal and peat to keep up good fire in every room ; and lastly , the two day precede that on which you sister be expect will be devote by and I to such a beating of egg , sorting of currant , grating of spice , compounding of cake , chopp up of material for mince -py , and solemnise of other culinary rite , as word can convey but a inadequate notion of to the uninitiated like you . my purpose , in short , be to have all thing in a absolutely perfect state of readiness for and before next ; and my ambition be to give they a beau - ideal of a welcome when they come . " smile slightly : still he be dissatisfie . " it be all very well for the present , " say he ; " but seriously , I trust that when the first flush of vivacity be over , you will look a little higher than domestic endearment and household joy . " " the best thing the world have ! " I interrupt . " no , , no : this world be not the scene of fruition ; do not attempt to make it so : nor of rest ; do not turn slothful . " " I mean , on the contrary , to be busy . " " , I excuse you for the present : two month ' grace I allow you for the full enjoyment of you new position , and for pleas yourself with this late - find charm of relationship ; but then , I hope you will begin to look beyond and , and sisterly society , and the selfish calm and sensual comfort of civilised affluence . I hope you energie will then once more trouble you with they strength . " I look at he with surprise . " . , " I say , " I think you be almost wick to talk so . I be dispose to be as content as a queen , and you try to stir I up to restlessness ! to what end ? " " to the end of turn to profit the talents which have commit to you keeping ; and of which he will surely one day demand a strict account . , I shall watch you closely and anxiously -- I warn you of that . and try to restrain the disproportionate fervour with which you throw yourself into commonplace home pleasure . do not cling so tenaciously to tie of the flesh ; save you constancy and ardour for a adequate cause ; forbear to waste they on trite transient object . do you hear , ? " " yes ; just as if you be speak . I feel I have adequate cause to be happy , and I will be happy . Goodbye ! " happy at I be , and hard I work ; and so do : she be charme to see how jovial I could be amidst the bustle of a house turn topsy - turvy -- how I could brush , and dust , and clean , and cook . and really , after a day or two of confusion worse confound , it be delightful by degree to invoke order from
from the chaos ourselves have make . I have previously take a journey to - to purchase some new furniture : my cousin have give I to effect what alteration I please , and a sum have be set aside for that purpose . the ordinary sitting - room and bedroom I leave much as they be : for I know and would derive more pleasure from see again the old homely table , and chair , and bed , than from the spectacle of the smartest innovation . still some novelty be necessary , to give to they return the piquancy with which I wish it to be invest . handsome new carpet and curtain , a arrangement of some carefully select antique ornament in porcelain and bronze , new coverings , and mirror , and dress - case , for the toilet table , answer the end : they look fresh without be glar . a spare parlour and bedroom I refurnish entirely , with old mahogany and crimson upholstery : I lay canva on the passage , and carpet on the stair . when all be finished , I think as complete a model of bright modest snugness withing , as it be , at this season , a specimen of wintry waste and desert dreariness without . the eventful at length come . they be expect about dark , and ere dusk fire be light upstairs and below ; the kitchen be in perfect trim ; and I be dress , and all be in readiness . arrive first . I have entreate he to keep quite clear of the house till everything be arrange : and , indeed , the bare idea of the commotion , at once sordid and trivial , go on within its wall suffice to scare he to estrangement . he find I in the kitchen , watch the progress of certain cake for tea , then bake . Approach the hearth , he ask , " if I be at last satisfied with housemaid 's work ? " I answer by invite he to accompany I on a general inspection of the result of my labour . with some difficulty , I get he to make the tour of the house . he just look in at the door I open ; and when he have wander upstairs and downstairs , he say I must have go through a great deal of fatigue and trouble to have effect such considerable change in so short a time : but not a syllable do he utter indicate pleasure in the improved aspect of he abode . this silence dam I . I think perhaps the alteration have disturb some old associations he value . I inquire whether this be the case : no doubt in a somewhat crest -fallen tone . " not at all ; he have , on the contrary , remark that I have scrupulously respect every association : he fear , indeed , I must have bestow more thought on the matter than it be worth . how many minute , for instance , have I devote to study the arrangement of this very room ? -- by - the - bye , could I tell he where such a book be ? " I show he the volume on the shelf : he take it down , and withdraw to he accustom window recess , he begin to read it . now , I do not like this , reader . be a good man ; but I begin to feel he have speak truth of himself when he say he be hard and cold . the humanity and amenity of life have no attraction for he -- its peaceful enjoyment no charm . literally , he live only to aspire -- after what be good and great , certainly ; but still he would never rest , nor approve of other rest round he . as I look at he lofty forehead , still and pale as a white stone -- at he fine lineament fix in study -- I comprehend all at once that he would hardly make a good husband : that it would be a try thing to be he wife . I understand , as by inspiration , the nature of he love for ; I agree with he that it be but a love of the sense . I comprehend how he should despise himself for the feverish influence it exercise over he ; how he should wish to stifle and destroy it ; how he should mistrust it be ever conduct permanently to he happiness or hers . I see he be of the material from which nature hew she heroe -- and -- she lawgiver , she statesman , she conqueror : a steadfast bulwark for great interest to rest upon ; but , at the fireside , too often a cold cumbrous column , gloomy and out of place . " this parlour be not he sphere , " I reflect : " the or , even the plague - curse guinea Coast swamp would suit he better . well may he eschew the calm of domestic life ; it be not he element : there he faculty stagnate -- they can not develop or appear to advantage . it be in scene of strife and danger -- where courage be prove , and energy exercise , and fortitude taske -- that he will speak and move , the leader and superior . a merry child would have the advantage of he on this hearth . he be right to choose a missionary 's career -- I see it now . " " they be come ! they be come ! " cry , throw open the parlour door . at the same moment old bark joyfully . out I run . it be now dark ; but a
a rumbling of wheel be audible . soon have a lantern lit . the vehicle have stop at the wicket ; the driver open the door : first one well - know form , then another , step out . in a minute I have my face under they bonnet , in contact first with 's soft cheek , then with 's flowing curl . they laugh -- kiss I -- then : pat , who be half wild with delight ; ask eagerly if all be well ; and be assure in the affirmative , hasten into the house . they be stiff with they long and jolting drive from , and chill with the frosty night air ; but they pleasant countenance expand to the cheerful firelight . while the driver and brotch in the box , they demand . at this moment he advanc from the parlour . they both throw they arm round he neck at once . he give each one quiet kiss , say in a low tone a few word of welcome , stand a while to be talk to , and then , intimat that he suppose they would soon rejoin he in the parlour , withdraw there as to a place of refuge . I have light they candle to go upstairs , but have first to give hospitable order respect the driver ; this do , both follow I . they be delighted with the renovation and decoration of they room ; with the new drapery , and fresh carpets , and rich tint china vase : they express they gratification ungrudgingly . I have the pleasure of feeling that my arrangement meet they wish exactly , and that what I have do add a vivid charm to they joyous return home . be that even . my cousin , full of exhilaration , be so eloquent in narrative and comment , that they fluency cover 's taciturnity : he be sincerely glad to see he sister ; but in they glow of fervour and flow of joy he could not sympathise . the event of the day -- that be , the return of and -- please he ; but the accompaniment of that event , the glad tumult , the garrulous glee of reception irk he : I see he wish the calmer morrow be come . in the very meridian of the night 's enjoyment , about a hour after tea , a rap be hear at the door . enter with the intimation that " a poor lad be come , at that unlikely time , to fetch to see he mother , who be draw away . " " where do she live , ? " " clear up at , almost four mile off , and moor and moss all the way . " " tell he I will go . " " I be sure , sir , you have better not . it be the worst road to travel after dark that can be : there be no track at all over the bog . and then it be such a bitter night -- the keenest wind you ever feel . you have better send word , sir , that you will be there in the morning . " but he be already in the passage , put on he cloak ; and without one objection , one murmur , he depart . it be then nine o'clock : he do not return till midnight . and tire enough he be : but he look happier than when he set out . he have perform a act of duty ; make a exertion ; feel he own strength to do and deny , and be on better term with himself . I be afraid the whole of the ensuing week try he patience . it be week : we take to no settled employment , but spend it in a sort of merry domestic dissipation . the air of the moor , the freedom of home , the dawn of prosperity , act on and 's spirit like some life - give elixir : they be gay from morning till noon , and from noon till night . they could always talk ; and they discourse , witty , pithy , original , have such charms for I , that I prefer listen to , and share in it , to do anything else . do not rebuke we vivacity ; but he escape from it : he be seldom in the house ; he parish be large , the population scatter , and he find daily business in visit the sick and poor in its different district . one morning at breakfast , , after look a little pensive for some minute , ask he , " if he plan be yet unchanged . " " Unchange and unchangeable , " be the reply . and he proceed to inform we that he departure from be now definitively fix for the ensuing year . " and ? " suggest , the word seem to escape she lip involuntarily : for no sooner have she utter they , than she make a gesture as if wishing to recall they . have a book in he hand -- it be he unsocial custom to read at meal -- he close it , and look up , " , " say he , " be about to be marry to , one of the best connect and most estimable resident in -, grandson and heir to : I have the intelligence from she father yesterday . " he sister look at each other and at I ; we all three look at he : he be serene as glass . " the match must have be get up hastily , " say : " they can not have know each other long . " "
" but two month : they meet in at the county ball at - . but where there be no obstacle to a union , as in the present case , where the connection be in every point desirable , delay be unnecessary : they will be marry as soon as s - place , which give up to they , can he refit for they reception . " the first time I find alone after this communication , I feel temp to inquire if the event distress he : but he seem so little to need sympathy , that , so far from venturing to offer he more , I experience some shame at the recollection of what I have already hazard . besides , I be out of practice in talk to he : he reserve be again freeze over , and my frankness be congeal beneath it . he have not keep he promise of treat I like he sister ; he continually make little chilling difference between we , which do not at all tend to the development of cordiality : in short , now that I be acknowledge he kinswoman , and live under the same roof with he , I feel the distance between we to be far greater than when he have know I only as the village schoolmistress . when I remembe how far I have once be admit to he confidence , I could hardly comprehend he present frigidity . such be the case , I feel not a little surprised when he raise he head suddenly from the desk over which he be stoop , and say - " you see , , the battle be fight and the victory win . " Startle at be thus address , I do not immediately reply : after a moment 's hesitation I answer - " but be you sure you be not in the position of those conqueror whose triumph have cost they too dear ? would not such another ruin you ? " " I think not ; and if I be , it do not much signify ; I shall never be call upon to contend for such another . the event of the conflict be decisive : my way be now clear ; I thank for it ! " so say , he return to he papers and he silence . as we mutual happiness ( i.e. , 's , 's , and mine ) settle into a quieter character , and we resume we usual habit and regular study , stay more at home : he sit with we in the same room , sometimes for hour together . while , pursue a course of encyclopaedic reading she have ( to my awe and amazement ) undertaken , and I fag away at , he ponder a mystic lore of he own : that of some eastern tongue , the acquisition of which he think necessary to he plan . thus engage , he appear , sit in he own recess , quiet and absorb enough ; but that blue eye of he have a habit of leave the outlandish - look grammar , and wander over , and sometimes fix upon we , he fellow - student , with a curiious intensity of observation : if catch , it would be instantly withdrawn ; yet ever and , it return searchingly to we table . I wonder what it mean : I wonder , too , at the punctual satisfaction he never fail to exhibit on a occasion that seem to I of small moment , namely , my weekly visit to school ; and still more be I puzzl when , if the day be unfavourable , if there be snow , or rain , or high wind , and he sister urge I not to go , he would invariably make light of they solicitude , and encourage I to accomplish the task without regard to the element . " be not such a weakl as you would make she , " he would say : " she can bear a mountain blast , or a shower , or a few flake of snow , as well as any of we . she constitution be both sound and elastic ; -- better calculate to endure variation of climate than many more robust . " and when I return , sometimes a good deal tired , and not a little weather - beaten , I never da complain , because I see that to yomurmu would be to vex he : on all occasion fortitude please he ; the reverse be a special annoyance . one afternoon , however , I get leave to stay at home , because I really have a cold . he sister be go to in my stead : I sit read Schiller ; he , decipher he crab Oriental scroll . as I exchange a translation for a exercise , I happen to look he way : there I find myself under the influence of the ever - watchful blue eye . how long it have be search I through and through , and over and over , I can not tell : so keen be it , and yet so cold , I feel for the moment superstitious -- as if I be sit in the room with something uncanny . " , what be you do ? " " learn german . " " I want you to give up German and learn . " " you be not in earnest ? " " in such earnest that I must have it so : and I will tell you why . " he then go on to explain that be the language he be himself at present studying ; that , as he advance , he be apt to forget the commencement ; that it would assist he
he greatly to have a pupil with whom he might again and again go over the element , and so fix they thoroughly in he mind ; that he choice have hover for some time between I and he sister ; but that he have fix on I because he see I could sit at a task the longest of the three . would I do he this favour ? I should not , perhaps , have to make the sacrifice long , as it want now barely three month to he departure . be not a man to be lightly refuse : you feel that every impression make on he , either for pain or pleasure , be deep - graved and permanent . I consent . when and return , the former find she scholar transfer from she to she brother : she laugh , and both she and agree that . should never have persuade they to such a step . he answer quietly - " I know it . " I find he a very patient , very forbearing , and yet a exact master : he expect I to do a great deal ; and when I fulfil he expectation , he , in he own way , fully testify he approbation . by degrees , he acquire a certain influence over I that take away my liberty of mind : he praise and notice be more restrain than he indifference . I could no longer talk or laugh freely when he be by , because a tiresomely importunate instinct remind I that vivacity ( at least in I ) be distasteful to he . I be so fully aware that only serious mood and occupation be acceptable , that in he presence every effort to sustain or follow any other become vain : I fall under a freezing spell . when he say " go , " I go ; " come , " I come ; " do this , " I do it . but I do not love my servitude : I wish , many a time , he have continue to neglect I . one evening when , at bedtime , he sister and I stand round he , bid he good - night , he kiss each of they , as be he custom ; and , as be equally he custom , he give I he hand . , who chance to be in a frolicsome humour ( she be not painfully control by he will ; for hers , in another way , be as strong ) , exclaim - " . ! you use to call you third sister , but you do not treat she as such : you should kiss she too . " she push I towards he . I think very provoke , and feel uncomfortably confused ; and while I be thus think and feel , bend he head ; he face be bring to a level with mine , he eye question my eye piercingly -- he kiss I . there be no such thing as marble kiss or ice kiss , or I should say my ecclesiastical cousin 's salute belong to one of these class ; but there may be experiment kiss , and he be a experiment kiss . when give , he view I to learn the result ; it be not strike : I be sure I do not blush ; perhaps I might have turn a little pale , for I feel as if this kiss be a seal affix to my fetter . he never omit the ceremony afterwards , and the gravity and quiescence with which I undergo it , seem to invest it for he with a certain charm . as for I , I daily wish more to please he ; but to do so , I feel daily more and more that I must disow half my nature , stifle half my faculty , wrest my taste from they original bent , force myself to the adoption of pursuit for which i have no natural vocation . he want to train I to a elevation I could never reach ; it rack I hourly to aspire to the standard he uplift . the thing be as impossible as to mould my irregular feature to he correct and classic pattern , to give to my changeable green eye the sea - blue tint and solemn lustre of he own . not he ascendancy alone , however , hold I in thrall at present . of late it have be easy enough for I to look sad : a canker evil sat at my heart and drain my happiness at its source -- the evil of suspense . perhaps you think I have forgote , reader , amidst these change of place and fortune . not for a moment . he idea be still with I , because it be not a vapour sunshine could disperse , nor a sand - trace effigy storm could wash away ; it be a name graven on a tablet , fate to last as long as the marble it inscribe . the craving to know what have become of he follow I everywhere ; when I be at , I re-enter my cottage every evening to think of that ; and now at , I seek my bedroom each night to brand over it . in the course of my necessary correspondence with about the will , I have inquire if he know anything of 's present residence and state of health ; but , as . have conjecture , he be quite ignorant of all concern he . I then write to , entreat information on the subject . I have calculate with certainty on this step answer my end : I feel sure it would elicit a early answer . I be astonish
astonish when a fortnight pass without reply ; but when two month wore away , and day after day the post arrive and bring nothing for I , I fall a prey to the keenest anxiety . I write again : there be a chance of my first letter have miss . renew hope follow renew effort : it shine like the former for some week , then , like it , it fad , flicker : not a line , not a word reach I . when half a year waste in vain expectancy , my hope die out , and then I feel dark indeed . a fine spring shone round I , which I could not enjoy . summer approach ; try to cheer I : she say I look ill , and wish to accompany I to the sea -side . this oppose ; he say I do not want dissipation , I want employment ; my present life be too purposeless , I require a aim ; and , I suppose , by way of supplye deficiency , he prolonge still further my lesson in , and grow more urgent in require they accomplishment : and I , like a fool , never think of resist he -- I could not resist he . one day I have come to my study in lower spirit than usual ; the ebb be occasion by a poignantly feel disappointment . have tell I in the morning there be a letter for I , and when I go down to take it , almost certain that the long - look for tiding be vouchsaf I at last , I find only a unimportant note from on business . the bitter check have wrung from I some tear ; and now , as I sit poring over the crabbed character and flourish trope of a indian scribe , my eye fill again . call I to he side to read ; in attempting to do this my voice fail I : word be lose in sob . he and I be the only occupant of the parlour : be practise she music in the drawing - room , be garden -- it be a very fine day , clear , sunny , and breezy . my companion express no surprise at this emotion , nor do he question I as to its cause ; he only say - " we will wait a few minute , , till you be more composed . " and while I smother the paroxysm with all haste , he sit calm and patient , lean on he desk , and look like a physician watch with the eye of science a expect and fully understand crisis in a patient 's malady . have stifle my sob , wip my eye , and mutter something about not be very well that morning , I resume my task , and succeed in complete it . put away my book and he , lock he desk , and say - " now , , you shall take a walk ; and with I . " " I will call and . " " no ; I want only one companion this morning , and that must be you . put on you thing ; go out by the kitchen - door : take the road towards the head of : I will join you in a moment . " I know no medium : I never in my life have know any medium in my dealings with positive , hard character , antagonistic to my own , between absolute submission and determine revolt . I have always faithfully observe the one , up to the very moment of bursting , sometimes with volcanic vehemence , into the other ; and as neither present circumstance warrant , nor my present mood inclin I to mutiny , I observe careful obedience to 's direction ; and in ten minute I be tread the wild track of the glen , side by side with he . the breeze be from the west : it come over the hill , sweet with scent of heath and rush ; the sky be of stainless blue ; the stream descende the ravine , swell with past spring rain , pour along plentiful and clear , catch golden gleam from the sun , and sapphire tints from the firmament . as we advance and leave the track , we trod a soft turf , mossy fine and emerald green , minutely enamell with a tiny white flower , and spangle with a star - like yellow blossom : the hill , meantime , shut we quite in ; for the glen , towards its head , wound to they very core . " let we rest here , " say . , as we reach the first straggler of a battalion of rock , guard a sort of pass , beyond which the beck rush down a waterfall ; and where , still a little farther , the mountain shook off turf and flower , have only heath for raiment and crag for gem -- where it exaggerate the wild to the savage , and exchange the fresh for the frowning -- where it guard the forlorn hope of solitude , and a last refuge for silence . I take a seat : stand near I . he look up the pass and down the hollow ; he glance wander away with the stream , and return to traverse the unclouded heaven which colour it : he remove he hat , let the breeze stir he hair and kiss he brow . he seem in communion with the genius of the haunt : with he eye he bay farewell to something . " and I shall see it again , " he say aloud , " in dream when I sleep by the Gange
Gange : and again in a more remote hour -- when another slumber overcome I -- on the shore of a darker stream ! " strange word of a strange love ! a austere patriot 's passion for he fatherland ! he sit down ; for half - a - hour we never speak ; neither he to I nor I to he : that interval past , he recommence - " , I go in six week ; I have take my berth in a which sail on the 20th of . " " will protect you ; for you have undertaken his work , " I answer . " yes , " say he , " there be my glory and joy . I be the servant of a infallible master . I be not go out under human guidance , subject to the defective law and er control of my feeble fellow - worm : my king , my lawgiver , my , be the all - perfect . it seem strange to I that all round I do not burn to enlist under the same banner , -- to join in the same enterprise . " " all have not you power , and it would be folly for the feeble to wish to march with the strong . " " I do not speak to the feeble , or think of they : I address only such as be worthy of the work , and competent to accomplish it . " " those be few in number , and difficult to discover . " " you say truly ; but when find , it be right to stir they up -- to urge and exhort they to the effort -- to show they what they gift be , and why they be give -- to speak 's message in they ear , -- to offer they , direct from , a place in the rank of he chosen . " " if they be really qualified for the task , will not they own heart be the first to inform they of it ? " I feel as if a awful charm be fram round and gather over I : I tremble to hear some fatal word speak which would at once declare and rivet the spell . " and what do you heart say ? " demand . " my heart be mute , -- my heart be mute , " I answer , struck and thrill . " then I must speak for it , " continue the deep , relentless voice . " , come with I to : come as my helpmeet and fellow - labourer . " the glen and sky spun round : the hill heav ! it be as if I have hear a summon from -- as if a visionary messenger , like he of , have enounce , " come over and help we ! " but I be no apostle , -- I could not behold the herald , -- I could not receive he call . " oh , ! " I cry , " have some mercy ! " I appeal to one who , in the discharge of what he believe he duty , kknow neither mercy nor remorse . he continue - " and nature intend you for a missionary 's wife . it be not personal , but mental endowment they have give you : you be form for labour , not for love . a missionary 's wife you must -- shall be . you shall be mine : I claim you -- not for my pleasure , but for my 's service . " " I be not fit for it : I have no vocation , " I say . he have calculate on these first objection : he be not irritate by they . indeed , as he lean back against the crag behind he , fold he arm on he chest , and fix he countenance , I see he be prepare for a long and try opposition , and have take in a stock of patience to last he to its close -- resolve , however , that that close should be conquest for he . " Humility , , " say he , " be the groundwork of virtue : you say right that you be not fit for the work . who be fit for it ? or who , that ever be truly call , believe himself worthy of the summon ? I , for instance , am but dust and ash . with , I acknowledge myself the chiefest of sinner ; but I do not suffer this sense of my personal vileness to daunt I . I know my leader : that he be just as well as mighty ; and while he have choose a feeble instrument to perform a great task , he will , from the boundless store of he providence , supply the inadequacy of the means to the end . think like I , -- trust like I . it be the rock of I ask you to lean on : do not doubt but it will bear the weight of you human weakness . " " I do not understand a missionary life : I have never study missionary labour . " " there I , humble as I be , can give you the aid you want : I can set you you task from hour to hour ; stand by you always ; help you from moment to moment . this I could do in the beginning : soon ( for I know you power ) you would be as strong and apt as myself , and would not require my help . " " but my power -- where be they for this undertaking ? I do not feel they .
. nothing speak or stir in I while you talk . I be sensible of no light kindling -- no life quicken -- no voice counselling or cheering . oh , I wish I could make you see how much my mind be at this moment like a rayless dungeon , with one shrinking fear fetter in its depth -- the fear of be persuade by you to attempt what I can not accomplish ! " " I have a answer for you -- hear it . I have watch you ever since we first meet : I have make you my study for ten month . I have prove you in that time by sundry test : and what have I see and elicit ? in the village school I find you could perform well , punctually , uprightly , labour uncongenial to you habits and inclination ; I see you could perform it with capacity and tact : you could win while you control . in the calm with which you lear not you have become suddenly rich , I read a mind clear of the vice of :- lucre have no undue power over you . in the resolute readiness with which you cut you wealth into four share , keep but one to yourself , and relinquish the three other to the claim of abstract justice , I recognise a soul that revell in the flame and excitement of sacrifice . in the tractability with which , at my wish , you forsook a study in which you be interested , and adopt another because it interes I ; in the untiring assiduity with which you have since persever in it -- in the unflagging energy and unshaken temper with which you have meet its difficulty -- I acknowledge the complement of the quality I seek . , you be docile , diligent , disinterested , faithful , constant , and courageous ; very gentle , and very heroic : cease to mistrust yourself -- I can trust you unreservedly . as a conductress of indian school , and a helper amongst indian woman , you assistance will be to I invaluable . " my iron shrould contract round I ; persuasion advanc with slow sure step . shut my eye as I would , these last word of he succeed in make the way , which have see block up , comparatively clear . my work , which have appear so vague , so hopelessly diffuse , condense itself as he proceed , and assume a definite form under he shaping hand . he wait for a answer . I demand a quarter of a hour to think , before I again hazard a reply . " very willingly , " he rejoin ; and rise , he strode a little distance up the pass , throw himself down on a swell of heath , and there lay still . " I can do what he want I to do : I be force to see and acknowledge that , " I meditate , -- " that be , if life be spare I . but I feel mine be not the existence to be long protract under a indian sun . what then ? he do not care for that : when my time come to die , he would resign I , in all serenity and sanctity , to the who give I . the case be very plain before I . in leave , I should leave a loved but empty land -- be not there ; and if he be , what be , what can that ever be to I ? my business be to live without he now : nothing so absurd , so weak as to drag on from day to day , as if I be wait some impossible change in circumstance , which might reunite I to he . of course ( as once say ) I must seek another interest in life to replace the one lose : be not the occupation he now offer I truly the most glorious man can adopt or assign ? be it not , by it be noble care and sublime result , the one best calculate to fill the void leave by uptorn affections and demolish hope ? I believe I must say , yes -- and yet I shudder . ! if I join , I abandon half myself : if I go to , I go to premature death . and how will the interval between leave for , and for the grave , be fill ? oh , I know well ! that , too , be very clear to my vision . by strain to satisfy till my sinews ache , I shall satisfy he -- to the finest central point and farthest outward circle of he expectation . if I do go with he -- if I do make the sacrifice he urge , I will make it absolutely : I will throw all on the altar -- heart , vital , the entire victim . he will never love I ; but he shall approve I ; I will show he energie he have not yet see , resource he have never suspect . yes , I can work as hard as he can , and with as little grudging . " consent , then , to he demand be possible : but for one item -- one dreadful item . it be -- that he ask I to be he wife , and have no more of a husband 's heart for I than that frowning giant of a rock , down which the stream be foam in yonder gorge . he prize I as a soldier would a good weapon ; and that be all . Unmarry to he , this would never grieve I ; but can I let he
he complete he calculation -- coolly put into practice he plan -- go through the wedding ceremony ? can I receive from he the bridal ring , endure all the form of love ( which I doubt not he would scrupulously observe ) and know that the spirit be quite absent ? can I bear the consciousness that every endearment he bestow be a sacrifice make on principle ? no : such a martyrdom would be monstrous . I will never undergo it . as he sister , I might accompany he -- not as he wife : I will tell he so . " I look towards the knoll : there he lay , still as a prostrate column ; he face turn to I : he eye beam watchful and keen . he start to he foot and approach I . " I be ready to go to , if I may go free . " " you answer require a commentary , " he say ; " it be not clear . " " you have hithertoo be my adopt brother -- I , you adopt sister : let we continue as such : you and I have better not marry . " he shook he head . " adopt fraternity will not do in this case . if you be my real sister it would be different : I should take you , and seek no wife . but as it be , either we union must be consecrate and seal by marriage , or it can not exist : practical obstacle oppose themselves to any other plan . do you not see it , ? consider a moment -- you strong sense will guide you . " I do consider ; and still my sense , such as it be , direct I only to the fact that we do not love each other as man and wife should : and therefore it infer we ought not to marry . I say so . " . , " I return , " I regard you as a brother -- you , I as a sister : so let we continue . " " we cannot -- we can not , " he answer , with short , sharp determination : " it would not do . you have say you will go with I to : remember -- you have say that . " " Conditionally . " " well -- well . to the main point -- the departure with I from , the co-operation with I in my future labour -- you do not object . you have already as good as put you hand to the plough : you be too consistent to withdraw it . you have but one end to keep in view -- how the work you have undertaken can best be done . Simplify you complicated interest , feelings , thought , wish , aim ; merge all consideration in one purpose : that of fulfilling with effect -- with power -- the mission of you great master . to do so , you must have a coadjutor : not a brother -- that be a loose tie -- but a husband . I , too , do not want a sister : a sister might any day be take from I . I want a wife : the sole helpmeet I can influence efficiently in life , and retain absolutely till death . " I shudder as he speak : I feel he influence in my marrow -- he hold on my limb . " seek one elsewhere than in I , : seek one fit to you . " " one fitte to my purpose , you mean -- fit to my vocation . again I tell you it be not the insignificant private individual -- the mere man , with the man 's selfish sense -- I wish to mate : it be the missionary . " " and I will give the missionary my energie -- it be all he want -- but not myself : that would be only add the husk and shell to the kernel . for they he have no use : I retain they . " " you can not -- you ought not . do you think will be satisfied with half a oblation ? will he accept a mutilated sacrifice ? it be the cause of I advocate : it be under he standard I enlist you . I can not accept on he behalf a divided allegiance : it must be entire . " " oh ! I will give my heart to , " I say . " you do not want it . " I will not swear , reader , that there be not something of repress sarcasm both in the tone in which I utter this sentence , and in the feeling that accompany it . I have silently fear till now , because I have not understand he . he have hold I in awe , because he have hold I in doubt . how much of he be saint , how much mortal , I could not heretofore tell : but revelation be be make in this conference : the analysis of he nature be proceed before my eye . I see he fallibility : I comprehend they . I understand that , sit there where I do , on the bank of heath , and with that handsome form before I , I sit at the foot of a man , car as I . the veil fall from he hardness and despotism . have felt in he the presence of these quality , I feel he imperfection and take courage . I be with a equal -- one with whom I might argue -- one whom , if I see good , I might resist . he be silent
silent after I have utter the last sentence , and I presently risk a upward glance at he countenance . he eye , bend on I , express at once stern surprise and keen inquiry . " be she sarcastic , and sarcastic to I ! " it seem to say . " what do this signify ? " " do not let we forget that this be a solemn matter , " he say ere long ; " one of which we may neither think nor talk lightly without sin . I trust , , you be in earnest when you say you will serve you heart to : it be all I want . once wrench you heart from man , and fix it on you maker , the advancement of that 's spiritual kingdom on earth will be you chief delight and endeavour ; you will be ready to do at once whatever furthers that end . you will see what impetus would be give to you effort and mine by we physical and mental union in marriage : the only union that give a character of permanent conformity to the destiny and design of human being ; and , pass over all minor caprice -- all trivial difficulty and delicacies of feeling -- all scruple about the degree , kind , strength or tenderness of mere personal inclination -- you will hasten to enter into that union at once . " " shall I ? " I say briefly ; and I look at he feature , beautiful in they harmony , but strangely formidable in they still severity ; at he brow , command but not open ; at he eye , bright and deep and search , but never soave ; at he tall impos figure ; and fancie myself in idea . oh ! it would never do ! as he curate , he comrade , all would be right : I would cross oceans with he in that capacity ; toil under eastern suns , in asian desert with he in that office ; admire and emulate he courage and devotion and vigour ; accommodate quietly to he masterhood ; smile undistur at he ineradicable ambition ; discriminate the from the man : profoundly esteem the one , and freely forgive the other . I should suffer often , no doubt , attach to he only in this capacity : my body would be under rather a stringent yoke , but my heart and mind would be free . I should still have my unblighted self to turn to : my natural unenslaved feeling with which to communicate in moment of loneliness . there would be recess in my mind which would be only mine , to which he never come , and sentiment grow there fresh and shelter which he austerity could never blight , nor he measure warrior - march trample down : but as he wife -- at he side always , and always restrain , and always check -- force to keep the fire of my nature continually low , to compel it to burn inwardly and never utter a cry , though the imprison flame consum vital after vital -- this would be unendurable . " . ! " I exclaim , when I have get so far in my meditation . " well ? " he answer icily . " I repeat I freely consent to go with you as you fellow - missionary , but not as you wife ; I can not marry you and become part of you . " " a part of I you must become , " he answer steadily ; " otherwise the whole bargain be void . how can I , a man not yet thirty , take out with I to a girl of nineteen , unless she be marry to I ? how can we be for ever together -- sometimes in solitude , sometimes amidst savage tribe -- and unw ? " " very well , " I say shortly ; " under the circumstance , quite as well as if I be either you real sister , or a man and a clergyman like yourself . " " it be know that you be not my sister ; I can not introduce you as such : to attempt it would be to fasten injuriious suspicions on we both . and for the rest , though you have a man 's vigorous brain , you have a woman 's heart and -- it would not do . " " it would do , " I affir with some disdain , " perfectly well . I have a woman 's heart , but not where you be concerned ; for you I have only a comrade 's constancy ; a fellow - soldier 's frankness , fidelity , fraternity , if you like ; a neophyte 's respect and submission to he hierophant : nothing more -- do not fear . " " it be what I want , " he say , speak to himself ; " it be just what I want . and there be obstacle in the way : they must be hew down . , you would not repent marrie I -- be certain of that ; we must be marry . I repeat it : there be no other way ; and undoubtedly enough of love would follow upon marriage to render the union right even in you eye . " " I scorn you idea of love , " I could not help say , as I rise up and stand before he , lean my back against the rock . " I scorn the counterfeit sentiment you offer : yes , , and I scorn you when you offer it . " he look at I fixedly , compresse he well - cut lip while he do so .
. whether he be incense or surprise , or what , it be not easy to tell : he could command he countenance thoroughly . " I scarcely expect to hear that expression from you , " he say : " I think I have do and utter nothing to deserve scorn . " I be touch by he gentle tone , and overaw by he high , calm mien . " forgive I the word , ; but it be you own fault that I have be rouse to speak so unguardedly . you have introduce a topic on which we nature be at variance -- a topic we should never discuss : the very name of love be a apple of discord between we . if the reality be require , what should we do ? how should we feel ? my dear cousin , abandon you scheme of marriage -- forget it . " " no , " say he ; " it be a long - cherish scheme , and the only one which can secure my great end : but I shall urge you no further at present . to -morrow , I leave home for : I have many friend there to whom I should wish to say farewell . I shall be absent a fortnight -- take that space of time to consider my offer : and do not forget that if you reject it , it be not I you deny , but . through my mean , he open to you a noble career ; as my wife only can you enter upon it . refuse to be my wife , and you limit yourself for ever to a track of selfish ease and barren obscurity . Tremble lest in that case you should be number with those who have deny the faith , and be worse than infidel ! " he have do . turn from I , he once more " look to river , look to hill . " but this time he feeling be all pent in he heart : I be not worthy to hear they utter . as I walk by he side homeward , I read well in he iron silence all he feel towards I : the disappointment of a austere and despotic nature , which have meet resistance where it expect submission -- the disapprobation of a cool , inflexible judgment , which have detect in another feeling and view in which it have no power to sympathise : in short , as a man , he would have wish to coerce I into obedience : it be only as a sincere he bear so patiently with my perversity , and allow so long a space for reflection and repentance . that night , after he have kiss he sister , he think proper to forget even to shake hand with I , but leave the room in silence . I -- who , though I have no love , have much friendship for he -- be hurt by the mark omission : so much hurt that tear start to my eye . " I see you and have be quarrell , , " say , " during you walk on the moor . but go after he ; he be now linger in the passage expect you -- he will make it up . " I have not much pride under such circumstance : I would always rather be happy than dignify ; and I run after he -- he stand at the foot of the stair . " good - night , , " say I . " good - night , , " he reply calmly . " then shake hand , " I add . what a cold , loose touch , he impress on my finger ! he be deeply displease by what have occur that day ; cordiality would not warm , nor tear move he . no happy reconciliation be to be have with he -- no cheering smile or generous word : but still the be patient and placid ; and when I ask he if he forgave I , he answer that he be not in the habit of cherish the remembrance of vexation ; that he have nothing to forgive , not have be offend . and with that answer he leave I . I would much rather he have knock I down . he do not leave for the next day , as he have say he would . he defer he departure a whole week , and during that time he make I feel what severe punishment a good yet stern , a conscientious yet implacable man can inflict on one who have offend he . without one overt act of hostility , one upbraiding word , he contrive to impress I momently with the conviction that I be put beyond the pale of he favour . not that . harbour a spirit of unchristian vindictiveness -- not that he would have injure a hair of my head , if it have be fully in he power to do so . both by nature and principle , he be superior to the mean gratification of vengeance : he have forgive I for say I scorn he and he love , but he have not forget the word ; and as long as he and I liv he never would forget they . I see by he look , when he turn to I , that they be always write on the air between I and he ; whenever I speak , they sound in my voice to he ear , and they echo ton every answer he give I . he do not abstain from conversing with I : he even call I as usual each morning to join he at he desk ; and I fear the corrupt man within
within he have a pleasure unimparted to , and unshared by , the pure , in evincing with what skill he could , while act and speak apparently just as usual , extract from every deed and every phrase the spirit of interest and approval which have formerly communicate a certain austere charm to he language and manner . to I , he be in reality become no longer flesh , but marble ; he eye be a cold , bright , blue gem ; he tongue a speak instrument -- nothing more . all this be torture to I -- refin , linger torture . it keep up a slow fire of indignation and a trembl trouble of grief , which harass and crush I altogether . I feel how -- if I be he wife , this good man , pure as the deep sunless source , could soon kill I , without draw from my vein a single drop of blood , or receive on he own crystal conscience the faintest stain of crime . especially I feel this when I make any attempt to propitiate he . no ruth meet my ruth . he experience no suffering from estrangement -- no yearning after reconciliation ; and though , more than once , my fast fall tear blister the page over which we both bent , they produce no more effect on he than if he heart have be really a matter of stone or metal . to he sister , meantime , he be somewhat kinder than usual : as if afraid that mere coldness would not sufficiently convince I how completely I be banish and ban , he add the force of contrast ; and this I be sure he do not by force , but on principle . the night before he leave home , happen to see he walk in the garden about sunset , and remember , as I look at he , that this man , alienate as he now be , have once save my life , and that we be near relation , I be move to make a last attempt to regain he friendship . I go out and approach he as he stand lean over the little gate ; I speak to the point at once . " . , I be unhappy because you be still angry with I . let we be friend . " " I hope we be friend , " be the unmoved reply ; while he still watch the rising of the moon , which he have be contemplate as I approached . " no , , we be not friend as we be . you know that . " " be we not ? that be wrong . for my part , I wish you no ill and all good . " " I believe you , ; for I be sure you be incapable of wish any one ill ; but , as I be you kinswoman , I should desire somewhat more of affection than that sort of general philanthropy you extend to mere stranger . " " of course , " he say . " you wish be reasonable , and I be far from regard you as a stranger . " this , speak in a cool , tranquil tone , be mortify and baffle enough . have I attend to the suggestion of pride and ire , I should immediately have leave he ; but something work within I more strongly than those feeling could . I deeply venerate my cousin 's talent and principle . he friendship be of value to I : to lose it try I severely . I would not so soon relinquish the attempt to reconquer it . " must we part in this way , ? and when you go to , will you leave I so , without a kinder word than you have yet speak ? " he now turn quite from the moon and face I . " when I go to , , will I leave you ! what ! do you not go to ? " " you say I could not unless I marry you . " " and you will not marry I ! you adhere to that resolution ? " reader , do you know , as I do , what terror those cold people can put into the ice of they question ? how much of the fall of the avalanche be in they anger ? of the breaking up of the freeze sea in they displeasure ? " no . , I will not marry you . I adhere to my resolution . " the avalanche have shaken and slid a little forward , but it do not yet crash down . " once more , why this refusal ? " he ask . " Formerly , " I answer , " because you do not love I ; now , I reply , because you almost hate I . if I be to marry you , you would kill I . you be kill I now . " he lip and cheek turn white -- quite white . " I should kill you -- I be kill you ? you word be such as ought not to be use : violent , unfeminine , and untrue . they betray a unfortunate state of mind : they merit severe reproof : they would seem inexcusable , but that it be the duty of man to forgive he fellow even until seventy - and - seven time . " I have finish the business now . while earnestly wish to erase from he mind the trace of my former offence , I have stamp on that tenacious surface another and far deeper impression , I have burn it in . " now you will indeed hate I , " I say
say . " it be useless to attempt to conciliate you : I see I have make a eternal enemy of you . " a fresh wrong do these word inflict : the worse , because they touch on the truth . that bloodless lip quiver to a temporary spasm . I know the steely ire I have whet . I be heart-wrung . " you utterly misinterpret my word , " I say , at once seize he hand : " I have no intention to grieve or pain you -- indeed , I have not . " most bitterly he smile -- most decidedly he withdraw he hand from mine . " and now you recall you promise , and will not go to at all , I presume ? " say he , after a considerable pause . " yes , I will , as you assistant , " I answer . a very long silence succeed . what struggle there be in he between and in this interval , I can not tell : only singular gleam scintillate in he eye , and strange shadow pass over he face . he speak at last . " I before prove to you the absurdity of a single woman of you age propose to accompany abroad a single man of mine . I prove it to you in such term as , I should have think , would have prevent you ever again allud to the plan . that you have do so , I regret -- for you sake . " I interrupt he . anything like a tangible reproach give I courage at once . " keep to common sense , : you be verge on nonsense . you pretend to be shock by what I have say . you be not really shocke : for , with you superior mind , you can not be either so dull or so conceited as to misunderstand my meaning . I say again , I will be you curate , if you like , but never you wife . " again he turn lividly pale ; but , as before , control he passion perfectly . he answer emphatically but calmly - " a female curate , who be not my wife , would never suit I . with I , then , it seem , you can not go : but if you be sincere in you offer , I will , while in town , speak to a marry missionary , whose wife need a coadjutor . you own fortune will make you independent of the 's aid ; and thus you may still be spare the dishonour of break you promise and desert the band you engage to join . " now I never have , as the reader know , either give any formal promise or enter into any engagement ; and this language be all much too hard and much too despotic for the occasion . I reply - " there be no dishonour , no breach of promise , no desertion in the case . I be not under the slightest obligation to go to , especially with stranger . with you I would have venture much , because I admire , confide in , and , as a sister , I love you ; but I be convinced that , go when and with whom I would , I should not live long in that climate . " " ah ! you be afraid of yourself , " he say , curl he lip . " I be . do not give I my life to throw away ; and to do as you wish I would , I begin to think , be almost equivalent to commit suicide . moreover , before I definitively resolve on quit , I will know for certain whether I can not be of greater use by remain in it than by leave it . " " what do you mean ? " " it would be fruitless to attempt to explain ; but there be a point on which I have long endure painful doubt , and I can go nowhere till by some means that doubt be remove . " " I know where you heart turn and to what it cling . the interest you cherish be lawless and unconsecrated . long since you ought to have crush it : now you should blush to allude to it . you think of ? " it be true . I confess it by silence . " be you go to seek ? " " I must find out what be become of he . " " it remain for I , then , " he say , " to remember you in my prayer , and to entreat for you , in all earnestness , that you may not indeed become a castaway . I have think I recognise in you one of the chosen . but see not as man see : he will be do -- " he open the gate , pass through it , and stray away down the glen . he be soon out of sight . on re-enter the parlour , I find stand at the window , look very thoughtful . be a great deal taller than I : she put she hand on my shoulder , and , stoop , examine my face . " , " she say , " you be always agitate and pale now . I be sure there be something the matter . tell I what business and you have on hand . I have watch you this half hour from the window ; you must forgive my be such a spy , but for a long time I have fancie I hardly know what . be a strange being -- " she pause -- I do not speak : soon
soon she resum - " that brother of mine cherish peculiar view of some sort respect you , I be sure : he have long distinguished you by a notice and interest he never show to any one else -- to what end ? I wish he love you -- do he , ? " I put she cool hand to my hot forehead ; " no , , not one whit . " " then why do he follow you so with he eye , and get you so frequently alone with he , and keep you so continually at he side ? and I have both conclude he wish you to marry he . " " he do -- he have ask I to be he wife . " clap she hand . " that be just what we hope and think ! and you will marry he , , will not you ? and then he will stay in . " " far from that , ; he sole idea in propose to I be to procure a fitting fellow - labourer in he indian toil . " " what ! he wish you to go to ? " " yes . " " Madness ! " she exclaim . " you would not live three month there , I be certain . you never shall go : you have not consent , have you , ? " " I have refuse to marry he -- " " and have consequently displease he ? " she suggest . " deeply : he will never forgive I , I fear : yet I offer to accompany he as he sister . " " it be frantic folly to do so , . think of the task you undertake -- one of incessant fatigue , where fatigue kill even the strong , and you be weak . -- you know he -- would urge you to impossibility : with he there would be no permission to rest during the hot hour ; and unfortunately , I have notice , whatever he exact , you force yourself to perform . I be astonish you find courage to refuse he hand . you do not love he then , ? " " not as a husband . " " yet he be a handsome fellow . " " and I be so plain , you see , . we should never suit . " " ! you ? not at all . you be much too pretty , as well as too good , to be grill alive in . " and again she earnestly conjure I to give up all thought of go out with she brother . " I must indeed , " I say ; " for when just now I repeat the offer of serve he for a deacon , he express himself shock at my want of decency . he seem to think I have commit a impropriety in propose to accompany he unmarried : as if I have not from the first hope to find in he a brother , and habitually regard he as such . " " what make you say he do not love you , ? " " you should hear himself on the subject . he have again and again explain that it be not himself , but he office he wish to mate . he have tell I I be form for labour -- not for love : which be true , no doubt . but , in my opinion , if I be not form for love , it follow that I be not form for marriage . would it not be strange , , to be chain for life to a man who regard one but as a useful tool ? " " Insupportable -- unnatural -- out of the question ! " " and then , " I continue , " though I have only sisterly affection for he now , yet , if force to be he wife , I can imagine the possibility of conceive a inevitable , strange , torture kind of love for he , because he be so talented ; and there be often a certain heroic grandeur in he look , manner , and conversation . in that case , my lot would become unspeakably wretched . he would not want I to love he ; and if I show the feeling , he would make I sensible that it be a superfluity , unrequire by he , unbecoming in I . I know he would . " " and yet be a good man , " say . " he be a good and a great man ; but he forget , pitilessly , the feeling and claim of little people , in pursue he own large view . it be better , therefore , for the insignificant to keep out of he way , lest , in he progress , he should trample they down . here he come ! I will leave you , . " and I hasten upstairs as I see he enter the garden . but I be force to meet he again at supper . during that meal he appear just as compose as usual . I have think he would hardly speak to I , and I be certain he have give up the pursuit of he matrimonial scheme : the sequel show I be mistaken on both point . he address I precisely in he ordinary manner , or what have , of late , be he ordinary manner -- one scrupulously polite . no doubt he have invoke the help of the to subdue the anger I have rouse in he , and now believe he have forgive I once more . for the evening read before prayer , he selecte the twenty - first chapter of Revelation . it be
be at all time pleasant to listen while from he lip fall the word of the : never do he fine voice sound at once so sweet and full -- never do he manner become so impressive in it be noble simplicity , as when he deliver the oracle of : and to - night that take a more solemn tone -- that manner a more thrilling meaning -- as he sit in the midst of he household circle ( the moon shining in through the uncurtained window , and render almost unnecessary the light of the candle on the table ) : as he sit there , bend over the great old , and describe from it be page the vision of the new heaven and the new earth -- tell how would come to dwell with man , how he would wipe away all tear from they eye , and promise that there should be no more death , neither sorrow nor cry , nor any more pain , because the former thing be pass away . the succeed word thrill I strangely as he speak they : especially as I feel , by the slight , indescribable alteration in sound , that in utter they , he eye have turn on I . " he that overcometh shall inherit all thing ; and I will be he , and he shall be my son . but , " be slowly , distinctly read , " the fearful , the unbelieving , & c. , shall have they part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone , which be the second death . " Henceforward , I know what fate fear for I . a calm , subdue triumph , blent with a longing earnestness , mark he enunciation of the last glorious verse of that chapter . the reader believe he name be already write in the 's book of life , and he year after the hour which should admit he to the city to which the king of the earth bring they glory and honour ; which have no need of sun or moon to shine in it , because the glory of lighten it , and the lamb be the light thereof . in the prayer follow the chapter , all he energy gather -- all he stern zeal woke : he be in deep earnest , wrestl with , and resolve on a conquest . he supplicate strength for the weak - hear ; guidance for wanderer from the fold : a return , even at the eleventh hour , for those whom the temptation of the world and the flesh be lur from the narrow path . he ask , he urge , he claim the boon of a brand snatch from the burning . Earnestness be ever deeply solemn : first , as I listen to that prayer , I wonder at he ; then , when it continue and rise , I be touch by it , and at last awed . he feel the greatness and goodness of he purpose so sincerely : other who hear he plead for it , could not but feel it too . the prayer over , we take leave of he : he be to go at a very early hour in the morning . and have kiss he , leave the room -- in compliance , I think , with a whispered hint from he : I tender my hand , and wish he a pleasant journey . " thank you , . as I say , I shall return from Cambridge in a fortnight : that space , then , be yet leave you for reflection . if I listen to human pride , I should say no more to you of marriage with I ; but I listen to my duty , and keep steadily in view my first aim -- to do all thing to the glory of . my master be long - suffering : so will I be . I can not give you up to perdition as a vessel of wrath : repent -- resolve , while there be yet time . remember , we be bid to work while it be day -- warn that ' the night cometh when no man shall work . ' remember the fate of Dives , who have he good thing in this life . give you strength to choose that better part which shall not be take from you ! " he lay he hand on my head as he utter the last word . he have speak earnestly , mildly : he look be not , indeed , that of a lover behold he mistress , but it be that of a pastor recalle he wander sheep -- or better , of a guardian angel watch the soul for which he be responsible . all man of talent , whether they be man of feeling or not ; whether they be zealot , or aspirant , or despot -- provide only they be sincere -- have they sublime moment , when they subdue and rule . I feel veneration for -- veneration so strong that it be impetus thrust I at once to the point I have so long shunn . I be tempt to cease struggle with he -- to rush down the torrent of he will into the gulf of he existence , and there lose my own . I be almost as hard beset by he now as I have be once before , in a different way , by another . I be a fool both time . to have yield then would have be a error of principle ; to have yield now would have be a error of judgment . so I think at this hour , when I look back to the crisis through the quiet medium of time
time : I be unconscious of folly at the instant . I stand motionless under my hierophant 's touch . my refusal be forget -- my fear overcome -- my wrestling paralyse . the impossible -- , my marriage with -- be fast become the possible . all be change utterly with a sudden sweep . religion call -- Angels beckon -- command -- life roll together like a scroll -- death 's gate opening , show eternity beyond : it seem , that for safety and bliss there , all here might be sacrifice in a second . the dim room be full of vision . " could you decide now ? " ask the missionary . the inquiry be put in gentle tone : he draw I to he as gently . oh , that gentleness ! how far more potent be it than force ! I could resist 's wrath : I grow pliant as a reed under he kindness . yet I know all the time , if I yield now , I should not the less be make to repent , some day , of my former rebellion . he nature be not change by one hour of solemn prayer : it be only elevate . " I could decide if I be but certain , " I answer : " be I but convince that it be 's will I should marry you , I could vow to marry you here and now -- come afterwards what would ! " " my prayer be hear ! " ejaculate . he press he hand firmer on my head , as if he claim I : he surround I with he arm , almost as if he love I ( I say almost -- I know the difference -- for I have feel what it be to be love ; but , like he , I have now put love out of the question , and think only of duty ) . I contend with my inward dimness of vision , before which cloud yet roll . I sincerely , deeply , fervently longe to do what be right ; and only that . " show I , show I the path ! " I entreate of . I be excite more than I have ever be ; and whether what follow be the effect of excitement the reader shall judge . all the house be still ; for I believe all , except and myself , be now retire to rest . the one candle be die out : the room be full of moonlight . my heart beat fast and thick : I hear its throb . suddenly it stand still to a inexpressible feeling that thrill it through , and pass at once to my head and extremity . the feeling be not like a electric shock , but it be quite as sharp , as strange , as start : it act on my sense as if they utmost activity hithertoo have be but torpor , from which they be now summon and force to wake . they rise expectant : eye and ear wait while the flesh quiver on my bone . " what have you hear ? what do you see ? " ask . I see nothing , but I hear a voice somewhere cry - " ! ! ! " -- nothing more . " of ! what be it ? " I gas . I might have say , " where be it ? " for it do not seem in the room -- nor in the house -- nor in the garden ; it do not come out of the air -- nor from under the earth -- nor from overhead . I have hear it -- where , or whence , for ever impossible to know ! and it be the voice of a human being -- a know , love , well - remember voice -- that of ; and it speak in pain and woe , wildly , eerily , urgently . " I be come ! " I cry . " wait for I ! oh , I will come ! " I flow to the door and look into the passage : it be dark . I run out into the garden : it be void . " where be you ? " I exclaim . the hill beyond send the answer faintly back -- " where be you ? " I listen . the wind sigh low in the fir : all be moorland loneliness and midnight hush . " Dow superstition ! " I comment , as that spectre rise up black by the black yew at the gate . " this be not thy deception , nor thy witchcraft : it be the work of nature . she be rouse , and do -- no miracle -- but she best . " I break from , who have follow , and would have detain I . it be my time to assume ascendency . my power be in play and in force . I tell he to forbear question or remark ; I desire he to leave I : I must and would be alone . he obey at once . where there be energy to command well enough , obedience never fail . I mount to my chamber ; lock myself in ; fell on my knee ; and pray in my way -- a different way to 's , but effective in its own fashion . I seem to penetrate very near a Spirit ; and my soul rush out in gratitude at he foot . I rise from the thanksgiving -- take a resolve -- and lay down , unscared , enlighten -- eager but for the daylight . the daylight come . I rise at dawn . I busy myself for a hour or two
two with arrange my thing in my chamber , drawer , and wardrobe , in the order wherein I should wish to leave they during a brief absence . meantime , I hear . quit he room . he stop at my door : I fear he would knock -- no , but a slip of paper be pass under the door . I take it up . it bear these word - " you leave I too suddenly last night . have you stay but a little longer , you would have lay you hand on the 's cross and the angel 's crown . I shall expect you clear decision when I return this day fortnight . meantime , watch and pray that you enter not into temptation : the spirit , I trust , be willing , but the flesh , I see , be weak . I shall pray for you hourly . -- yours , . " " my spirit , " I answer mentally , " be willing to do what be right ; and my flesh , I hope , be strong enough to accomplish the will of , when once that will be distinctly known to I . at any rate , it shall be strong enough to search -- inquire -- to grope a outlet from this cloud of doubt , and find the open day of certainty . " it be the first of ; yet the morning be overcast and chilly : rain beat fast on my casement . I hear the front - door open , and pass out . look through the window , I see he traverse the garden . he take the way over the misty moor in the direction of -- there he would meet the coach . " in a few more hour I shall succeed you in that track , cousin , " think I : " I too have a coach to meet at . I too have some to see and ask after in , before I depart for ever . " it want yet two hour of breakfast - time . I fill the interval in walk softly about my room , and ponder the visitation which have give my plan they present bent . I recall that inward sensation I have experience : for I could recall it , with all its unspeakable strangeness . I recall the voice I have hear ; again I question whence it come , as vainly as before : it see in I -- not in the external world . I ask be it a mere nervous impression -- a delusion ? I could not conceive or believe : it be more like a inspiration . the wondrous shock of feeling have come like the earthquake which shook the foundation of and 's prison ; it have open the door of the soul 's cell and loose its band -- it have wake it out of its sleep , whence it spring trembling , listen , aghast ; then vibrate thrice a cry on my start ear , and in my quaking heart and through my spirit , which neither fear nor shook , but exult as if in joy over the success of one effort it have be privileged to make , independent of the cumbrous body . " Ere many day , " I say , as I terminate my musing , " I will know something of he whose voice seem last night to summon I . letter have prove of no avail -- personal inquiry shall replace they . " at breakfast I announce to and that I be go a journey , and should be absent at least four day . " , ? " they ask . " yes ; it be to see or hear news of a friend about whom I have for some time be uneasy . " they might have say , as I have no doubt they think , that they have believe I to be without any friend save they : for , indeed , I have often say so ; but , with they true natural delicacy , they abstain from comment , except that ask I if I be sure I be well enough to travel . I look very pale , she observe . I reply , that nothing ail I save anxiety of mind , which I hope soon to alleviate . it be easy to make my further arrangement ; for I be trouble with no inquiry -- no surmise . have once explain to they that I could not now be explicit about my plan , they kindly and wisely acquiesce in the silence with which I pursue they , accord to I the privilege of free action I should under similar circumstance have accord they . I leave at three o'clock p.m. , and soon after four I stand at the foot of the sign - post of , wait the arrival of the coach which be to take I to distant . Amidst the silence of those solitary roads and desert hill , I hear it approach from a great distance . it be the same vehicle whence , a year ago , I have alight one summer evening on this very spot -- how desolate , and hopeless , and objectless ! it stop as I beckon . I enter -- not now oblige to part with my whole fortune as the price of its accommodation . once more on the road to , I feel like the messenger - pigeon fly home . it be a journey of six - and - thirty hour . I have set out from on a afternoon , and early on the succeeding morn the coach stop to water the horse at a wayside inn , situate in the midst of scenery whose green hedge
hedge and large field and low pastoral hill ( how mild of feature and verdant of hue compare with the stern - moor of ! ) meet my eye like the lineament of a once familiar face . yes , I know the character of this landscape : I be sure we be near my bourne . " how far be from here ? " I ask of the ostler . " just two mile , ma 'am , across the field . " " my journey be close , " I think to myself . I get out of the coach , give a box I have into the ostler 's charge , to be keep till I call for it ; pay my fare ; satisfy the coachman , and be go : the brightening day gleam on the sign of the inn , and I read in gilt letter , " the Arms . " my heart leapt up : I be already on my master 's very land . it fall again : the thought strike it :- " you master himself may be beyond the , for atch you know : and then , if he be at , towards which you hasten , who beside he be there ? he lunatic wife : and you have nothing to do with he : you dare not speak to he or seek he presence . you have lose you labour -- you have better go no farther , " urge the monitor . " ask information of the people at the inn ; they can give you all you seek : they can solve you doubt at once . go up to that man , and inquire if be at home . " the suggestion be sensible , and yet I could not force myself to act on it . I so dread a reply that would crush I with despair . to prolong doubt be to prolong hope . I might yet once more see the Hall under the ray of she star . there be the stile before I -- the very field through which i have hurried , blind , deaf , distract with a revengeful fury track and scour I , on the morning I fle from : ere I well know what course I have resolve to take , I be in the midst of they . how fast I walke ! how I run sometimes ! how I look forward to catch the first view of the well - know woods ! with what feeling I welcome single tree I know , and familiar glimpse of meadow and hill between they ! at last the woods rise ; the rookery cluster dark ; a loud cawing break the morning stillness . delight inspire I : on I hasten . another field cross -- a lane thread -- and there be the courtyard wall -- the back office : the house itself , the rookery still hide . " my first view of it shall be in front , " I determine , " where its bold battlement will strike the eye nobly at once , and where I can single out my master 's very window : perhaps he will be stand at it -- he rise early : perhaps he be now walk in the orchard , or on the pavement in front . could I but see he ! -- but a moment ! surely , in that case , I should not be so mad as to run to he ? I can not tell -- I be not certain . and if I do -- what then ? bless he ! what then ? who would be hurt by my once more taste the life he glance can give I ? I rave : perhaps at this moment he be watch the sun rise over the , or on the tideless sea of the south . " I have coaste along the lower wall of the orchard -- turn its angle : there be a gate just there , open into the meadow , between two stone pillars crown by stone ball . from behind one pillar I could peep round quietly at the full front of the mansion . I advance my head with precaution , desirous to ascertain if any bedroom window - blind be yet draw up : battlement , window , long front -- all from this sheltered station be at my command . the crow sail overhead perhaps watch I while I take this survey . I wonder what they think . they must have consider I be very careful and timid at first , and that gradually I grow very bold and reckless . a peep , and then a long stare ; and then a departure from my niche and a stray out into the meadow ; and a sudden stop full in front of the great mansion , and a protract , hardy gaze towards it . " what affectation of diffidence be this at first ? " they might have demand ; " what stupid regardlessness now ? " hear a illustration , reader . a lover find he mistress asleep on a mossy bank ; he wish to catch a glimpse of she fair face without wake she . he steal softly over the grass , careful to make no sound ; he pause -- fancie she have stir : he withdraw : not for worlds would he be see . all be still : he again advances : he bend above she ; a light veil rest on she feature : he lift it , bend lower ; now he eye anticipate the vision of beauty -- warm , and bloom , and lovely , in rest . how hurry be they first glance ! but how they fix ! how he start ! how he
he suddenly and vehemently clasp in both arm the form he da not , a moment since , touch with he finger ! how he call aloud a name , and drop he burden , and gaze on it wildly ! he thus grasp and cry , and gaze , because he no longer fear to wake by any sound he can utter -- by any movement he can make . he think he love sleep sweetly : he find she be stone dead . I look with timorous joy towards a stately house : I see a blackened ruin . no need to cower behind a gate - post , indeed ! -- to peep up at chamber lattice , fear life be astir behind they ! no need to listen for door opening -- to fancy step on the pavement or the gravel - walk ! the lawn , the grounds be trodden and waste : the portal yawn void . the front be , as I have once see it in a dream , but a well - like wall , very high and very fragile - look , perforate with paneless window : no roof , no battlement , no chimney -- all have crashed in . and there be the silence of death about it : the solitude of a lonesome wild . no wonder that letter address to people here have never receive a answer : as well despatch epistle to a vault in a church aisle . the grim blackness of the stone tell by what fate the have fall -- by conflagration : but how kindle ? what story belong to this disaster ? what loss , besides mortar and marble and wood - work have follow upon it ? Had life be wrecke as well as property ? if so , whose ? Dreadful question : there be no one here to answer it -- not even dumb sign , mute token . in wandere round the shattered wall and through the devastated interior , I gather evidence that the calamity be not of late occurrence . snows , I think , have drift through that void arch , winter rain beat in at those hollow casement ; for , amidst the drench pile of rubbish , spring have cherish vegetation : grass and we grew here and there between the stone and fall rafter . and oh ! where meantime be the hapless owner of this wreck ? in what land ? under what auspices ? my eye involuntarily wandere to the grey church tower near the gate , and I ask , " be he with , share the shelter of he narrow marble house ? " some answer must be have to these question . I could find it nowhere but at the inn , and thither , ere long , I return . the host himself bring my breakfast into the parlour . I request he to shut the door and sit down : I have some question to ask he . but when he comply , I scarcely know how to begin ; such horror have I of the possible answer . and yet the spectacle of desolation I have just leave prepare I in a measure for a tale of misery . the host be a respectable - look , middle - aged man . " you know , of course ? " I manage to say at last . " yes , ma 'am ; I live there once . " " do you ? " not in my time , I think : you be a stranger to I . " I be the late 's butler , " he add . the late ! I seem to have receive , with full force , the blow I have be try to evade . " the late ! " I gas . " be he dead ? " " I mean the present gentleman , 's father , " he explain . I breathe again : my blood resume it be flow . fully assure by these word that -- my ( bless he , wherever he be ! ) -- be at least alive : be , in short , " the present gentleman . " Gladden word ! it seem I could hear all that be to come -- whatever the disclosure might be -- with comparative tranquillity . since he be not in the grave , I could bear , I think , to learn that he be at the Antipode . " be live at now ? " I ask , know , of course , what the answer would be , but yet desirous of deferr the direct question as to where he really be . " no , ma 'am -- oh , no ! no one be live there . I suppose you be a stranger in these part , or you would have hear what happen last autumn , -- be quite a ruin : it be bur not down just about harvest - time . a dreadful calamity ! such a immense quantity of valuable property destroy : hardly any of the furniture could be save . the fire break out at dead of night , and before the engine arrive from , the building be one mass of flame . it be a terrible spectacle : I witness it myself . " " at dead of night ! " I mutter . yes , that be ever the hour of fatality at . " be it know how it originate ? " I demand . " they guess , ma 'am : they guess . indeed , I should say it be ascertain beyond a doubt . you be not perhaps aware , " he continue , ed he chair a little nearer the table , and speak low , " that there be
be a lady -- a -- a lunatic , keep in the house ? " " I have hear something of it . " " she be keep in very close confinement , ma 'am : people even for some year be not absolutely certain of she existence . no one see she : they only know by rumour that such a person be at the hall ; and who or what she be it be difficult to conjecture . they say have bring she from abroad , and some believe she have be he mistress . but a queer thing happen a year since -- a very queer thing . " I fear now to hear my own story . I endeavoure to recall he to the main fact . " and this lady ? " " this lady , ma 'am , " he answer , " turn out to be 's wife ! the discovery be bring about in the strangest way . there be a young lady , a governess at the hall , that fell in -- " " but the fire , " I suggest . " I be come to that , ma 'am -- that fell in love with . the servant say they never see anybody so much in love as he be : he be after she continually . they use to watch he -- servants will , you know , ma 'am -- and he set store on she past everything : for all , nobody but he think she so very handsome . she be a little small thing , they say , almost like a child . I never see she myself ; but I have hear , the house - maid , tell of she . like she well enough . be about forty , and this governess not twenty ; and you see , when gentleman of he age fall in love with girl , they be often like as if they be bewitch . well , he would marry she . " " you shall tell I this part of the story another time , " I say ; " but now I have a particular reason for wishing to hear all about the fire . be it suspect that this lunatic , , have any hand in it ? " " you have hit it , ma 'am : it be quite certain that it be she , and nobody but she , that set it go . she have a woman to take care of she call -- a able woman in she line , and very trustworthy , but for one fault -- a fault common to a deal of they nurse and matron -- she keep a private bottle of by , and now and then take a drop over-much . it be excusable , for she have a hard life of it : but still it be dangerous ; for when . Poole be fast asleep after the gin and water , the mad lady , who be as cunn as a witch , would take the key out of she pocket , let herself out of she chamber , and go roam about the house , do any wild mischief that come into she head . they say she have nearly burn she husband in he bed once : but I do not know about that . however , on this night , she set fire first to the hanging of the room next she own , and then she get down to a lower storey , and make she way to the chamber that have be the governess 's -- ( she be like as if she know somehow how matter have go on , and have a spite at she ) -- and she kindle the bed there ; but there be nobody sleeping in it , fortunately . the governess have run away two month before ; and for all seek she as if she have be the most precious thing he have in the world , he never could hear a word of she ; and he grow savage -- quite savage on he disappointment : he never be a wild man , but he get dangerous after he lose she . he would be alone , too . he send , the housekeeper , away to she friend at a distance ; but he do it handsomely , for he settle a annuity on she for life : and she deserv it -- she be a very good woman . , a ward he have , be put to school . he break off acquaintance with all the gentry , and shut himself up like a hermit at the Hall . " " what ! do he not leave ? " " leave ? bless you , no ! he would not cross the door - stone of the house , except at night , when he walk just like a ghost about the grounds and in the orchard as if he have lose he sense -- which it be my opinion he have ; for a more spirited , bolder , keener gentleman than he be before that midge of a governess cross he , you never see , ma'am . he be not a man give to wine , or card , or racing , as some be , and he be not so very handsome ; but he have a courage and a will of he own , if ever man have . I know he from a boy , you see : and for my part , I have often wish that have be sunk in the sea before she come to . " " then be at home when the fire break out ? " " yes , indeed be he ; and he go up to the attic
attic when all be burn above and below , and get the servants out of they bed and help they down himself , and go back to get he mad wife out of she cell . and then they call out to he that she be on the roof , where she be stand , wave she arm , above the battlement , and shout out till they could hear she a mile off : I see she and hear she with my own eye . she be a big woman , and have long black hair : we could see it stream against the flame as she stand . I witness , and several more witnessed , ascend through the sky - light on to the roof ; we hear he call ' ! ' we see he approach she ; and then , ma 'am , she yell and give a spring , and the next minute she lay smashed on the pavement . " " dead ? " " dead ! ay , dead as the stone on which she brain and blood be scatter . " " ! " " you may well say so , ma 'am : it be frightful ! " he shudder . " and afterwards ? " I urg . " well , ma 'am , afterwards the house be burnt to the ground : there be only some bit of wall stand now . " " be any other life lose ? " " no -- perhaps it would have be better if there have . " " what do you mean ? " " poor ! " he ejaculate , " I little thought ever to have see it ! some say it be a just judgment on he for keep he first marriage secret , and want to take another wife while he have one liive : but I pity he , for my part . " " you say he be alive ? " I exclaim . " yes , yes : he be alive ; but many think he have better he dead . " " why ? how ? " my blood be again run cold . " where be he ? " I demand . " be he in ? " " ay -- ay -- he be in ; he can not get out of , I fancy -- he be a fixture now . " what agony be this ! and the man seem resolve to protract it . " he be stone - blind , " he say at last . " yes , he be stone - blind , be . " I have dread worse . I have dread he be mad . I summon strength to ask what have cause this calamity . " it be all he own courage , and a body may say , he kindness , in a way , ma 'am : he would not leave the house till every one else be out before he . as he come down the great staircase at last , after have fling herself from the battlement , there be a great crash -- all fell . he be take out from under the ruin , alive , but sadly hurt : a beam have fall in such a way as to protect he partly ; but one eye be knock out , and one hand so crush that , the surgeon , have to amputate it directly . the other eye inflam : he lose the sight of that also . he be now helpless , indeed -- blind and a cripple . " " where be he ? where do he now live ? " " at , a manor - house on a farm he have , about thirty mile off : quite a desolate spot . " " who be with he ? " " and he wife : he would have none else . he be quite break down , they say . " " have you any sort of conveyance ? " " we have a chaise , ma'am , a very handsome chaise . " " let it be get ready instantly ; and if you post -boy can drive I to Ferndean before dark this day , I will pay both you and he twice the hire you usually demand . " the manor - house of be a building of considerable antiquity , moderate size , and no architectural pretension , deep bury in a wood . I have hear of it before . often speak of it , and sometimes go there . he father have purchase the estate for the sake of the game cover . he would have let the house , but could find no tenant , in consequence of its ineligible and insalubrious site . then remain uninhabited and unfurnished , with the exception of some two or three room fit up for the accommodation of the squire when he go there in the season to shoot . to this house I come just ere dark on a evening mark by the characteristic of sad sky , cold gale , and continue small penetrating rain . the last mile I perform on foot , have dismiss the chaise and driver with the double remuneration I have promise . even when within a very short distance of the manor - house , you could see nothing of it , so thick and dark grow the timber of the gloomy wood about it . gate between granite pillars show I where to enter , and pass through they , I find myself at once in the twilight of close - rank tree . there be a grass - grow track descende the forest aisle between hoar and knotty shaft and under branch arch . I follow it , expect soon to reach the dwelling ;
; but it stretch on and on , it would far and farther : no sign of habitation or grounds be visible . I think I have take a wrong direction and lose my way . the darkness of natural as well as of sylvan dusk gather over I . I look round in search of another road . there be none : all be interwoven stem , columnar trunk , dense summer foliage -- no opening anywhere . I proceed : at last my way open , the tree thin a little ; presently I beheld a railing , then the house -- scarce , by this dim light , distinguishable from the tree ; so dank and green be its decay wall . enter a portal , fasten only by a latch , I stand amidst a space of enclose ground , from which the wood sweep away in a semicircle . there be no flower , no garden - bed ; only a broad gravel - walk girdl a grass - plat , and this set in the heavy frame of the forest . the house present two point gable in its front ; the window be latticed and narrow : the front door be narrow too , one step lead up to it . the whole look , as the host of the Arms have say , " quite a desolate spot . " it be as still as a church on a week - day : the patter rain on the forest leave be the only sound audible in its vicinage . " can there be life here ? " I ask . yes , life of some kind there be ; for I hear a movement -- that narrow front - door be unclosing , and some shape be about to issue from the grange . it open slowly : a figure come out into the twilight and stand on the step ; a man without a hat : he stretch forth he hand as if to feel whether it rain . Dusk as it be , I have recognise he -- it be my master , , and no other . I stay my step , almost my breath , and stand to watch he -- to examine he , myself unseen , and alas ! to he invisible . it be a sudden meeting , and one in wich rapture be keep well in check by pain . I have no difficulty in restrain my voice from exclamation , my step from hasty advance . he form be of the same strong and stalwart contour as ever : he port be still erect , he hair be still raven black ; nor be he feature alter or sink : not in one year 's space , by any sorrow , could he athletic strength be quell or he vigorous prime blight . but in he countenance I see a change : that look desperate and brooding -- that remind I of some wronge and fetter wild beast or bird , dangerous to approach in he sullen woe . the cage eagle , whose gold - ring eye cruelty have extinguish , might look as look that sightless . and , reader , do you think I fear he in he blind ferocity ? -- if you do , you little know I . a soft hope blest with my sorrow that soon I should dare to drop a kiss on that brow of rock , and on those lip so sternly seal beneath it : but not yet . I would not accost he yet . he descend the one step , and advance slowly and gropingly towards the grass - plat . where be he daring stride now ? then he pause , as if he know not which way to turn . he lift he hand and open he eyelid ; gaze blank , and with a straining effort , on the sky , and toward the amphitheatre of tree : one see that all to he be void darkness . he stretch he right hand ( the left arm , the mutilate one , he keep hide in he bosom ) ; he seem to wish by touch to gain a idea of what lay around he : he meet but vacancy still ; for the tree be some yard off where he stand . he relinquish the endeavour , fold he arm , and stand quiet and mute in the rain , now fall fast on he uncovered head . at this moment approach he from some quarter . " will you take my arm , sir ? " he say ; " there be a heavy shower come on : have you not better go in ? " " let I alone , " be the answer . withdraw without have observe I . now try to walk about : vainly , -- all be too uncertain . he grope he way back to the house , and , re-enter it , close the door . I now draw near and knock : 's wife open for I . " , " I say , " how be you ? " she start as if she have see a ghost : I calm she . to she hurry " be it really you , miss , come at this late hour to this lonely place ? " I answer by take she hand ; and then I follow she into the kitchen , where now sit by a good fire . I explain to they , in few word , that I have hear all which have happene since I leave , and that I be come to see . I ask to go down to the turn - pike - house , where I have dismiss the chaise , and bring my trunk , which I have
have leave there : and then , while I remove my bonnet and shawl , I question as to whether I could be accommodate at the House for the night ; and find that arrangement to that effect , though difficult , would not be impossible , I inform she I should stay . just at this moment the parlour - bell rang . " when you go in , " say I , " tell you master that a person wish to speak to he , but do not give my name . " " I do not think he will see you , " she answer ; " he refuse everybody . " when she return , I inquire what he have say . " you be to send in you name and you business , " she reply . she then proceed to fill a glass with water , and place it on a tray , together with candle . " be that what he ring for ? " I ask . " yes : he always have candle bring in at dark , though he be blind . " " give the tray to I ; I will carry it in . " I take it from she hand : she point I out the parlour door . the tray shook as I hold it ; the water spilt from the glass ; my heart strike my rib loud and fast . open the door for I , and shut it behind I . this parlour look gloomy : a neglect handful of fire bur not low in the grate ; and , lean over it , with he head support against the high , old - fashioned mantelpiece , appear the blind tenant of the room . he old dog , , lay on one side , remove out of the way , and coil up as if afraid of be inadvertently trode upon . prick up he ear when I come in : then he jump up with a yelp and a whine , and bounde towards I : he almost knock the tray from my hand . I set it on the table ; then pat he , and say softly , " lie down ! " turn mechanically to see what the commotion be : but as he see nothing , he return and sigh . " give I the water , , " he say . I approach he with the now only half - fill glass ; follow I , still excit . " what be the matter ? " he inquire . " down , ! " I again say . he check the water on its way to he lip , and seem to listen : he drank , and put the glass down . " this be you , , be it not ? " " be in the kitchen , " I answer . he put out he hand with a quick gesture , but not see where I stand , he do not touch I . " who be this ? who be this ? " he demand , try , as it seem , to see with those sightless eye -- unavailing and distressing attempt ! " answer I -- speak again ! " he order , imperiously and aloud . " will you have a little more water , sir ? I spill half of what be in the glass , " I say . " who be it ? what be it ? who speak ? " " know I , and and know I be here . I come only this evening , " I answer . " Great ! -- what delusion have come over I ? what sweet madness have seize I ? " " no delusion -- no madness : you mind , sir , be too strong for delusion , you health to sound for frenzy . " " and where be the speaker ? be it only a voice ? oh ! I can not see , but I must feel , or my heart will stop and my brain burst . whatever -- whoever you be -- be perceptible to the touch or I can not live ! " he grope ; I arrest he wander hand , and prison it in both mine . " she very finger ! " he cry ; " she small , slight finger ! if so there must be more of she . " the muscular hand break from my custody ; my arm be seize , my shoulder -- neck -- waist -- I be entwin and gather to he . " be it ? what be it ? this be she shape -- this be she size -- " " and this she voice , " I add . " she be all here : she heart , too . bless you , sir ! I be glad to be so near you again . " " ! -- , " be all he say . " my dear master , " I answer , " I be : I have find you out -- I be come back to you . " " in truth ? -- in the flesh ? my live ? " " you touch I , sir , -- you hold I , and fast enough : I be not cold like a corpse , nor vacant like air , be I ? " " my live darling ! these be certainly she limb , and these she feature ; but I can not be so blest , after all my misery . it be a dream ; such dream as I have have at night when I have clasp she once more to my heart , as I do now ; and kiss she , as thus -- and feel that
that she love I , and trust that she would not leave I . " " which I never will , sir , from this day . " " never will , say the vision ? but I always wake and find it a empty mockery ; and I be desolate and abandon -- my life dark , lonely , hopeless -- my soul athirst and forbidden to drink -- my heart famish and never to be feed . Gentle , soft dream , nestle in my arm now , you will fly , too , as you sister have all fle before you : but kiss I before you go -- embrace I , . " " there , sir -- and there ! " ' I press my lip to he once brilliant and now rayless eye -- I sweep he hair from he brow , and kiss that too . he suddenly seem to arouse himself : the conviction of the reality of all this seize he . " it be you -- be it , ? you be come back to I then ? " " I be . " " and you do not lie dead in some ditch under some stream ? and you be not a pining outcast amongst stranger ? " " no , sir ! I be a independent woman now . " " independent ! what do you mean , ? " " my uncle in be dead , and he leave I five thousand pound . " " ah ! this be practical -- this be real ! " he cry : " I should never dream that . besides , there be that peculiar voice of hers , so animating and piquant , as well as soft : it cheer my withered heart ; it put life into it . -- what , ! be you a independent woman ? a rich woman ? " " if you will not let I live with you , I can build a house of my own close up to you door , and you may come and sit in my parlour when you want company of a evening . " " but as you be rich , , you have now , no doubt , friend who will look after you , and not suffer you to devote yourself to a blind lameter like I ? " " I tell you I be independent , sir , as well as rich : I be my own mistress . " " and you will stay with I ? " " certainly -- unless you object . I will be you neighbour , you nurse , you housekeeper . I find you lonely : I will be you companion -- to read to you , to walk with you , to sit with you , to wait on you , to be eye and hand to you . cease to look so melancholy , my dear master ; you shall not be leave desolate , so long as I live . " he reply not : he seem serious -- abstract ; he sigh ; he half - open he lip as if to speak : he close they again . I feel a little embarrassed . perhaps I have too rashly over -leaped conventionality ; and he , like , see impropriety in my inconsiderateness . I have indeed make my proposal from the idea that he wish and would ask I to be he wife : a expectation , not the less certain because unexpressed , have buoy I up , that he would claim I at once as he own . but no hint to that effect escape he and he countenance become more overcast , I suddenly remember that I might have be all wrong , and be perhaps play the fool unwittingly ; and I begin gently to withdraw myself from he arm -- but he eagerly snatch I closer . " no -- no -- ; you must not go . no -- I have touch you , hear you , feel the comfort of you presence -- the sweetness of you consolation : I can not give up these joy . I have little left in myself -- I must have you . the world may laugh -- may call I absurd , selfish -- but it do not signify . my very soul demand you : it will be satisfied , or it will take deadly vengeance on its frame . " " well , sir , I will stay with you : I have say so . " " yes -- but you understand one thing by stay with I ; and I understand another . you , perhaps , could make up you mind to be about my hand and chair -- to wait on I as a kind little nurse ( for you have a affectionate heart and a generous spirit , which prompt you to make sacrifice for those you pity ) , and that ought to suffice for I no doubt . I suppose I should now entertain none but fatherly feeling for you : do you think so ? come -- tell I . " " I will think what you like , sir : I be content to be only you nurse , if you think it better . " " but you can not always be my nurse , : you be young -- you must marry one day . " " I do not care about be marry . " " you should care , : if i be what I once be , I would try to make you care -- but -- a sightless block ! " he relapse again into gloom . I , on the contrary , become more cheerful , and take fresh courage : these last word give I a
a insight as to where the difficulty lay ; and as it be no difficulty with I , I feel quite relieved from my previous embarrassment . I resume a livelier vein of conversation . " it be time some one undertook to rehumanise you , " say I , part he thick and long uncut lock ; " for I see you be be metamorphose into a lion , or something of that sort . you have a ' faux air ' of in the field about you , that be certain : you hair remind I of eagle ' feather ; whether you nail be grow like bird ' claw or not , I have not yet notice . " " on this arm , I have neither hand nor nail , " he say , draw the mutilate limb from he breast , and show it to I . " it be a mere stump -- a ghastly sight ! do not you think so , ? " " it be a pity to see it ; and a pity to see you eye -- and the scar of fire on you forehead : and the worst of it be , one be in danger of love you too well for all this ; and make too much of you . " " I think you would be revolt , , when you see my arm , and my cicatrised visage . " " do you ? do not tell I so -- lest I should say something disparage to you judgment . now , let I leave you a instant , to make a better fire , and have the hearth sweep up . can you tell when there be a good fire ? " " yes ; with the right eye I see a glow -- a ruddy haze . " " and you see the candle ? " " very dimly -- each be a luminous cloud . " " can you see I ? " " no , my fairy : but I be only too thankful to hear and feel you . " " when do you take supper ? " " I never take supper . " " but you shall have some to - night . I be hungry : so be you , I daresay , only you forget . " Summon , I soon have the room in more cheerful order : I prepare he , likewise , a comfortable repast . my spirit be excited , and with pleasure and ease I talk to he during supper , and for a long time after . there be no harassing restraint , no repressing of glee and vivacity with he ; for with he I be at perfect ease , because I know I suit he ; all I say or do seem either to conseal or revive he . delightful consciousness ! it bring to life and light my whole nature : in he presence I thoroughly liv ; and he live in mine . blind as he be , smile play over he face , joy dawn on he forehead : he lineament soften and warm . after supper , he begin to ask I many question , of where I have be , what I have be do , how I have find he out ; but I give he only very partial reply : it be too late to enter into particular that night . besides , I wish to touch no deep - thrilling chord -- to open no fresh well of emotion in he heart : my sole present aim be to cheer he . Cheer , as I have say , he be : and yet but by fit . if a moment 's silence break the conversation , he would turn restless , touch I , then say , " . " " you be altogether a human being , ? you be certain of that ? " " I conscientiously believe so , . " " yet how , on this dark and doleful evening , could you so suddenly rise on my lone hearth ? I stretch my hand to take a glass of water from a hireling , and it be give I by you : I ask a question , expect 's wife to answer I , and you voice speak at my ear . " " because I have come in , in 's stead , with the tray . " " and there be enchantment in the very hour I be now spend with you . who can tell what a dark , dreary , hopeless life I have drag on for month past ? do nothing , expect nothing ; merge night in day ; feel but the sensation of cold when I let the fire go out , of hunger when I forget to eat : and then a ceaseless sorrow , and , at time , a very delirium of desire to behold my again . yes : for she restoration I longe , far more than for that of my lost sight . how can it be that be with I , and say she love I ? will she not depart as suddenly as she come ? to -morrow , I fear I shall find she no more . " a commonplace , practical reply , out of the train of he own disturb idea , be , I be sure , the best and most reassure for he in this frame of mind . I pass my finger over he eyebrow , and remark that they be scorch , and that I would apply something which would make they grow as broad and black as ever . " where be the use of do I good in any way , beneficent spirit , when , at some fatal moment
moment , you will again desert I -- pass like a shadow , whither and how to I unknown , and for I remain afterwards undiscoverable ? " have you a pocket -comb about you , sir ? " " what for , ? " " just to comb out this shaggy black mane . I find you rather alarme , when I examine you close at hand : you talk of my be a fairy , but I be sure , you be more like a brownies . " " be I hideous , ? " " very , sir : you always be , you know . " " Humph ! the wickedness have not be take out of you , wherever you have sojourn . " " yet I have be with good people ; far better than you : a hundred time better people ; possess of idea and view you never entertaine in you life : quite more refin and exalt . " " who the deuce have you be with ? " " if you twist in that way you will make I pull the hair out of you head ; and then I think you will cease to entertain doubt of my substantiality . " " who have you be with , ? " " you shall not get it out of I to - night , sir ; you must wait till to - morrow ; to leave my tale half tell , will , you know , be a sort of security that I shall appear at you breakfast table to finish it . by the bye , I must mind not to rise on you hearth with only a glass of water then : I must bring a egg at the least , to say nothing of fry ham . " " you mock changeling -- fairy - born and human - breed ! you make I feel as I have not feel these twelve month . if could have have you for he , the evil spirit would have be exorcise without the aid of the harp . " " there , sir , you be red up and make decent . now I will leave you : I have be travel these last three day , and I believe I be tired . good night . " " just one word , : be there only lady in the house where you have be ? " I laugh and make my escape , still laugh as I run upstairs . " a good idea ! " I think with glee . " I see I have the means of frett he out of he melancholy for some time to come . " very early the next morning I hear he up and astir , wander from one room to another . as soon as come down I hear the question : " be here ? " then : " which room do you put she into ? be it dry ? be she up ? go and ask if she want anything ; and when she will come down . " I come down as soon as I think there be a prospect of breakfast . enter the room very softly , I have a view of he before he discover my presence . it be mournful , indeed , to witness the subjugation of that vigorous spirit to a corporeal infirmity . he sit in he chair -- still , but not at rest : expectant evidently ; the line of now habitual sadness mark he strong featur . he countenance reminde one of a lamp quench , wait to be re-lit -- and alas ! it be not himself that could now kindle the lustre of animated expression : he be dependent on another for that office ! I have mean to be gay and careless , but the powerlessness of the strong man touch my heart to the quick : still I accost he with what vivacity I could . " it be a bright , sunny morning , sir , " I say . " the rain be over and gone , and there be a tender shin after it : you shall have a walk soon . " I have wake the glow : he feature beam . " oh , you be indeed there , my skylark ! come to I . you be not gone : not vanish ? I hear one of you kind a hour ago , singe high over the wood : but it be song have no music for I , any more than the rising sun have ray . all the melody on earth be concentrate in my 's tongue to my ear ( I be glad it be not naturally a silent one ) : all the sunshine I can feel be in she presence . " the water stand in my eye to hear this avowal of he dependence ; just as if a royal eagle , chain to a perch , should be force to entreat a sparrow to become its purveyor . but I would not be lachrymose : I dash off the salt drop , and busy myself with prepare breakfast . most of the morning be spend in the open air . I lead he out of the wet and wild wood into some cheerful field : I describe to he how brilliantly green they be ; how the flower and hedge look refresh ; how sparklingly blue be the sky . I seek a seat for he in a hidden and lovely spot , a dry stump of a tree ; nor do I refuse to let he , when seate , place I on he knee . why should I , when both he and I be happier near than apart ? lay beside we : all be quiet
quiet . he break out suddenly while clasp I in he arm - " , cruel deserter ! oh , , what do I feel when I discover you have fle from , and when I could nowhere find you ; and , after examine you apartment , ascertain that you have take no money , nor anything which could serve as a equivalent ! a pearl necklace I have give you lay untouched in its little casket ; you trunk be leave corded and lock as they have be prepare for the bridal tour . what could my darling do , I ask , leave destitute and penniless ? and what do she do ? let I hear now . " thus urge , I begin the narrative of my experience for the last year . I soften considerably what related to the three day of wandering and starvation , because to have tell he all would have be to inflict unnecessary pain : the little I do say lacerate he faithful heart deeper than I wish . I should not have leave he thus , he say , without any means of make my way : I should have tell he my intention . I should have confide in he : he would never have force I to be he mistress . violent as he have see in he despair , he , in truth , love I far too well and too tenderly to constitute himself my tyrant : he would have give I half he fortune , without demand so much as a kiss in return , rather than I should have flng myself friendless on the wide world . I have endure , he be certain , more than I have confess to he . " well , whatever my suffering have be , they be very short , " I answer : and then I proceed to tell he how I have be receive at ; how I have obtain the office of schoolmistress , &c . the accession of fortune , the discovery of my relation , follow in due order . of course , 's name come in frequently in the progress of my tale . when I have do , that name be immediately take up . " this , then , be you cousin ? " " yes . " " you have speak of he often : do you like he ? " " he be a very good man , sir ; I could not help like he . " " a good man . do that mean a respectable well - conduct man of fifty ? or what do it mean ? " " be only twenty - nine , sir . " " ' , ' as the french say . be he a person of low stature , phlegmatic , and plain . a person whose goodness consist rather in he guiltlessness of vice , than in he prowess in virtue . " " he be untiringly active . great and exalt deed be what he live to perform . " " but he brain ? that be probably rather soft ? he mean well : but you shrug you shoulders to hear he talk ? " " he talk little , sir : what he do say be ever to the point . he brain be first - rate , I should think not impressible , but vigorous . " " be he a able man , then ? " " truly able . " " a thoroughly educated man ? " " . be a accomplished and profound scholar . " " he manners , I think , you say be not to you taste ? -- priggish and parsonic ? " " I never mention he manners ; but , unless I have a very bad taste , they must suit it ; they be polish , calm , and gentlemanlike . " " he appearance , -- I forget what description you give of he appearance ; -- a sort of raw curate , half strangle with he white neckcloth , and stil up on he thick - so high - lows , eh ? " " . dress well . he be a handsome man : tall , fair , with blue eye , and a Grecian profile . " ( aside . ) " damn he ! " -- ( to I . ) " do you like he , ? " " yes , , I like he : but you ask I that before . " I perceive , of course , the drift of my interlocutor . have get hold of he : she sting he ; but the sting be salutary : it give he respite from the gnawing fang of melancholy . I would not , therefore , immediately charm the snake . " perhaps you would rather not sit any longer on my knee , ? " be the next somewhat unexpected observation . " why not , ? " " the picture you have just draw be suggestive of a rather too overwhelming contrast . you word have delineate very prettily a graceful : he be present to you imagination , -- tall , fair , blue - eye , and with a Grecian profile . you eye dwell on a , -- a real blacksmith , brown , broad - shouldere : and blind and lame into the bargain . " " I never think of it , before ; but you certainly be rather like , . " " well , you can leave I , ma 'am : but before you go " ( and he retain I by a firmer grasp than ever ) , " you will be pleased just to answer I a question or two . " he pause . " what question , ? "
" then follow this cross-examination . " . make you schoolmistress of before he know you be he cousin ? " " yes . " " you would often see he ? he would visit the school sometimes ? " " Daily . " " he would approve of you plan , ? I know they would be clever , for you be a talented creature ! " " he approve of they -- yes . " " he would discover many thing in you he could not have expect to find ? some of you accomplishment be not ordinary . " " I do not know about that . " " you have a little cottage near the school , you say : do he ever come there to see you ? " " now and then ? " " of a evening ? " " once or twice . " a pause . " how long do you reside with he and he sister after the cousinship be discover ? " " five months . " " do spend much time with the ladie of he family ? " " yes ; the back parlour be both he study and ours : he sit near the window , and we by the table . " " do he study much ? " " a good deal . " " what ? " " . " " and what do you do meantime ? " " I learn german , at first . " " do he teach you ? " " he do not understand german . " " do he teach you nothing ? " " a little . " " River teach you ? " " yes , sir . " " and he sister also ? " " no . " " only you ? " " only I . " " do you ask to learn ? " " no . " " he wish to teach you ? " " yes . " a second pause . " why do he wish it ? of what use could be to you ? " " he intend I to go with he to . " " ah ! here I reach the root of the matter . he want you to marry he ? " " he ask I to marry he . " " that be a fiction -- a impudent invention to vex I . " " I beg you pardon , it be the literal truth : he ask I more than once , and be as stiff about urge he point as ever you could be . " " , I repeat it , you can leave I . how often be I to say the same thing ? why do you remain pertinaciously perch on my knee , when I have give you notice to quit ? " " because I be comfortable there . " " no , , you be not comfortable there , because you heart be not with I : it be with this cousin -- this . oh , till this moment , I think my little be all mine ! I have a belief she love I even when she leave I : that be a atom of sweet in much bitter . long as we have be part , hot tear as I have weep over we separation , I never think that while I be mourn she , she be love another ! but it be useless grieving . , leave I : go and marry Rivers . " " shake I off , then , sir , -- push I away , for I will not leave you of my own accord . " " , I ever like you tone of voice : it still renew hope , it sound so truthful . when I hear it , it carry I back a year . I forget that you have form a new tie . but I be not a fool -- go -- " " where must I go , sir ? " " you own way -- with the husband you have choose . " " who be that ? " " you know -- this . " " he be not my husband , nor ever will be . he do not love I : I do not love he . he love ( as he can love , and that be not as you love ) a beautiful young lady call . he want to marry I only because he think I should make a suitable missionary 's wife , which she would not have do . he be good and great , but severe ; and , for I , cold as a iceberg . he be not like you , sir : I be not happy at he side , nor near he , nor with he . he have no indulgence for I -- no fondness . he see nothing attractive in I ; not even youth -- only a few useful mental point . -- then I must leave you , sir , to go to he ? " I shudder involuntarily , and cling instinctively closer to my blind but beloved master . he smile . " what , ! be this true ? be such really the state of matter between you and ? " " absolutely , sir ! oh , you need not be jealous ! I want to tease you a little to make you less sad : I think anger would be better than grief . but if you wish I to love you , could you but see how much I do love you , you would be proud and content . all my heart be yours , sir : it belong to you ; and with you it would remain , be fate to
to exile the rest of I from you presence for ever . " again , as he kiss I , painful thought darken he aspect . " my scarred vision ! my crippl strength ! " he murmure regretfully . I caress , in order to soothe he . I know of what he be think , and want to speak for he , but da not . as he turn aside he face a minute , I see a tear slide from under the seal eyelid , and trickle down the manly cheek . my heart swell . " I be no better than the old lightning - struck chestnut - tree in , " he remark ere long . " and what right would that ruin have to bid a budding woodbine cover its decay with freshness ? " " you be no ruin , sir -- no lightning - struck tree : you be green and vigorous . plant will grow about you root , whether you ask they or not , because they take delight in you bountiful shadow ; and as they grow they will lean towards you , and wind round you , because you strength offer they so safe a prop . " again he smile : I give he comfort . " you speak of friend , ? " he ask . " yes , of friend , " I answer rather hesitatingly : for I know I mean more than friend , but could not tell what other word to employ . he help I . " ah ! . but I want a wife . " " do you , sir ? " " yes : be it news to you ? " " of course : you say nothing about it before . " " be it unwelcome news ? " " that depend on circumstance , sir -- on you choice . " " which you shall make for I , . I will abide by you decision . " " choose then , sir -- she who love you best . " " I will at least choose -- she I love best . , will you marry I ? " " yes , sir . " " a poor blind man , whom you will have to lead about by the hand ? " " yes , sir . " " a crippled man , twenty year older than you , whom you will have to wait on ? " " yes , sir . " " truly , ? " " most truly , sir . " " oh ! my darling ! bless you and reward you ! " " , if ever I do a good deed in my life -- if ever I think a good thought -- if ever I pray a sincere and blameless prayer -- if ever I wish a righteous wish , -- I be reward now . to be you wife be , for I , to be as happy as I can be on earth . " " because you delight in sacrifice . " " ! what do I sacrifice ? Famine for food , expectation for content . to be privilege to put my arm round what I value -- to press my lip to what I love -- to repose on what I trust : be that to make a sacrifice ? if so , then certainly I delight in sacrifice . " " and to bear with my infirmity , : to overlook my deficiency . " " which be none , sir , to I . I love you better now , when I can really be useful to you , than I do in you state of proud independence , when you disdain every part but that of the giver and protector . " " Hithertoo I have hate to be help -- to be lead : henceforth , I feel I shall hate it no more . I do not like to put my hand into a hireling 's , but it be pleasant to feel it circle by 's little finger . I prefer utter loneliness to the constant attendance of servants ; but 's soft ministry will be a perpetual joy . suit I : do I suit she ? " " to the finest fibre of my nature , sir . " " the case be so , we have nothing in the world to wait for : we must be marry instantly . " he look and speak with eagerness : he old impetuosity be rise . " we must become one flesh without any delay , : there be but the licence to get -- then we marry . " " , I have just discover the sun be far decline from its meridian , and be actually go home to he dinner . let I look at you watch . " " Fasten it into you girdle , , and keep it henceforward : I have no use for it . " " it be nearly four o'clock in the afternoon , sir . do not you feel hungry ? " " the third day from this must be we wedding - day , . never mind fine clothes and jewel , now : all that be not worth a fillip . " " the sun have dry up all the rain - drop , sir . the breeze be still : it be quite hot . " " do you know , , I have you little pearl necklace at this moment fasten round my bronze scrag under my cravat ? I have wear it since the day I lose my only treasure , as a memento of she . " " we will go home through the wood : that will be the shadiest way . " he pursue he own thought
thought without heed I . " ! you think I , I daresay , a irreligious dog : but my heart swell with gratitude to the beneficent of this earth just now . he see not as man see , but far clearer : judge not as man judge , but far more wisely . I do wrong : I would have sully my innocent flower -- breathe guilt on its purity : the snatch it from I . I , in my stiff - neck rebellion , almost curse the dispensation : instead of bending to the decree , I defy it . justice pursue its course ; disaster come thick on I : I be force to pass through the valley of the shadow of death . he chastisement be mighty ; and one smote I which have humble I for ever . you know I be proud of my strength : but what be it now , when I must give it over to foreign guidance , as a child do its weakness ? of late , -- only -- only of late -- I begin to see and acknowledge the hand of in my doom . I begin to experience remorse , repentance ; the wish for reconcilement to my maker . I begin sometimes to pray : very brief prayer they be , but very sincere . " some day since : nay , I can number they -- four ; it be last night , a singular mood come over I : one in which grief replace frenzy -- sorrow , sullenness . I have long have the impression that since I could nowhere find you , you must be dead . late that night -- perhaps it might be between eleven and twelve o'clock -- ere I retire to my dreary rest , I supplicate , that , if it seem good to , I might soon be take from this life , and admit to that world to come , where there be still hope of rejoin . " I be in my own room , and sit by the window , which be open : it soothe I to feel the balmy night - air ; though I could see no stars and only by a vague , luminous haze , kknow the presence of a moon . I longe for , ! oh , I longe for thee both with soul and flesh ! I ask of , at once in anguish and humility , if I have not be long enough desolate , afflict , torment ; and might not soon taste bliss and peace once more . that I merite all I endure , I acknowledge -- that I could scarcely endure more , I plead ; and the alpha and omega of my heart 's wish break involuntarily from my lip in the word -- ' ! ! ! ' " " do you speak these word aloud ? " " I do , . if any listener have hear I , he would have think I mad : I pronounce they with such frantic energy . " " and it be last night , somewhere near midnight ? " " yes ; but the time be of no consequence : what follow be the strange point . you will think I superstitious , -- some superstition I have in my blood , and always have : nevertheless , this be true -- true at least it be that I hear what I now relate . " as I exclaim ' ! ! ! ' a voice -- I can not tell whence the voice come , but I know whose voice it be -- reply , 'I be come : wait for I ;' and a moment after , go whisper on the wind the word -- ' where be you ? ' " I will tell you , if I can , the idea , the picture these word open to my mind : yet it be difficult to express what I want to express . be bury , as you see , in a heavy wood , where sound fall dull , and die unreverberating . ' where be you ? ' seem speak amongst mountain ; for I hear a hill - send echo repeat the word . and fresher at the moment the gale seem to visit my brow : I could have deem that in some wild , lone scene , I and be meeting . in spirit , I believe we must have meet . you no doubt be , at that hour , in unconscious sleep , : perhaps you soul wander from its cell to comfort mine ; for those be you accent -- as certain as I live -- they be yours ! " , it be on night -- near midnight -- that I too have receive the mysterious summon : those be the very word by which I reply to it . I listen to 's narrative , but make no disclosure in return . the coincidence struck I as too awful and inexplicable to be communicate or discuss . if I tell anything , my tale would be such as must necessarily make a profound impression on the mind of my hearer : and that mind , yet from its suffering too prone to gloom , need not the deeper shade of the supernatural . I keep these thing then , and ponder they in my heart . " you can not now wonder , " continue my master , " that when you rise upon I so unexpectedly last night , I have difficulty in believe you any other than a mere voice and vision , something that would melt to silence and annihilation , as the midnight whisper and mountain echo have melte before . now , I thank ! I know it
it to be otherwise . yes , I thank ! " he put I off he knee , rose , and reverently lift he hat from he brow , and bend he sightless eye to the earth , he stand in mute devotion . only the last word of the worship be audible . " I thank my maker , that , in the midst of judgment , he have remember mercy . I humbly entreat my Redeemer to give I strength to lead henceforth a purer life than I have do hithertoo ! " then he stretch he hand out to be lead . I take that dear hand , hold it a moment to my lip , then let it pass round my shoulder : be so much lower of stature than he , I serve both for he prop and guide . we enter the wood , and wend homeward . -- , I marry he . a quiet wedding we have : he and I , the parson and clerk , be alone present . when we get back from church , I go into the kitchen of the manor - house , where be cook the dinner and clean the knife , and I say - " , I have be marry to this morning . " the housekeeper and she husband be both of that decent phlegmatic order of people , to whom one may at any time safely communicate a remarkable piece of news without incurr the danger of have one 's ear pierce by some shrill ejaculation , and subsequently stun by a torrent of wordy wonderment . do look up , and she do stare at I : the ladle with which she be bast a pair of chicken roast at the fire , do for some three minute hang suspend in air ; and for the same space of time 's knife also have rest from the polishing process : but , bend again over the roast , say only - " Have you , ? well , for sure ! " a short time after she pursue -- " I see you go out with the master , but I do not know you be go to church to be we ; " and she bast away . , when I turn to he , be grinn from ear to ear . " I tell how it would be , " he say : " I know what " ( be a old servant , and have know he master when he be the cadet of the house , therefore , he often give he he christian name ) -- " I know what would do ; and I be certain he would not wait long neither : and he be do right , for atch I know . I wish you joy , ! " and he politely pull he forelock . " thank you , . tell I to give you and Mary this . " I put into he hand a five - pound note . without wait to hear more , I leave the kitchen . in pass the door of that sanctum some time after , I catch the word - " she will happen do better for he nor ony o't ' grand lady . " and again , " if she be not one of ' th ' handsomest , she be noan faal and varry good - natured ; and I ' he ee she be fair beautiful , onybody may see that . " I write to and to immediately , to say what I have do : fully explain also why I have thus ac . and approve the step unreservedly . announce that she would just give I time to get over the honeymoon , and then she would come and see I . " she have better not wait till then , , " say , when I read she letter to he ; " if she do , she will be too late , for we honeymoon will shine we life long : it be beam will only fade over you grave or mine . " how . receive the news , I do not know : he never answer the letter in which I communicate it : yet six month after he write to I , without , however , mention 's name or allud to my marriage . he letter be then calm , and , though very serious , kind . he have maintain a regular , though not frequent , correspondence ever since : he hope I be happy , and trust I be not of those who live without in the world , and only mind earthly thing . you have not quite forget little , have you , reader ? I have not ; I soon ask and obtain leave of , to go and see she at the school where he have place she . she frantic joy at beholde I again move I much . she look pale and thing : she say she be not happy . I find the rule of the establishment be too strict , its course of study too severe for a child of she age : I take she home with I . I mean to become she governess once more , but I soon find this impracticable ; my time and car be now require by another -- my husband need they all . so I seek out a school conduct on a more indulgent system , and near enough to permit of my visit she often , and bring she home sometimes . I take care she should never want for anything that could contribute to she comfort : she soon settle in she new abode , become very happy there , and make fair progress in she study . as
as she grow up , a sound English education correcte in a great measure she french defect ; and when she leave school , I find in she a pleasing and oblige companion : docile , good - tempered , and well - principle . by she grateful attention to I and mine , she have long since well repay any little kindness I ever have it in my power to offer she . my tale draw to its close : one word respect my experience of married life , and one brief glance at the fortune of those whose name have most frequently recur in this narrative , and I have do . I have now be marry ten year . I know what it be to live entirely for and with what I love best on earth . I hold myself supremely blest -- blest beyond what language can express ; because I be my husband 's life as fully be he be mine . no woman be ever nearer to she mate than I be : ever more absolutely bone of he bone and flesh of he flesh . I know no weariness of my 's society : he know none of mine , any more than we each do of the pulsation of the heart that beat in we separate bosom ; consequently , we be ever together . to be together be for we to be at once as free as in solitude , as gay as in company . we talk , I believe , all day long : to talk to each other be but a more animated and a audible thinking . all my confidence be bestow on he , all he confidence be devoted to I ; we be precisely suit in character -- perfect concord be the result . continue blind the first two year of we union ; perhaps it be that circumstance that draw we so very near -- that knit we so very close : for I be then he vision , as I be still he right hand . literally , I be ( what he often call I ) the apple of he eye . he see nature -- he see book through I ; and never do I weary of gazing for he behalf , and of put into word the effect of field , tree , town , river , cloud , sunbeam -- of the landscape before we ; of the weather round we -- and impress by sound on he ear what light could no longer stamp on he eye . never do I weary of read to he ; never do I weary of conduct he where he wish to go : of do for he what he wish to be do . and there be a pleasure in my service , most full , most exquisite , even though sad -- because he claim these service without painful shame or damping humiliation . he love I so truly , that he know no reluctance in profit by my attendance : he feel I love he so fondly , that to yield that attendance be to indulge my sweetest wish . one morning at the end of the two year , as I be write a letter to he dictation , he come and bend over I , and say -- " , have you a glitter ornament round you neck ? " I have a gold watch - chain : I answer " yes . " " and have you a pale blue dress on ? " I have . he inform I then , that for some time he have fancie the obscurity cloude one eye be become less dense ; and that now he be sure of it . he and I go up to . he have the advice of a eminent oculist ; and he eventually recover the sight of that one eye . he can not now see very distinctly : he can not read or write much ; but he can find he way without be lead by the hand : the sky be no longer a blank to he -- the earth no longer a void . when he first - born be put into he arm , he could see that the boy have inherit he own eye , as they once be -- large , brilliant , and black . on that occasion , he again , with a full heart , acknowledge that have tempere judgment with mercy . my and I , then , be happy : and the more so , because those we most love be happy likewise . and be both married : alternately , once every year , they come to see we , and we go to see they . 's husband be a captain in the navy , a gallant officer and a good man . 's be a clergyman , a college friend of she brother 's , and , from he attainment and principles , worthy of the connection . both and love they wife , and be love by they . as to , he leave : he go to . he enter on the path he have mark for himself ; he pursue it still . a more resolute , indefatigable pioneer never wrotch amidst rock and dangers . firm , faithful , and devoted , full of energy , and zeal , and truth , he labour for he race ; he clear they painful way to improvement ; he hew down like a giant the prejudice of creed and caste that encumber it . he may be stern ; he may be exacte ; he may be ambitious yet ; but he be the sternness of the warrior , who guard he pilgrim convoy from the onslatch of . he be the exaction of the apostle ,
