the Professor by ( ) . this little book be write before either " " or " , " and yet no indulgence can be solicite for it on the plea of a first attempt . a first attempt it certainly be not , as the pen which write it have be previously wear a good deal in a practice of some year . I have not indeed publish anything before I commence " the , " but in many a crude effort , destroy almost as soon as compose , I have get over any such taste as I might once have have for ornamented and redundant composition , and come to prefer what be plain and homely . at the same time I have adopt a set of principle on the subject of incident , & c. , such as would be generally approve in theory , but the result of which , when carry out into practice , often procure for a author more surprise than pleasure . I say to myself that my hero should work he way through life as I have see real living man work theirs -- that he should never get a shilling he have not earn -- that no sudden turn should lift he in a moment to wealth and high station ; that whatever small competency he might gain , should be win by the sweat of he brow ; that , before he could find so much as a arbour to sit down in , he should master at least half the ascent of " the of ; " that he should not even marry a beautiful girl or a lady of rank . as 's son he should share 's doom , and drain throughout life a mixed and moderate cup of enjoyment . in the sequel , however , I find that publisher in general scarcely approve of this system , but would have like something more imaginative and poetical -- something more consonant with a highly wrotch fancy , with a taste for patho , with sentiment more tender , elevate , unworldly . indeed , until a author have try to dispose of a manuscript of this kind , he can never know what store of romance and sensibility lie hide in breast he would not have suspect of casketing such treasure . man in business be usually think to prefer the real ; on trial the idea will be often find fallacious : a passionate preference for the wild , wonderful , and thrill -- the strange , start , and harrow -- agitate diver soul that show a calm and sober surface . such be the case , the reader will comprehend that to have reach he in the form of a print book , this brief narrative must have go through some struggle -- which indeed it have . and after all , it be worst struggle and strongest ordeal be yet to come but it take comfort -- subdue fear -- lean on the staff of a moderate expectation -- and mutter under its breath , while lift its eye to that of the public , " he that be low need fear no fall . " . the foregoing preface be write by my wife with a view to the publication of " the , " shortly after the appearance of " . " be dissuad from she intention , the authoress make some use of the material in a subsequent work -- " , " a , however , these two story be in most respects unlike , it have be represent to I that I ought not to withhold " the Professor " from the public . I have therefore consent to its publication . a . . , 22nd , 1856 . of of I . Introductory . the other day , in look over my papers , I find in my desk the follow copy of a letter , send by I a year since to a old school acquaintance :-- " , " I think when you and I be at together , we be neither of we what could be call popular character : you be a sarcastic , observant , shrewd , cold - blood creature ; my own portrait I will not attempt to draw , but I can not recollect that it be a strikingly attractive one -- can you ? what animal magnetism drew thee and I together I know not ; certainly I never experience anything of the and sentiment for you , and I have reason to believe that you , on you part , be equally free from all romantic regard to I . still , out of school hour we walk and talk continually together ; when the theme of conversation be we companion or we master we understand each other , and when I recur to some sentiment of affection , some vague love of a excellent or beautiful object , whether in animate or inanimate nature , you sardonic coldness do not move I . I feel myself superior to that check then as I do now . " it be a long time since I write to you , and a still longer time since I see you . Chance to take up a newspaper of you county the other day , my eye fall upon you name . I begin to think of old time ; to run over the event which have transpire since we separat ; and I sit down and commence this letter . what you have be do I know not ; but you shall hear , if you choose to listen , how the world have wag with I . " first , after leave , I have a interview with my maternal uncle , and the Hon . . they ask I if I would enter the
the Church , and my uncle the nobleman offer I the living of , which be in he gift , if I would ; then my other uncle , , hint that when I become rector of - , I might perhaps be allow to take , as mistress of my house and head of my parish , one of my six cousin , he daughter , all of whom I greatly dislike . " I decline both the church and matrimony . a good clergyman be a good thing , but I should have make a very bad one . as to the wife -- oh how like a night - mare be the thought of be bound for life to one of my cousin ! no doubt they be accomplish and pretty ; but not a accomplishment , not a charm of theirs , touch a chord in my bosom . to think of pass the winter evening by the parlour fire - side of alone with one of they -- for instance , the large and well - model statue , -- no ; I should be a bad husband , under such circumstance , as well as a bad clergyman . " when I have decline my uncle ' offer they ask I ' what I intend to do ? ' I say I should reflect . they remind I that I have no fortune , and no expectation of any , and , after a considerable pause , demand sternly , ' whether I have thoughts of follow my father 's step and engage in trade ? ' now , I have have no thought of the sort . I do not think that my turn of mind qualifie I to make a good tradesman ; my taste , my ambition do not lie in that way ; but such be the scorn express in 's countenance as he pronounce the word trade -- such the contemptuous sarcasm of he tone -- that I be instantly decide . my father be but a name to I , yet that name I do not like to hear mention with a sneer to my very face . I answer then , with haste and warmth , 'I can not do better than follow in my father 's step ; yes , I will be a tradesman . ' my uncle do not remonstrate ; they and I part with mutual disgust . in review this transaction , I find that I be quite right to shake off the burden of 's patronage , but a fool to offer my shoulders instantly for the reception of another burden -- one which might be more intolerable , and which certainly be yet untried . " I write instantly to -- you know -- my only brother , ten year my senior , marry to a rich mill - owner 's daughter , and now possessor of the mill and business which be my father 's before he fail . you be aware that my father - once reckon a Croesus of wealth -- become bankrupt a short time previous to he death , and that my mother live in destitution for some six month after he , unhelp by she aristocratical brothers , whom she have mortally offende by she union with , the ---- shire manufacturer . at the end of the six month she bring I into the world , and then herself leave it without , I should think , much regret , as it contain little hope or comfort for she . " my father 's relation take charge of , as they do of I , till I be nine year old . at that period it chance that the representation of a important borough in we county fall vacant ; stand for it . my uncle , a astute mercantile man , take the opportunity of write a fierce letter to the candidate , state that if he and do not consent to do something towards the support of they sister 's orphan child , he would expose they relentless and malignant conduct towards that sister , and do he best to turn the circumstance against 's election . that gentleman and know well enough that the be a unscrupulous and determined race ; they know also that they have influence in the borough of ---- ; and , make a virtue of necessity , they consent to defray the expense of my education . I be send to , where I remain ten year , during which space of time and I never meet . he , when he grow up , enter into trade , and pursue he calling with such diligence , ability , and success , that now , in he thirtieth year , he be fast make a fortune . of this I be apprise by the occasional short letter I receive from he , some three or four time a year ; which say letter never conclude without some expression of determined enmity against the house of , and some reproach to I for living , as he say , on the bounty of that house . at first , while still in boyhood , I could not understand why , as I have no parent , I should not be indebted to my uncle and for my education ; but as I grow up , and hear by degree of the persevering hostility , the hatred till death evince by they against my father -- of the suffering of my mother -- of all the wrongs , in short , of we house -- then do I conceive shame of the dependence in which I liv , and form a resolution no more to take bread from hand which have refuse to minister to the necessity of my dying mother . it be by these feeling I
I be influence when I refuse the Rectory of , and the union with one of my patrician cousins . " a irreparable breach thus be effect between my uncle and myself , I write to ; tell he what have occur , and inform he of my intention to follow he step and be a tradesman . I ask , moreover , if he could give I employment . he answer express no approbation of my conduct , but he say I might come down to ---- shire , if I like , and he would 's see what could be do in the way of furnish I with work . ' I repress all -- even mental comment on he note -- pack my trunk and carpet - bag , and start for the directly . " after two day ' travelling ( railroad be not then in existence ) I arrive , one wet afternoon , in the town of ---- . I have always understand that live in this town , but on inquiry I find that it be only 's mill and warehouse which be situate in the smoky atmosphere of ; he residence lay four mile out , in the country . " it be late in the evening when I alight at the gate of the habitation designate to I as my brother 's . as I advanc up the avenue , I could see through the shade of twilight , and the dark gloomy mist which deepen those shade , that the house be large , and the grounds surround it sufficiently spacious . I pause a moment on the lawn in front , and lean my back against a tall tree which rise in the centre , I gaze with interest on the exterior of . " be rich , " think I to myself . 'I believe he to be do well -- but I do not know he be master of a mansion like this . ' cut short all marvelling ; speculation , conjecture , & c. , I advanc to the front door and rang . a man - servant open it -- I announce myself -- he relieve I of my wet cloak and carpet - bag , and usher I into a room furnish as a library , where there be a bright fire and candle burn on the table ; he inform I that he master be not yet return from ---- market , but that he would certainly be at home in the course of half a hour . " be leave to myself , I take the stuffe easy chair , cover with red morocco , which stand by the fireside , and while my eye watch the flame dart from the glow coal , and the cinder fall at interval on the hearth , my mind busy itself in conjecture concern the meeting about to take place . Amidst much that be doubtful in the subject of these conjecture , there be one thing tolerably certain -- I be in no danger of encounter severe disappointment ; from this , the moderation of my expectation guarantee I . I anticipate no overflowing of fraternal tenderness ; 's letter have always be such as to prevent the engendering or harbouring of delusion of this sort . still , as I sit await he arrival , I feel eager -- very eager -- I can not tell you why ; my hand , so utterly a stranger to the grasp of a kindred hand , clench itself to repress the tremor with which impatience would fain have shake it . " I think of my uncle ; and as I be engage in wonder whether 's indifference would equal the cold disdain I have always experienced from they , I hear the avenue gate open : wheel approach the house ; be arrive ; and after the lapse of some minute , and a brief dialogue between himself and he servant in the hall , he tread draw near the library door -- that tread alone announce the master of the house . " I still retain some confused recollection of as he be ten year ago -- a tall , wiry , raw youth ; now , as I rise from my seat and turn towards the library door , I see a fine - look and powerful man , light - complexion , well - make , and of athletic proportion ; the first glance make I aware of a air of promptitude and sharpness , show as well in he movement as in he port , he eye , and the general expression of he face . he greet I with brevity , and , in the moment of shaking hand , scan I from head to foot ; he take he seat in the morocco cover arm -chair , and motion I to another sent . " 'I expect you would have call at the counting - house in the close , ' say he ; and he voice , I notice , have a abrupt accent , probably habitual to he ; he speak also with a guttural northern tone , which sound harsh in my ear , accustom to the silvery utterance of the south . " ' the landlord of the inn , where the coach stop , direct I here , ' say I . 'I doubt at first the accuracy of he information , not be aware that you have such a residence as this . ' " 'Oh , it be all right ! ' he reply , ' only I be keep half a hour behind time , wait for you -- that be all . I think you must be come by the eight o'clock coach . ' " I express regret that he have have to wait ; he make no
no answer , but stir the fire , as if to cover a movement of impatience ; then he scan I again . " I feel a inward satisfaction that I have not , in the first moment of meeting , betraye any warmth , any enthusiasm ; that I have salute this man with a quiet and steady phlegm . " 'have you quite break with and ? ' he ask hastily . " 'I do not think I shall have any further communication with they ; my refusal of they proposal will , I fancy , operate as a barrier against all future intercourse . ' " ' why , ' say he , 'I may as well remind you at the very outset of we connection , that " no man can serve two masters . " acquaintance with will be incompatible with assistance from I . ' there be a kind of gratuitous menace in he eye as he look at I in finish this observation . " feel no disposition to reply to he , I contente myself with a inward speculation on the difference which exist in the constitution of man 's mind . I do not know what inference draw from my silence -- whether he consider it a symptom of contumacity or a evidence of my be cow by he peremptory manner . after a long and hard stare at I , he rise sharply from he seat . " 'To - morrow , ' say he , 'I shall call you attention to some other point ; but now it be supper time , and be probably wait ; will you come ? ' " he strode from the room , and I follow . in cross the hall , I wonder what might be . ' be she , ' think I , 'as alien to what I like as , , the -- as the affectionate relative now strid before I ? or be she better than these ? shall I , in converse with she , feel free to show something of my real nature ; or -- ' further conjecture be arrest by my entrance into the dining - room . " a lamp , burn under a shade of ground - glass , show a handsome apartment , wainscote with oak ; supper be laid on the table ; by the fire - place , stand as if wait we entrance , appear a lady ; she be young , tall , and well shape ; she dress be handsome and fashionable : so much my first glance suffice to ascertain . a gay salutation pass between she and ; she chide he , half playfully , half poutingly , for be late ; she voice ( I always take voice into the account in judging of character ) be lively -- it indicate , I think , good animal spirit . soon check she animate scolding with a kiss -- a kiss that still tell of the bridegroom ( they have not yet be marry a year ) ; she take she seat at the supper - table in first - rate spirit . perceive I , she beg my pardon for not notice I before , and then shook hand with I , as lady do when a flow of good - humwe dispose they to be cheerful to all , even the most indifferent of they acquaintance . it be now further obvious to I that she have a good complexion , and feature sufficiently mark but agreeable ; she hair be red -- quite red . she and talk much , always in a vein of playful contention ; she be vex , or pretend to be vex , that he have that day drive a vicious horse in the gig , and he make light of she fear . sometimes she appeal to I . " ' now , , be not it absurd in to talk so ? he say he will drive , and no other horse , and the brute have throw he twice already . " she speak with a kind of lisp , not disagreeable , but childish . I soon see also that there be more than girlish -- a somewhat infantine expression in she by no means small feature ; this lisp and expression be , I have no doubt , a charm in 's eye , and would be so to those : of most man , but they be not to mine . I seek she eye , desirous to read there the intelligence which I could not discern in she face or hear in she conversation ; it be merry , rather small ; by turn I see vivacity , vanity , coquetry , look out through its irid , but I watch in vain for a glimpse of soul . I be no Oriental ; white neck , carmine lip and cheek , cluster of bright curl , do not suffice for I without that Promethean spark which will live after the rose and lily be fad , the burnished hair grow grey . in sunshine , in prosperity , the flower be very well ; but how many wet day be there in life -- season of disaster , when a man 's hearth and home would be cold indeed , without the clear , cheer gleam of intellect . " have peruse the fair page of 's face , a deep , involuntary sigh announce my disappointment ; she take it as a homage to she beauty , and , who be evidently proud of he rich and handsome young wife , throw on I a glance -- half ridicule , half ire . " I turn from they both , and gaze wearily round the room , I see two picture set in the oak panel -- one
one on each side the mantel - piece . Cease to take part in the bantering conversation that flow on between and , I bend my thought to the examination of these picture . they be portrait -- a lady and a gentleman , both costume in the fashion of twenty year ago . the gentleman be in the shade . I could not see he well . the lady have the benefit of a full beam from the softly shaded lamp . I presently recognise she ; I have see this picture before in childhood ; it be my mother ; that and the companion picture be the only heir - loom save out of the sale of my father 's property . " the face , I remember , have pleas I as a boy , but then I do not understand it ; now I know how rare that class of face be in the world , and I appreciate keenly its thoughtful , yet gentle expression . the serious grey eye possess for I a strong charm , as do certain line in the feature indicative of most true and tender feeling . I be sorry it be only a picture . " I soon leave and to themselve ; a servant conducte I to my bed - room ; in close my chamber - door , I shut out all intruder -- you , charle , as well as the rest . " good - bye for the present , " . " to this letter I never get a answer ; before my old friend receive it , he have accept a government appointment in one of the colony , and be already on he way to the scene of he official labour . what have become of he since , I know not . the leisure time I have at command , and which I intend to employ for he private benefit , I shall now dedicate to that of the public at large . my narrative be not exci , and above all , not marvellous ; but it may interest some individual , who , have toil in the same vocation as myself , will find in my experience frequent reflection of they own . the above letter will serve as a introduction . I now proceed . chapter ii . a Fine morning succeed to the foggy evening that have witness my first introduction to . I be early up and walk in the large park - like meadow surround the house . the autumn sun , rise over the ---- shire hill , disclose a pleasant country ; wood brown and mellow vari the field from which the harvest have be lately carry ; a river , glid between the wood , catch on its surface the somewhat cold gleam of the sun and sky ; at frequent interval along the bank of the river , tall , cylindrical chimney , almost like slender round towers , indicate the factory which the tree half conceal ; here and there mansion , similar to , occupy agreeable site on the hill - side ; the country wore , on the whole , a cheerful , active , fertile look . steam , trade , machinery have long banished from it all romance and seclusion . at a distance of five miles , a valley , open between the low hill , hold in its cup the great town of ---- . a dense , permanent vapour brood over this locality -- there lay 's " . " I force my eye to scrutinize this prospect , I force my mind to dwell on it for a time , and when I find that it communicate no pleasurable emotion to my heart -- that it stir in I none of the hope a man ought to feel , when he see laid before he the scene of he life 's career -- I say to myself , " , you be a rebel against circumstance ; you be a fool , and know not what you want ; you have choose trade and you shall be a tradesman . look ! " I continue mentally -- " look at the sooty smoke in that hollow , and know that there be you post ! there you can not dream , you can not speculate and theorize -- there you shall out and work ! " thus self - schoole , I return to the house . my brother be in the breakfast - room . I meet he collectedly -- I could not meet he cheerfully ; he be stand on the rug , he back to the fire -- how much do I read in the expression of he eye as my glance encounter he , when I advanc to bid he good morning ; how much that be contradictory to my nature ! he say " good morning " abruptly and nod , and then he snatch , rather than took , a newspaper from the table , and begin to read it with the air of a master who seize a pretext to escape the bore of converse with a underling . it be well i have take a resolution to endure for a time , or he manner would have go far to render insupportable the disgust I have just be endeavour to subdue . I look at he : I measure he robust frame and powerful proportion ; I see my own reflection in the mirror over the mantel - piece ; I amuse myself with compare the two picture . in face I resemble he , though I be not so handsome ; my feature be less regular ; I have a darker eye , and a broader brow -- in form I be greatly inferior -- thinner , slighter , not so tall . as
as a animal , excel I far ; should he prove as paramount in mind as in person I must be a slave -- for I must expect from he no lion - like generosity to one weaker than himself ; he cold , avaricious eye , he stern , forbid manner tell I he would not spare . have I then force of mind to cope with he ? I do not know ; I have never be try . 's entrance divert my thought for a moment . she look well , dress in white , she face and she attire shine in morning and bridal freshness . I address she with the degree of ease she last night 's careless gaiety seem to warrant , but she reply with coolness and restraint : she husband have tutor she ; she be not to be too familiar with he clerk . as soon as breakfast be over intimate to I that they be bring the gig round to the door , and that in five minute he should expect I to be ready to go down with he to ---- . I do not keep he wait ; we be soon dash at a rapid rate along the road . the horse he drive be the same vicious animal about which have express she fear the night before . once or twice seem dispose to turn restive , but a vigorous and determined application of the whip from the ruthless hand of he master soon compelle he to submission , and 's dilate nostril express he triumph in the result of the contest ; he scarcely speak to I during the whole of the brief drive , only open he lip at interval to damn he horse . ---- be all stir and bustle when we enter it ; we leave the clean street where there be dwelling - house and shop , church , and public building ; we leave all these , and turn down to a region of mill and warehouse ; thence we pass through two massive gate into a great paved yard , and we be in , and the mill be before we , vomit soot from its long chimney , and quiver through its thick brick wall with the commotion of its iron bowel . Workpeople be pass to and for ; a waggon be be laden with piece . look from side to side , and see at one glance to comprehend all that be go on ; he alight , and leave he horse and gig to the care of a man who hasten to take the rein from he hand , he bid I follow he to the counting - house . we enter it ; a very different place from the parlour of - - a place for business , with a bare , plank floor , a safe , two high desk and stool , and some chair . a person be seat at one of the desk , who take off he square cap when enter , and in a instant be again absorb in he occupation of writing or calculate -- I know not which . , have remove he mackintosh , sit down by the fire . I remain stand near the hearth ; he say presently -- " , you may leave the room ; I have some business to transact with this gentleman . come back when you hear the bell . " the individual at the desk rise and depart , close the door as he go out . stir the fire , then fold he arm , and sit a moment think , he lip compress , he brow knit . I have nothing to do but to watch he -- how well he feature be cut ! what a handsome man he be ! Whence , then , come that air of contraction -- that narrow and hard aspect on he forehead , in all he lineament ? turn to I he begin abruptly : " you be come down to ---- shire to learn to be a tradesman ? " " yes , I be . " " have you make up you mind on the point ? let I know that at once . " " yes . " " well , I be not bound to help you , but I have a place here vacant , if you be qualified for it . I will take you on trial . what can you do ? do you know anything besides that useless trash of college learn -- , , and so forth ? " " I have study mathematics . " " stuff ! I dare say you have . " " I can read and write French and german . " " ! " he reflect a moment , then open a drawer in a desk near he take out a letter , and give it to I . " can you read that ? " he ask . it be a german commercial letter ; I translate it ; I could not tell whether he be gratify or not -- he countenance remain fix . " it be well ; " he - say , after a pause , " that you be acquaint with something useful , something that may enable you to earn you board and lod : since you know French and german , I will take you as second clerk to manage the foreign correspondence of the house . I shall give you a good salary -- 90 l . a year -- and now , " he continue , raise he voice , " hear once for all what I have to say about we relationship , and all that sort of humbug ! I must have no nonsense on that point ; it would never suit I
I . I shall excuse you nothing on the plea of be my brother ; if I find you stupid , negligent , dissipate , idle , or possess of any fault detrimental to the interest of the house , I shall dismiss you as I would any other clerk . pound a year be good wage , and I expect to have the full value of my money out of you ; remember , too , that thing be on a practical footing in my establishment -- business - like habit , feeling , and idea , suit I best . do you understand ? " " partly , " I reply . " I suppose you mean that I be to do my work for my wage ; not to expect favour from you , and not to depend on you for any help but what I earn ; that suit I exactly , and on these term I will consent to be you clerk . " I turn on my heel , and walk to the window ; this time I do not consult he face to learn he opinion : what it be I do not know , nor do I then care . after a silence of some minute he recommence :-- " you perhaps expect to be accommodate with apartment at , and to go and come with I in the gig . I wish you , however , to be aware that such a arrangement would be quite inconvenient to I . I like to have the seat in my gig at liberty for any gentleman whom for business reason I may wish to take down to the hall for a night or so . you will seek out lodging in -- -- . " quit the window , I walk back to the hearth . " of course I shall seek out lodging in ----, " I answer . " it would not suit I either to lodge at . " my tone be quiet . I always speak quietly . yet 's blue eye become incense ; he take he revenge rather oddly . turn to I he say bluntly -- " you be poor enough , I suppose ; how do you expect to live till you quarter 's salary become due ? " " I shall get on , " say I . " how do you expect to live ? " he repeat in a louder voice . " as I can , . " " get into debt at you peril ! that be all , " he answer . " for atch I know you may have extravagant aristocratic habit : if you have , drop they ; I tolerate nothing of the sort here , and I will never give you a shilling extra , whatever liability you may incur -- mind that . " " yes , , you will find I have a good memory . " I say no more . I do not think the time be come for much parley . I have a instinctive feeling that it would be folly to let one 's temper effervesce often with such a man as . I say to myself , " I will place my cup under this continual drop ; it shall stand there still and steady ; when full , it will run over of itself -- meantime patience . two thing be certain . I be capable of perform the work have set I ; I can earn my wage conscientiously , and those wage be sufficient to enable I to live . as to the fact of my brother assume towards I the bearing of a proud , harsh master , the fault be he , not mine ; and shall he injustice , he bad feeling , turn I at once aside from the path I have choose ? no ; at least , ere I deviate , I will advance far enough to see whither my career tend . as yet I be only press in at the entrance -- a strait gate enough ; it ought to have a good terminus . " while I thus reason , Crimsworth ring a bell ; he first clerk , the individual dismiss previously to we conference , re-enter . " , " say he , " show the letter from , Brothers , and give he English copy of the answer ; he will translate they . " , a man of about thirty - five , with a face at once sly and heavy , hasten to execute this order ; he lay the letter on the desk , and I be soon seat at it , and engage in rendere the english answer into German . a sentiment of keen pleasure accompany this first effort to earn my own living -- a sentiment neither poisone nor weaken by the presence of the taskmaster , who stand and watch I for some time as I write . I think he be try to read my character , but I feel as secure against he scrutiny as if I have have on a casque with the visor down - or rather I show he my countenance with the confidence that one would show a unlearned man a letter write in ; he might see line , and trace character , but he could make nothing of they ; my nature be not he nature , and its sign be to he like the word of a unknown tongue . Ere long he turn away abruptly , as if baffle , and leave the counting - house ; he return to it but twice in the course of that day ; each time he mix and swallow a glass of brandy - and - water , the material for make which he extract from a cupboard on one
one side of the fireplace ; have glance at my translation -- he could read both French and german -- he go out again in silence . chapter III . I serve as he second clerk faithfully , punctually , diligently . what be give I to do i have the power and the determination to do well . watch sharply for defect , but find none ; he set , he favourite and head man , to watch also . be baffle ; I be as exact as himself , and quicker . make inquirie as to how I liv , whether I get into debt -- no , my account with my landlady be always straight . I have hire small lodging , which I contrive to pay for out of a slender fund -- the accumulate savings of my pocket - money ; for as it have ever be abhorrent to my nature to ask pecuniary assistance , I have early acquired habits of self - deny economy ; husband my monthly allowance with anxious care , in order to obviate the danger of be force , in some moment of future exigency , to beg additional aid . I remember many call I miser at the time , and I use to couple the reproach with this consolation -- better to be misunderstood now than repulse hereafter . at this day I have my reward ; I have have it before , when on parting with my irritated uncle one of they throw down on the table before I a 5 l . note , which I be able to leave there , say that my travelling expense be already provide for . employ to find out whether my landlady have any complaint to make on the score of my moral ; she answer that she believe I be a very religious man , and ask , in she turn , if he think I have any intention of go into the Church some day ; for , she say , she have have young curate to lodge in she house who be nothing equal to I for steadiness and quietness . be " a religious man " himself ; indeed , he be " a join , " which do not ( be it understand ) prevent he from be at the same time a engrain rascal , and he come away much pose at hear this account of my piety . have impart it to , that gentleman , who himself frequent no place of worship , and own no but , turn the information into a weapon of attack against the equability of my temper . he commence a series of covert sneer , of which I do not at first perceive the drift , till my landlady happen to relate the conversation she have have with ; this enlighten I ; afterwards I come to the counting - house prepare , and manage to receive the millowner 's blasphemous sarcasm , when next level at I , on a buckler of impenetrable indifference . Ere long he tired of waste he ammunition on a statue , but he do not throw away the shaft -- he only keep they quiet in he quiver . once during my clerkship I have a invitation to ; it be on the occasion of a large party give in honour of the master 's birthday ; he have always be accustom to invite he clerk on similar anniversary , and could not well pass I over ; I be , however , keep strictly in the background . , elegantly dress in satin and lace , bloom in youth and health , vouchsaf I no more notice than be express by a distant move ; Crimsworth , of course , never speak to I ; I be introduce to none of the band of young lady , who , envelope in silvery clouds of white gauze and muslin , sit in array against I on the opposite side of a long and large room ; in fact , I be fairly isolate , and could but contemplate the shining one from affar , and when weary of such a dazzling scene , turn for a change to the consideration of the carpet pattern . , stand on the rug , he elbow support by the marble mantelpiece , and about he a group of very pretty girl , with whom he converse gaily -- , thus place , glance at I ; I look weary , solitary , keep down like some desolate tutor or governess ; he be satisfied . dancing begin ; I should have like well enough to be introduce to some pleasing and intelligent girl , and to have freedom and opportunity to show that I could both feel and communicate the pleasure of social intercourse -- that I be not , in short , a block , or a piece of furniture , but a acting , think , sentient man . many smile face and graceful figure glide past I , but the smile be lavish on other eye , the figure sustain by other hand than mine . I turn away tantalize , leave the dancers , and wander into the oak - panel dining - room . no fibre of sympathy unit I to any liive thing in this house ; I look for and find my mother 's picture . I take a wax taper from a stand , and hold it up . I gaze long , earnestly ; my heart grow to the image . my mother , I perceive , have bequeath to I much of she feature and countenance -- she forehead , she eye , she complexion . no regular beauty pleases egotistical human being so much as a soften and refin likeness of themselves ; for this reason , fathers regard with
with complacency the lineament of they daughter 's face , where frequently they own similitude be find flatteringly associate with softness of hue and delicacy of outline . I be just wonder how that picture , to I so interesting , would strike a impartial spectator , when a voice close behind I pronounce the word -- " Humph ! there be some sense in that face . " I turn ; at my elbow stand a tall man , young , though probably five or six year older than I -- in other respects of a appearance the opposite to common place ; though just now , as I be not dispose to paint he portrait in detail , the reader must be content with the silhouette I have just throw off ; it be all I myself see of he for the moment : I do not investigate the colour of he eyebrow , nor of he eye either ; I see he stature , and the outline of he shape ; I see , too , he fastidious - look Retrousse nose ; these observation , few in number , and general in character ( the last except ) , suffice , for they enable I to recognize he . " good evening , , " mutter I with a bow , and then , like a shy noodle as I be , I begin move away -- and why ? simply because be a manufacturer and a millowner , and I be only a clerk , and my instinct propell I from my superior . I have frequently see in , where he come almost weekly to transact business with , but I have never speak to he , nor he to I , and I owed he a sort of involuntary grudge , because he have more than once be the tacit witness of insult offer by to I . I have the conviction that he could only regard I as a poor -spirited slave , wherefore I now go about to shin he presence and eschew he conversation . " where be you go ? " ask he , as I edge off sideway . I have already notice that indulge in abrupt form of speech , and I perversely say to myself -- " he think he may speak as he like to a poor clerk ; but my mood be not , perhaps , so supple as he deem it , and he rough freedom please I not at all . " I make some slight reply , rather indifferent than courteous , and continue to move away . he coolly plan himself in my path . " stay here awhile , " say he : " it be so hot in the dancing - room ; beside , you do not dance ; you have not have a partner to - night . " he be right , and as he speak neither he look , tone , nor manner displease I ; my Amour - Propre be propitiate ; he have not address I out of condescension , but because , have repair to the cool dining - room for refreshment , he now want some one to talk to , by way of temporary amusement . I hate to be condescende to , but I like well enough to oblige ; I stay . " that be a good picture , " he continue , recurr to the portrait . " do you consider the face pretty ? " I ask . " pretty ! no --how can it be pretty , with sunk eyes and hollow cheek ? but it be peculiar ; it seem to think . you could have a talk with that woman , if she be alive , on other subject than dress , visit , and compliment . " I agree with he , but do not say so . he go on . " not that I admire a head of that sort ; it want character and force ; there be too much of the sen -si - tive ( so he articulat it , curl he lip at the same time ) in that mouth ; besides , there be write on the brow and define in the figure ; I hate you aristocrat . " " you think , then , , that patrician descent may be read in a distinctive cast of form and feature ? " " Patrician descent be hange ! who doubt that you lordling may have they ' distinctive cast of form and feature ' as much as we ---- shire tradesman have ours ? but which be the best ? not they be assuredly . as to they woman , it be a little different : they cultivate beauty from childhood upward , and may by care and training attain to a certain degree of excellence in that point , just like the oriental odalisque . yet even this superiority be doubtful . compare the figure in that frame with -- which be the finer animal ? " I reply quietly : " compare yourself and , . " " oh , be better fill up than I be , I know besides he have a straight nose , arch eyebrow , and all that ; but these advantage -- if they be advantage -- he do not inherit from he mother , the patrician , but from he father , old , who , my father say , be as veritable a ---- shire blue - dyer as ever put indigo in a vat yet withal the handsomest man in the three Riding . it be you , , who be the aristocrat of you family , and you be not as fine a fellow as you plebeian brother by long chalk . " there be something in 's point - blank mode
mode of speech which rather please I than otherwise because it set I at my ease . I continue the conversation with a degree of interest . " how do you happen to know that I be 's brother ? I think you and everybody else look upon I only in the light of a poor clerk . " " well , and so we do ; and what be you but a poor clerk ? you do 's work , and he give you wage -- shabby wage they be , too . " I be silent . 's language now border on the impertinent , still he manner do not offend I in the least -- it only pique my curiosity ; I want he to go on , which he do in a little while . " this world be a absurd one , " say he . " why so , ? " " I wonder you should ask : you be yourself a strong proof of the absurdity I allude to . " I be determine he should explain himself of he own accord , without my press he so to do -- so I resum my silence . " be it you intention to become a tradesman ? " he inquire presently . " it be my serious intention three month ago . " " Humph ! the more fool you -- you look like a tradesman ! what a practical business - like face you have ! " " my face be as the make it , . " " the never make either you face or head for ---- what good can you bump of ideality , comparison , self - esteem , conscientiousness , do you here ? but if you like , stay there ; it be you own affair , not mine . " " perhaps I have no choice . " " well , I care nuy about it -- it will make little difference to I what you do or where you go ; but I be cool now -- I want to dance again ; and I see such a fine girl sit in the corner of the sofa there by she mamma ; see if I do not get she for a partner in a jiffy ! there be -- make up to she ; will not I cut he out ? " and strode away . I watch he through the open folding - door ; he outstrip , apply for the hand of the fine girl , and lead she off triumphant . she be a tall , well - make , full - form , dashingly - dress young woman , much in the style of ; whir she through the waltz with spirit ; he keep at she side during the remainder of the evening , and I read in she animat and gratify countenance that he succeed in make himself perfectly agreeable . the mamma too ( a stout person in a turban -- . Lupton by name ) look well pleased ; prophetic vision probably flatter she inward eye . the be of a old stem ; and scornful as ( such be my late interlocutor 's name ) profess to be of the advantages of birth , in he secret heart he well know and fully appreciate the distinction he ancient , if not high lineage confer on he in a mushroom - place like ----, concern whose inhabitant it be proverbially say , that not one in a thousand knew he own grandfather . moreover the , once rich , be still independent ; and report affir that bay fair , by he success in business , to restore to pristine prosperity the partially decay fortune of he house . these circumstance consider , 's broad face might well wear a smile of complacency as she contemplate the heir of occupy in pay assiduous court to she darling . I , however , whose observation be less anxious , be likely to be more accurate , soon see that the grounds for maternal self - congratulation be slight indeed ; the gentleman appear to I much more desirous of make , than susceptible of receive a impression . I know not what it be in that , as I watch he ( I have nothing better to do ) , suggest to I , every now and then , the idea of a foreigner . in form and feature he might be pronounce , though even there one catch a dash of something ; but he have no English shyness : he have learn somewhere , somehow , the art of setting himself quite at he ease , and of allow no insular timidity to intervene as a barrier between he and he convenience or pleasure . Refinement he do not affect , yet vulgar he could not be call ; he be not odd -- no quiz -- yet he resemble no one else I have ever see before ; he general bearing intimate complete , sovereign satisfaction with himself ; yet , at time , a indescribable shade pass like a eclipse over he countenance , and see to I like the sign of a sudden and strong inward doubt of himself , he word and action - a energetic discontent at he life or he social position , he future prospect or he mental attainment -- I know not which ; perhaps after all it might only be a bilious caprice . . no man like to acknowledge that he have make a mistake in the choice of he profession , and every man , worthy of the name , will row long against wind and tide before he allow himself to cry out , " I be baffle ! " and submit to be float passively back to land . from the first week
week of my residence in ---- I feel my occupation irksome . the thing itself -- the work of copy and translat business - letter -- be a dry and tedious task enough , but have that be all , I should long have borne with the nuisance ; I be not of a impatient nature , and influence by the double desire of get my living and justify to myself and other the resolution I have take to become a tradesman , I should have endure in silence the rust and cramp of my best faculty ; I should not have whisper , even inwardly , that I longe for liberty ; I should have pent in every sigh by which my heart might have venture to intimate its distress under the closeness , smoke , monotony and joyless tumult of , and its pante desire for freer and fresher scene ; I should have set up the image of , the fetish of , in my small bedroom at . 's lodging , and they two should have be my household gods , from which my darling , my cherish - in - secret , imagination , the tender and the mighty , should never , either by softness or strength , have severe I . but this be not all ; the antipathy which have spring up between myself and my employer strike deeper root and spread denser shade daily , exclude I from every glimpse of the sunshine of life ; and I begin to feel like a plant grow in humid darkness out of the slimy wall of a well . Antipathy be the only word which can express the feeling have for I -- a feeling , in a great measure , involuntary , and which be liable to be excite by every , the most trifling movement , look , or word of mine . my southern accent annoye he ; the degree of education evince in my language irritate he ; my punctuality , industry , and accuracy , fix he dislike , and give it the high flavour and poignant relish of envy ; he fear that I too should one day make a successful tradesman . have I be in anything inferior to he , he would not have hate I so thoroughly , but I know all that he know , and , what be worse , he suspect that I keep the padlock of silence on mental wealth in which he be no sharer . if he could have once place I in a ridiculous or mortifying position , he would have forgive I much , but I be guard by three faculty -- caution , Tact , observation ; and prowl and pry as be 's malignity , it could never baffle the lynx - eye of these , my natural sentinel . day by day do he malice watch my tact , hope it would sleep , and prepare to steal snake - like on its slumber ; but tact , if it be genuine , never sleep . I have receive my first quarter 's wage , and be return to my lodging , possess heart and soul with the pleasant feeling that the master who have pay I grudge every penny of that hard - earn pittance -- ( I have long cease to regard as my brother -- he be a hard , grind master ; he wish to be a inexorable tyrant : that be all ) . thought , not varied but strong , occupy my mind ; two voice speak within I ; again and again they utter the same monotonous phrase . one say : " , you life be intolerable . " the other : " what can you do to alter it ? " I walk fast , for it be a cold , frosty night in ; as I approach my lodging , I turn from a general view of my affair to the particular speculation as to whether my fire would be out ; look towards the window of my sitting - room , I see no cheering red gleam . " that slut of a servant have neglect it as usual , " say I , " and I shall see nothing but pale ash if I go in ; it be a fine starlight night -- I will walk a little farther . " it be a fine night , and the street be dry and even clean for ---- ; there be a crescent curve of moonlight to be see by the parish church tower , and hundred of star shone keenly bright in all quarter of the sky . Unconsciously I steer my course towards the country ; I have get into - street , and begin to feel the pleasure of see dim tree at the extremity , round a suburban house , when a person lean over the iron gate of one of the small garden which frond the neat dwelling - house in this street , address I as I be hurrie with quick stride past . " what the deuce be the hurry ? just so must have leave , when he expect fire to pour down upon it , out of burn brass clouds . " I stop short , and look towards the speaker . I smelt the fragrance , and see the red spark of a cigar ; the dusk outline of a man , too , bend towards I over the wicket . " you see I be meditat in the field at eventide , " continue this shade . " know it be cool work ! especially as instead of on a camel 's hump , with bracelet on she arm and a ring in she nose , send I only a counting - house clerk , in a grey tweed wrapper .
. " the voice be familiar to I -- its second utterance enable I to seize the speaker 's identity . " ! good evening . " " good evening , indeed ! yes , but you would have pass I without recognition if I have not be so civil as to speak first . " " I do not know you . " " a famous excuse ! you ought to have know I ; I know you , though you be go ahead like a steam - engine . be the police after you ? " " it would not be worth they while ; I be not of consequence enough to attract they . " Ala , poor shepherd ! and well - a - day ! what a theme for regret , and how down in the mouth you must be , judge from the sound of you voice ! but since you be not run from the police , from whom be you run ? the devil ? " " on the contrary , I be go post to he . " " that be well -- you be just in luck : this be evening ; there be score of market gig and cart return to to - night ; and he , or some of he , have a seat in all regularly ; so , if you will step in and sit half - a - hour in my bachelor 's parlour , you may catch he as he pass without much trouble . I think though you would better let he alone to - night , he will have so many customer to serve ; be he busy day in ---- and Dinneford ; come in at all event . " he swing the wicket open as he speak . " do you really wish I to go in ? " I ask . " as you please -- I be alone ; you company for a hour or two would be agreeable to I ; but , if you do not choose to favour I so far , I will not press the point . I hate to bear any one . " it suite I to accept the invitation as it suit to give it . I pass through the gate , and follow he to the front door , which he open ; thence we traverse a passage , and enter he parlour ; the door be shut , he point I to a arm -chair by the hearth ; I sit down , and glance round I . it be a comfortable room , at once snug and handsome ; the bright grate be fill with a genuine ---- shire fire , red , clear , and generous , no penurious south - of - ember heape in the corner of a grate . on the table a shade lamp diffuse around a soft , pleasant , and equal light ; the furniture be almost luxurious for a young bachelor , comprise a couch and two very easy chair ; bookshelves fill the recess on each side of the mantelpiece ; they be well - furnish , and arrange with perfect order . the neatness of the room suite my taste ; I hate irregular and slovenly habit . from what I see I conclude that 's idea on that point correspond with my own . while he remove from the centre - table to the side - board a few pamphlet and periodical , I run my eye along the shelf of the book - case nearest I . french and german work predominate , the old french dramatist , sundry modern author , Thier , , , , ; in -- , , , ; in there be work on political Economy . I examine no further , for himself recal my attention . " you shall have something , " say he , " for you ought to feel dispose for refreshment after walk nobody know how far on such a canadian night as this ; but it shall not be brandy - and - water , and it shall not be a bottle of port , nor ditto of sherry . I keep no such poison . I have - wein for my own drinking , and you may choose between that and coffee . " here again suite I : if there be one generally receive practice I abhor more than another , it be the habitual imbibing of spirit and strong wine . I have , however , no fancy for he acid german nectar , but I like coffee , so I respond -- " give I some coffee , . " I perceive my answer please he ; he have expect to see a chilling effect produce by he steady announcement that he would give I neither wine nor spirit ; he just shoot one searching glance at my face to ascertain whether my cordiality be genuine or a mere feint of politeness . I smile , because I quite understand he ; and , while I honoure he conscientious firmness , I be amuse at he mistrust ; he seem satisfied , ring the bell , and order coffee , which be presently bring ; for himself , a bunch of grape and half a pint of something sou suffice . my coffee be excellent ; I tell he so , and express the shuddering pity with which he anchorite fare inspire I . he do not answer , and I scarcely think hear my remark . at that moment one of those momentary eclipse I before allude to have come over he face , extinguish he smile , and replace , by a abstract and alienate look , the customarily shrewd , banter glance of he eye . I employ the interval of silence in a rapid scrutiny
scrutiny of he physiognomy . I have never observ he closely before ; and , as my sight be very short , I have gather only a vague , general idea of he appearance ; I be surprised now , on examination , to perceive how small , and even feminine , be he lineament ; he tall figure , long and dark lock , he voice and general bear , have impress I with the notion of something powerful and massive ; not at all :--my own feature be cast in a harsher and squarer mould than he . I discern that there would be contrast between he inward and outward man ; contention , too ; for I suspect he soul have more of will and ambition than he body have of fibre and muscle . perhaps , in these incompatibility of the " physique " with the " morale , " lay the secret of that fitful gloom ; he would but could not , and the athletic mind scowl scorn on its more fragile companion . as to he good look , I should have like to have a woman 's opinion on that subject ; it seem to I that he face might produce the same effect on a lady that a very piquant and interesting , though scarcely pretty , female face would on a man . I have mention he dark lock -- they be brush sideway above a white and sufficiently expansive forehead ; he cheek have a rather hectic freshness ; he feature might have do well on canva , but indifferently in marble : they be plastic ; character have set a stamp upon each ; expression re-cast they at she pleasure , and strange metamorphose she wrotch , give he now the mien of a morose bull , and anon that of a arch and mischievous girl ; more frequently , the two semblance be blent , and a queer , composite countenance they make . start from he silent fit , he begin :-- " ! what a fool you be to live in those dismal lodging of . 's , when you might take room here in , and have a garden like I ! " " I should be too far from the mill . " " what of that ? it would do you good to walk there and back two or three time a day ; beside , be you such a fossil that you never wish to see a flower or a green leaf ? " " I be no fossil . " " what be you then ? you sit at that desk in 's counting - house day by day and week by week , scrape with a pen on paper , just like a automaton ; you never get up ; you never say you be tired ; you never ask for a holiday ; you never take change or relaxation ; you give way to no excess of a evening ; you neither keep wild company , nor indulge in strong drink . " " do you , ? " " do not think to pose I with short question ; you case and mine be diametrically different , and it be nonsense attempt to draw a parallel . I say , that when a man endure patiently what ought to be unendurable , he be a fossil . " " Whence do you acquire the knowledge of my patience ? " " why , man , do you suppose you be a mystery ? the other night you seem surprised at my know to what family you belong ; now you find subject for wonderment in my call you patient . what do you think I do with my eye and ear ? I have be in you counting - house more than once when have treat you like a dog ; call for a book , for instance , and when you give he the wrong one , or what he choose to consider the wrong one , fling it back almost in you face ; desire you to shut or open the door as if you have be he flunkey ; to say nothing of you position at the party about a month ago , where you have neither place nor partner , but hover about like a poor , shabby hanger - on ; and how patient you be under each and all of these circumstance ! " " well , , what then ? " " I can hardly tell you what then ; the conclusion to be draw as to you character depend upon the nature of the motives which guide you conduct ; if you be patient because you expect to make something eventually out of , notwithstand he tyranny , or perhaps by means of it , you be what the world call a interested and mercenary , but may be a very wise fellow ; if you be patient because you think it a duty to meet insult with submission , you be a essential sap , and in no shape the man for my money ; if you be patient because you nature be phlegmatic , flat , inexcitable , and that you can not get up to the pitch of resistance , why , make you to be crush ; and lie down by all means , and lie flat , and let ride well over you . " 's eloquence be not , it will be perceive , of the smooth and oily order . as he speak , he please I ill . I seem to recognize in he one of those character who , sensitive enough themselve , be selfishly relentless towards the sensitiveness of other . moreover , though he be neither like nor , yet he be acrid , and , I suspect ,
, overbear in he way : there be a tone of despotism in the urgency of the very reproach by which , he aim at goad the oppress into rebellion against the oppressor . look at he still more fixedly than I have yet do , I see write in he eye and mien a resolution to arrogate to himself a freedom so unlimited that it might often trench on the just liberty of he neighbour . I rapidly run over these thought , and then I laugh a low and involuntary laugh , move theretoo by a slight inward revelation of the inconsistency of man . it be as I think : have expect I to take with calm he incorrect and offensive surmise , he bitter and haughty taunt ; and himself be chaf by a laugh , scarce louder than a whisper . he brow darken , he thing nostril dilate a little . " yes , " he begin , " I tell you that you be a aristocrat , and who but a aristocrat would laugh such a laugh as that , and look such a look ? a laugh frigidly jeering ; a look lazily mutinous ; gentlemanlike irony , patrician resentment . what a nobleman you would have make , ! you be cut out for one ; pity Fortune have baulk ! look at the feature , figure , even to the hand --distinction all over --ugly distinction ! now , if you would only a estate and a mansion , and a park , and a title , how you could play the exclusive , maintain the rights of you class , train you tenantry in habits of respect to the peerage , oppose at every step the advancing power of the people , support you rotten order , and be ready for it be sake to wake knee - deep in churl 's blood ; as it be , you have no power ; you can do nothing ; you be wreck and strand on the shore of commerce ; force into collision with practical man , with whom you can not cope , for you will never be a Tradesman . " the first part of 's speech move I not at all , or , if it do , it be only to wonder at the perversion into which prejudice have twist he judgment of my character ; the concluding sentence , however , not only move , but shake I ; the blow it give be a severe one , because wield the weapon . if I smile now , it , be only in disdain of myself . see he advantage ; he follow it up . " you will make nothing by trade , " continue he ; " nothing more than the crust of dry bread and the dratch of fair water on which you now live ; you only chance of get a competency lie in marry a rich widow , or run away with a heiress . " " I leave such shift to be put in practice by those who devise they , " say I , rise . " and even that be hopeless , " he go on coolly . " what widow would have you ? much less , what heiress ? you be not bold and venturesome enough for the one , nor handsome and fascinating enough for the other . you think perhaps you look intelligent and polished ; carry you intellect and refinement to market , and tell I in a private note what price be bid for they . " have take he tone for the night ; the string he strike be out of tune , he would finger no other . Averse to discord , of which I have enough every day and all day long , I conclude , at last , that silence and solitude be preferable to jarr converse ; I bade he good - night . " what ! be you go , lad ? well , good - night : you will find the door . " and he sit still in front of the fire , while I leave the room and the house . I have get a good way on my return to my lodging before I find out that I be walk very fast , and breathe very hard , and that my nail be almost stick into the palm of my clenched hand , and that my tooth be set fast ; on make this discovery , I relax both my pace , fists , and jaw , but I could not so soon cause the regret rush rapidly through my mind to slacke they tide . why do I make myself a tradesman ? why do I enter 's house this evening ? why , at dawn to - morrow , must I repair to 's mill ? all that night do I ask myself these question , and all that night fiercely demand of my soul a answer . I get no sleep ; my head burn , my foot froze ; at last the factory bell rang , and I spring from my bed with other slave . . there be a climax to everything , to every state of feel as well as to every position in life . I turn this truism over in my mind as , in the frosty dawn of a morning , I hurrie down the steep and now icy street which descende from 's to the close . the factory workpeople have proceed I by nearly a hour , and the mill be all light up and in full operation when I reach it . I repair to my post in the counting - house as usual ; the fire there , but just light , as yet only smoke ; have not
not yet arrive . I shut the door and sit down at the desk ; my hand , recently wash in half - freeze water , be still numb ; I could not write till they have regain vitality , so I go on think , and still the theme of my thought be the " climax . " self -dissatisfaction troublead exceedingly the current of my meditations . " come , , " say my conscience , or whatever it be that within ourselves take ourselves to task -- " come , get a clear notion of what you would have , or what you would not have . you talk of a climax ; pray have you endurance reach its climax ? it be not four month old . what a fine resolute fellow you imagine yourself to be when you tell Tynedale you would tread in you father 's step , and a pretty treading you be likely to make of it ! how well you like -- -- ! just at this moment how redolent of pleasant associations be its street , its shop , its warehouse , its factory ! how the prospect of this day cheer you ! letter - copy till noon , solitary dinner at you lodging , letter - copy till evening , solitude ; for you neither find pleasure in 's , nor 's , nor 's , nor 's company ; and as to , you fancie there be pleasure to be derive from he society -- he ! he ! how do you like the taste you have of he last night ? be it sweet ? yet he be a talented , a original - minded man , and even he do not like you ; you self - respect defy you to like he ; he have always see you to disadvantage ; he always will see you to disadvantage ; you position be unequal , and be they on the same level you minds could not ; assimilate ; never hope , then , to gather the honey of friendship out of that thorn - guard plant . hello , ! where be you thought tend ? you leave the recollection of as a bee would a rock , as a bird a desert ; and you aspiration spread eager wing towards a land of vision where , now in advancing daylight -- in ---- daylight -- you dare to dream of congeniality , repose , union . those three you will never meet in this world ; they be angel . the soul of just men make perfect may encounter they in heaven , but you soul will never be make perfect . eight o'clock strikes ! you hand be thaw , get to work ! " " work ? why should I work ? " say I sullenly : " I can not please though I toil like a slave . " " work , work ! " reiterat the inward voice . " I may work , it will do no good , " I grow ; but nevertheless I draw out a packet of letter and commence my task -- task thankless and bitter as that of the Israelite crawl over the sun - bake field of in search of straw and stubble wherewith to accomplish he tale of brick . about ten o'clock I hear 's gig turn into the yard , and in a minute or two he enter the counting - house . it be he custom to glance he eye at and myself , to hang up he mackintosh , stand a minute with he back to the fire , and then walk out . today he do not deviate from he usual habit ; the only difference be that when he look at I , he brow , instead of be merely hard , be surly ; he eye , instead of be cold , be fierce . he study I a minute or two longer than usual , but go out in silence . twelve o'clock arrive ; the bell ring for a suspension of labour ; the workpeople go off to they dinner ; , too , depart , desire I to lock the counting - house door , and take the key with I . I be tie up a bundle of papers , and put they in they place , preparatory to close my desk , when reappear at the door , and enter close it behind he . " you will stay here a minute , " say he , in a deep , brutal voice , while he nostril distend and he eye shoot a spark of sinister fire . alone with I remembe we relationship , and remember that forget the difference of position ; I put away deference and careful form of speech ; I answer with simple brevity . " it be time to go home , " I say , turn the key in my desk . " you will stay here ! " he reiterate . " and take you hand off that key ! leave it in the lock ! " " why ? " ask I . " what cause be there for change my usual plan ? " " do as I order , " be the answer , " and no question ! you be my servant , obey I ! what have you be about --? " he be go on in the same breath , when a abrupt pause announce that rage have for the moment get the better of articulation . " you may look , if you wish to know , " I reply . " there be the open desk , there be the papers . " " Confound you insolence ! what have you be about ? " " you work , and have do it
it well . " " Hypocrite and twaddler ! - face , snivell greasehorn ! " ( this last term be , I believe , purely ---- shire , and allude to the horn of black , rancid whale - oil , usually to be see suspend to cart-wheel , and employ for grease the same . ) " come , , enough of this . it be time you and I wound up account . I have now give you service three month ' trial , and I find it the most nauseous slavery under the sun . seek another clerk . I stay no longer . " " what I do you dare to give I notice ? stop at least for you wage . " he take down the heavy gig whip hang beside he mackintosh . I permit myself to laugh with a degree of scorn I take no pain to temper or hide . he fury boil up , and when he have swear half - a - dozen vulgar , impious oath , without , however , venture to lift the whip , he continue : " I have find you out and know you thoroughly , you mean , whin lickspittle ! what have you be say all over ---- about I ? answer I that ! " " you ? I have neither inclination nor temptation to talk about you . " " you lie ! it be you practice to talk about I ; it be you constant habit to make public complaint of the treatment you receive at my hand . you have go and tell it far and near that I give you low wage and knock you about like a dog . I wish you be a dog ! I would set - to this minute , and never stir from the spot till I would cut every strip of flesh from you bone with this whip . " he flourish he tool . the end of the lash just touche my forehead . a warm excited thrill run through my vein , my blood seem to give abound , and then rac fast and hot along its channel . I get up nimbly , come round to where he stand , and face he . " down with you whip ! " say I , " and explain this instant what you mean . " " Sirrah ! to whom be you speak ? " " to you . there be no one else present , I think . you say I have be calumniat you -- complain of you low wage and bad treatment . give you grounds for these assertion . " have no dignity , and when I sternly demand a explanation , he give one in a loud , scolding voice . " grounds ! you shall have they ; and turn to the light that I may see you brazen face blush black , when you hear yourself prove to be a liar and a hypocrite . at a public meeting in the town - hall yesterday , I have the pleasure of hearing myself insult by the speaker oppose to I in the question under discussion , by allusion to my private affair ; by cant about monster without natural affection , family despot , and such trash ; and when I rise to answer , I be meet by a shout from the filthy mob , where the mention of you name enable I at once to detect the quarter in which this base attack have originate . when I look round , I see that treacherous villain , act as fugleman . I detect you in close conversation with at my house a month ago , and I know that you be at 's room last night . deny it if you dare . " " oh , I shall not deny it ! and if hound on the people to hiss you , he do quite right . you deserve popular execration ; for a worse man , a harder master , a more brutal brother than you be have seldom exist . " " Sirrah ! sirrah ! " reiterate ; and to complete he apostrophe , he crack the whip straight over my head . a minute suffice to wrest it from he , break it in two piece , and throw it under the grate . he make a headlong rush at I , which I evad , and say -- " touch I , and I will have you up before the nearest magistrate . " like , if firmly and calmly resist , always abate something of they exorbitant insolence ; he have no mind to be bring before a magistrate , and I suppose he see I mean what I say . after a odd and long stare at I , at once bull - like and amaze , he seem to bethink himself that , after all , he money give he sufficient superiority over a beggar like I , and that he have in he hand a surer and more dignified mode of revenge than the somewhat hazardous one of personal chastisement . " take you hat , " say he . " take what belong to you , and go out at that door ; get away to you parish , you pauper : beg , steal , starve , get transport , do what you like ; but at you peril venture again into my sight ! if ever I hear of you setting foot on a inch of ground belong to I , I will hire a man to cane you . " " it be not likely you will have the chance ; once off you premise , what temptation can I have to return to they ? I leave a prison , I leave a tyrant
tyrant ; I leave what be worse than the worst that can lie before I , so no fear of my come back . " " go , or I will make you ! " exclaim . I walk deliberately to my desk , take out such of its contents as be my own property , put they in my pocket , lock the desk , and place the key on the top . " what be you abstract from that desk ? " demand the millowner . " leave all behind in its place , or I will send for a policeman to search you . " " look sharp about it , then , " say I , and I take down my hat , draw on my glove , and walk leisurely out of the counting - house -- walk out of it to enter it no more . I recollect that when the mill - bell ring the dinner hour , before enter , and the scene above relate take place , I have have rather a sharp appetite , and have be wait somewhat impatiently to hear the signal of feeding time . I forget it now , however ; the image of potatoe and roast mutton be efface from my mind by the stir and tumult which the transaction of the last half - hour have there excited . I only think of walking , that the action of my muscle might harmonize with the action of my nerve ; and walk I do , fast and far . how could I do otherwise ? a load be lifte off my heart ; I feel light and liberate . I have get away from without a breach of resolution ; without injury to my self - respect . I have not force circumstance ; circumstance have free I . life be again open to I ; no longer be it be limit by the high black wall surround 's mill . two hour have elapse before my sensation have so far subsided as to leave I calm enough to remark for what wider and clearer boundary I have exchang that sooty girdle . when I do look up , lo ! straight before I lay , a village of villa about five mile out of ---- . the short winter day , as I perceive from the far - decline sun , be already approach its close ; a chill frost - mist be rise from the river on which x ---- stand , and along whose bank the road I have take lay ; it dim the earth , but do not obscure the clear icy blue of the sky . there be a great stillness near and far ; the time of the day favour tranquillity , as the people be all employ within - door , the hour of evening release from the factory not be yet arrive ; a sound of full - flow water alone pervad the air , for the river be deep and abundant , swell by the melting of a late snow . I stand awhile , lean over a wall ; and look down at the current : I watch the rapid rush of its wave . I desire memory to take a clear and permanent impression of the scene , and treasure it for future year . Grovetown church clock struck four ; look up , I beheld the last of that day 's sun , glint red through the leafless bough of some very old oak tree surround the church -- its light colour and characterize the picture as I wish . I pause yet a moment , till the sweet , slow sound of the bell have quite die out of the air ; then ear , eye and feel satisfied , I quit the wall and once more turn my face towards ---- . . I be - enter the town a hungry man ; the dinner I have forget recur seductively to my recollection ; and it be with a quick step and sharp appetite I ascend the narrow street lead to my lodging . it be dark when I open the front door and walk into the house . I wonder how my fire would be ; the night be cold , and I shudder at the prospect of a grate full of sparkless cinder . to my joyful surprise , I find , on enter my sitting - room , a good fire and a clean hearth . I have hardly notice this phenomenon , when I become aware of another subject for wonderment ; the chair I usually occupy near the hearth be already fill ; a person sit there with he arm fold on he chest , and he leg stretch out on the rug . short -sight as I be , doubtful as be the gleam of the firelight , a moment 's examination enable I to recognize in this person my acquaintance , . I could not of course be much pleased to see he , consider the manner in which I have part from he the night before , and as I walk to the hearth , stir the fire , and say coolly , " good evening , " my demeanour evince as little cordiality as I feel ; yet I wonder in my own mind what have bring he there ; and I wonder , also , what motives have induce he to interfere so actively between I and ; it be to he , it appear , that I owe my welcome dismissal ; still I could not bring myself to ask he question , to show any eagerness of curiosity ; if he choose to explain , he might , but the explanation should be a perfectly voluntary one on he part ; I think he be enter upon it
it . " you owe I a debt of gratitude , " be he first word . " do I ? " say I ; " I hope it be not a large one , for I be much too poor to charge myself with heavy liabilities of any kind . " " then declare yourself bankrupt at once , for this liability be a ton weight at least . when I come in I find you fire out , and I have it light again , and make that sulky drab of a servant stay and blow at it with the bellow till it have burn up properly ; now , say ' thank you ! ' " " not till I have have something to eat ; I can thank nobody while I be so famish . " I ring the bell and order tea and some cold meat . " cold meat ! " exclaim , as the servant close the door , " what a glutton you be ; man ! meat with tea ! you will die of eat too much . " " no , , I shall not . " I feel a necessity for contradict he ; I be irritate with hunger , and irritate at see he there , and irritate at the continue roughness of he manner . " it be over -eating that make you so ill - tempere , " say he . " how do you know ? " I demand . " it be like you to give a pragmatical opinion without be acquaint with any of the circumstance of the case ; I have have no dinner . " what I say be petulant and snappish enough , and only replie by look in my face and laughing . " poor thing ! " he whin , after a pause . " it have have no dinner , have it ? what ! I suppose it 's master would not let it come home . do order you to fast by way of punishment , ! " " no , . fortunately at this sulky juncture , tea , be brotch in , and I fall to upon some bread and butter and cold beef directly . have clear a plateful , I become so far humanized as to intimate to that he need not sit there sta , but might come to the table and do as I do , if he like . " " but I do not like in the least , " say he , and therewith he summon the servant by a fresh pull of the bell - rope , and intimate a desire to have a glass of toast - and - water . " and some more coal , " he add ; " shall keep a good fire while I stay . " he order be execute , he wheel he chair round to the table , so as to be opposite I . " well , " he proceed . " you be out of work , I suppose . " " yes , " say I ; and not dispose to show the satisfaction I feel on this point , I , yield to the whim of the moment , take up the subject as though I consider myself aggrieve rather than benefit by what have be do . " yes -- thanks to you , I be . turn I off at a minute 's notice , owe to some interference of yours at a public meeting , I understand . " " ah ! what ! he mention that ? he observ I signal the lad , do he ? what have he to say about he friend -- anything sweet ? " " he call you a treacherous villain . " " oh , he hardly know I yet ! I be one of those shy people who do not come out all at once , and he be only just begin to make my acquaintance , but he will find I have some good quality -- excellent one ! the be always unrivalled at track a rascal ; a downright , dishonourable villain be they natural prey -- they could not keep off he wherever they meet he ; you use the word pragmatical just now -- that word be the property of we family ; it have be apply to we from generation to generation ; we have fine nos for abuse ; we scent a scoundrel a mile off ; we be reformer bear , radical reformer ; and it be impossible for I to live in the same town with , to come into weekly contact with he , to witness some of he conduct to you ( for whom personally I care nothing ; I only consider the brutal injustice with which he violate you natural claim to equality ) -- I say it be impossible for I to be thus situated and not feel the angel or the demon of my race at work within I . I follow my instinct , oppose a tyrant , and break a chain . " now this speech interest I much , both because it bring out 's character , and because it explain he motive ; it interest I so much that I forget to reply to it , and sit silent , ponder over a throng of idea it have suggest . " be you grateful to I ? " he ask , presently . in fact I be grateful , or almost so , and I believe I half like he at the moment , notwithstand he proviso that what he have do be not out of regard for I . but human nature be perverse . impossible to answer he blunt question in the affirmative , so I disclaim all tendency to gratitude , and
and advise he if he expect any reward for he championship , to look for it in a better world , as he be not likely to meet with it here . in reply he term I " a dry - hear aristocratic scamp , " whereupon I again charge he with have take the bread out of my mouth . " you bread be dirty , man ! " cry --" dirty and unwholesome ! it come through the hand of a tyrant , for I tell you be a tyrant ,-- a tyrant to he workpeople , a tyrant to he clerk , and will some day be a tyrant to he wife . " " Nonsense ! bread be bread , and a salary be a salary . I have lose mine , and through you mean . " " there be sense in what you say , after all , " rejoin . " I must say I be rather agreeably surprised to hear you make so practical a observation as that last . I have imagine now , from my previous observation of you character , that the sentimental delight you would have take in you newly regain liberty would , for a while at least , have efface all idea of forethotch and prudence . I think better of you for look steadily to the needful . " " look steadily to the needful ! how can I do otherwise ? I must live , and to live I must have what you call ' the needful , ' which I can only get by work . I repeat it , you have take my work from I . " " what do you mean to do ? " pursue coolly . " you have influential relation ; I suppose they will soon provide you with another place . " " influential relation ? who ? I should like to know they name . " " the . " " stuff ! I have cut they . " look at I incredulously . " I have , " say I , " and that definitively . " " you must mean they have cut you , . " " as you please . they offer I they patronage on condition of my enter the Church ; I decline both the term and the recompence ; I withdraw from my cold uncle , and prefer throw myself into my elder brother 's arm , from whose affectionate embrace I be now tear by the cruel intermeddling of a stranger -- of yourself , in short . " I could not repress a half - smile as I say this ; a similar demi-manifestation of feeling appear at the same moment on 's lip . " oh , I see ! " say he , look into my eye , and it be evident he do see right down into my heart . have sit a minute or two with he ching rest on he hand , diligently occupy in the continue perusal of my countenance , he go on : " seriously , have you then nothing to expect from the ? " " yes , rejection and repulsion . why do you ask I twice ? how can hand stain with the ink of a counting - house , soile with the grease of a wool - warehouse , ever again be permit to come into contact with aristocratic palm ? " " there would be a difficulty , no doubt ; still you be such a complete Seacombe in appearance , feature , language , almost manner , I wonder they should disow you . " " they have disown I ; so talk no more about it . " " do you regret it , ? " " no . " " why not , lad ? " " because they be not people with whom I could ever have have any sympathy . " " I say you be one of they . " " that merely prove that you know nothing at all about it ; I be my mother 's son , but not my uncle 's nephew . " " still -- one of you uncle be a lord , though rather a obscure and not a very wealthy one , and the other a right honourable : you should consider worldly interest . " " Nonsense , . you know or may know that even have I desire to be submissive to my uncle , I could not have stoop with a good enough grace ever to have win they favour . I should have sacrifice my own comfort and not have gain they patronage in return . " " very likely -- so you calculate you wisest plan be to follow you own device at once ? " " exactly . I must follow my own device -- I must , till the day of my death ; because I can neither comprehend , adopt , nor work out those of other people . " yawn . " well , " say he , " in all this , I see but one thing clearly - that be , that the whole affair be no business of mine . " he stretch himself and again yawn . " I wonder what time it be , " he go on : " I have a appointment for seven o'clock . " " three quarter past six by my watch . " " well , then I will go . " he get up . " you will not meddle with trade again ? " say he , lean he elbow on the mantelpiece . " no ; I think not . " " you would be a fool if you do . probably , after all , you will think better of you uncle 's proposal and go
go into the Church . " " a singular regeneration must take place in my whole inner and outer man before I do that . a good clergyman be one of the best of man . " " indeed ! do you think so ? " interrupt , scoffingly . " I do , and no mistake . but I have not the peculiar point which go to make a good clergyman ; and rather than adopt a profession for which I have no vocation , I would endure extremity of hardship from poverty . " " you be a mighty difficult customer to suit . you will not be a tradesman or a parson ; you can not be a lawyer , or a doctor , or a gentleman , because you have no money . I would recommend you to travel . " " what ! without money ? " " you must travel in search of money , man . you can speak french -- with a vile English accent , no doubt -- still , you can speak it . go on to the continent , and see what will turn up for you there . " " know I should like to go ! " exclaim I with involuntary ardour . " go : what the deuce hinder you ? you may get to , for instance , for five or six pound , if you know how to manage with economy . " " necessity would teach I if I do not . " " go , then , and let you wits make a way for you when you get there . I know almost as well as I know ----, and I be sure it would suit such a one as you better than . " " but occupation , ! I must go where occupation be to be have ; and how could I get recommendation , or introduction , or employment at ? " " there speak the organ of caution . you hate to advance a step before you know every inch of the way . you have not a sheet of paper and a pen -and - ink ? " " I hope so , " and I produce write material with alacrity ; for I guess what he be go to do . he sit down , write a few line , fold , seal , and address a letter , and hold it out to I . " there , Prudence , there be a pioneer to how down the first rough difficulty of you path . I know well enough , lad , you be not one of those who will run they neck into a noose without see how they be to get it out again , and you be right there . a reckless man be my aversion , and nothing should ever persuade I to meddle with the concern of such a one . those who be reckless for themselves be generally ten time more so for they friend . " " this be a letter of introduction , I suppose ? " say I , take the epistle . " yes . with that in you pocket you will run no risk of find yourself in a state of absolute destitution , which , I know , you will regard as a degradation -- so should I , for that matter . the person to whom you will present it generally have two or three respectable place depend upon he recommendation . " " that will just suit I , " say I . " well , and where be you gratitude ? " demand ; " do not you know how to say ' thank you ? ' " " I have fifteen pound and a watch , which my godmother , whom I never see , give I eighteen year ago , " be my rather irrelevant answer ; and I further avow myself a happy man , and profess that I do not envy any being in . " but you gratitude ? " " I shall be off presently , -- to - morrow , if all be well : I will not stay a day longer in ---- than I be oblige . " " very good -- but it will be decent to make due acknowledgment for the assistance you have receive ; be quick ! it be just go to strike seven : I be wait to be thank . " " just stand out of the way , will you , : I want a key there be on the corner of the mantelpiece . I will pack my portmanteau before I go to bed . " the house clock struck seven . " the lad be a heathen , " say , and take he hat from a sideboard , he leave the room , laugh to himself . I have half a inclination to follow he : I really intend to leave ---- the next morning , and should certainly not have another opportunity of bid he good - bye . the front door bang to . " let he go , " say I , " we shall meet again some day . " . reader , perhaps you be never in ? Haply you do not know the physiognomy of the country ? you have not its lineament define upon you memory , as I have they on mine ? -- nay four --picture line the four - walle cell where be store for I the record of the past . first , . all in that picture be in far perspective , reced , diminutive ; but freshly colou , green , dewy , with a spring sky , pile with glittering yet showery clouds ; for my childhood be not all sunshine -- it have its overcast ,
, its cold , its stormy hour . , ----, huge , dingy ; the canva crack and smoke ; a yellow sky , sooty cloud ; no sun , no azure ; the verdure of the suburb blight and sully -- a very dreary scene . , ; and I will pause before this landscape . as to the fourth , a curtain cover it , which I may hereafter withdraw , or may not , as suit my convenience and capacity . at any rate , for the present it must hang undisturbed . Belgium ! name unromantic and unpoetic , yet name that whenever utter has in my ear a sound , in my heart a echo , such as no other assemblage of syllable , however sweet or classic , can produce . Belgium ! I repeat the word , now as I sit alone near midnight . it stir my world of the past like a summon to resurrection ; the grave unclose , the dead be raise ; thought , feelings , memory that sleep , be see by I ascend from the cloud -- halo most of they -- but while I gaze on they vapoury form , and strive to ascertain definitely they outline , the sound which wake they die , and they sink , each and all , like a light wreath of mist , absorb in the mould , recal to urn , reseal in monument . farewell , luminous phantom ! this be , reader . look ! do not call the picture a flat or a dull one -- it be neither flat nor dull to I when I first beheld it . when I leave on a mild morning , and find myself on the road to , nothing could look vapid to I . my sense of enjoyment possess a edge whet to the finest , untouched , keen , exquisite . I be young ; I have good health ; pleasure and I have never meet ; no indulgence of hers have enervate or sate one faculty of my nature . I clasp in my arm for the first time , and the influence of she smile and embrace revive my life like the sun and the west wind . yes , at that epoch I feel like a morning traveller who doubt not that from the hill he be ascend he shall behold a glorious sunrise ; what if the track be strait , steep , and stony ? he see it not ; he eye be fix on that summit , flush already , flush and gild , and have gain it he be certain of the scene beyond . he know that the sun will face he , that he chariot be even now come over the eastern horizon , and that the herald breeze he feel on he cheek be open for the 's career a clear , vast path of azure , amidst cloud soft as pearl and warm as flame . difficulty and toil be to be my lot , but sustain by energy , draw on by hope as bright as vague , I deem such a lot no hardship . I mount now the hill in shade ; there be pebble , inequality , briar in my path , but my eye be fix on the crimson peak above ; my imagination be with the refulgent firmament beyond , and I think nothing of the stone turn under my foot , or of the thorn scratch my face and hand . I gaze often , and always with delight , from the window of the diligence ( these , be it remember , be not the day of train and railroad ) . well ! and what do I see ? I will tell you faithfully . Green , reedy swamp ; field fertile but flat , cultivate in patch that make they look like magnify kitchen - garden ; belt of cut tree , formal as pollard willow , skirt the horizon ; narrow canal , glid slow by the road - side ; pain Flemish farmhouse ; some very dirty hovel ; a gray , dead sky ; wet road , wet field , wet house - tops : not a beautiful , scarcely a picturesque object meet my eye along the whole route ; yet to I , all be beautiful , all be more than picturesque . it continue fair so long as daylight last , though the moisture of many precede damp day have sodden the whole country ; as it grow dark , however , the rain recommence , and it be through streaming and starless darkness my eye catch the first gleam of the light of . I see little of the city but it be light that night . have alight from the diligence , a fiacre convey I to the ----, where I have be advise by a fellow - traveller to put up ; have eat a traveller 's supper , I retire to bed , and sleep a traveller 's sleep . next morning I awoke from prolonge and sound repose with the impression that I be yet in ----, and perceive it to be broad daylight I start up , imagine that I have oversleep myself and should be behind time at the counting - house . the momentary and painful sense of restraint vanish before the revive and revive consciousness of freedom , as , throw back the white curtain of my bed , I look forth into a wide , lofy foreign chamber ; how different from the small and dingy , though not uncomfortable , apartment I have occupy for a night or two at a respectable inn in while wait for the sailing of the packet ! yet far be it from I to profane the memory of that little dingy
dingy room ! it , too , be dear to my soul ; for there , as I lay in quiet and darkness , I first hear the great bell of 's tell it be midnight , and well do I recall the deep , deliberate tone , so full charge with colossal phlegm and force . from the small , narrow window of that room , I first see the dome , loom through a mist . I suppose the sensation , stir by those first sound , first sight , be feel but once ; treasure they , memory ; seal they in urn , and keep they in safe nich ! well -- I rise . traveller talk of the apartment in foreign dwelling be bare and uncomfortable ; I think my chamber look stately and cheerful . it have such large window -- Croisee that open like door , with such broad , clear pane of glass ; such a great looking - glass stood on my dressing - table -- such a fine mirror glitter over the mantelpiece -- the painted floor look so clean and glossy ; when I have dress and be descende the stair , the broad marble step almost aw I , and so do the lofy hall into which they conduct . on the first landing I meet a Flemish housemaid : she have wooden shoe , a short red petticoat , a print cotton bedgown , she face be broad , she physiognomy eminently stupid ; when I speak to she in , she answer I in , with a air the reverse of civil ; yet I think she charming ; if she be not pretty or polite , she be , I conceive , very picturesque ; she remind I of the female figure in certain Dutch painting I have see in other year at . I repair to the public room ; that , too , be very large and very lofy , and warm by a stove ; the floor be black , and the stove be black , and most of the furniture be black : yet I never experience a freer sense of exhilaration than when I sit down at a very long , black table ( cover , however , in part by a white cloth ) , and , have order breakfast , begin to pour out my coffee from a little black coffee - pot . the stove might be dismal - look to some eye , not to mine , but it be indisputably very warm , and there be two gentleman seat by it talk in french ; impossible to follow they rapid utterance , or comprehend much of the purport of what they say -- yet french , in the mouth of , or ( I be not then sensible of the horror of the belgian accent ) be as music to my ear . one of these gentleman presently discern I to be a -- no doubt from the fashion in which I address the waiter ; for I would persist in speak in my execrable - of - style , though the man understood . the gentleman , after look towards I once or twice , politely accost I in very good ; I remember I wish to that I could speak french as well ; he fluency and correct pronunciation impress I for the first time with a due notion of the cosmopolitan character of the capital I be in ; it be my first experience of that skill in liive language I afterwards find to be so general in . I linger over my breakfast as long as I could ; while it be there on the table , and while that stranger continue talk to I , I be a free , independent traveller ; but at last the thing be remove , the two gentleman leave the room ; suddenly the illusion cease , reality and business come back . I , a bondsman just release from the yoke , free for one week from twenty - one year of constraint , must , of necessity , resume the fetter of dependency . hardly have I taste the delight of be without a master when duty issue she stern mandate : " go forth and seek another service . " I never linger over a painful and necessary task ; I never take pleasure before business , it be not in my nature to do so ; impossible to enjoy a leisurely walk over the city , though I perceive the morning be very fine , until I have first present 's letter of introduction , and get fairly on to the track of a new situation . Wrench my mind from liberty and delight , I seize my hat , and force my reluctant body out of the ---- into the foreign street . it be a fine day , but I would not look at the blue sky or at the stately house round I ; my mind be bent on one thing , find out " , numero -- , , " for so my letter be address . by dint of inquiry I succeed ; I stand at last at the desire door , knock , ask for , and be admit . be show into a small breakfast - room , I find myself in the presence of a elderly gentleman -- very grave , business - like , and respectable - look . I present 's letter ; he receive I very civilly . after a little desultory conversation he ask I if there be anything in which he advice or experience could be of use . I say , " yes , " and then proceed to tell he that I be not a gentleman of fortune , travel for pleasure , but a ex-counting
ex-counting - house clerk , who want employment of some kind , and that immediately too . he reply that as a friend of 's he would be willing to assist I as well as he could . after some meditation he name a place in a mercantile house at , and another in a bookseller 's shop at . " clerk and shopman ! " murmure I to myself . " no . " I shook my head . I have try the high stool ; I hate it ; I believe there be other occupations that would suit I better ; besides I do not wish to leave Brussels . " I know of no place in , " answer , " unless indeed you be dispose to turn you attention to teach . I be acquaint with the director of a large establishment who be in want of a professor of and . " I think two minute , then I seize the idea eagerly . " the very thing , sir ! " say I . " but , " ask he , " do you understand french well enough to teach belgian boy ? " fortunately I could answer this question in the affirmative ; have study french under a , I could speak the language intelligibly though not fluently . I could also read it well , and write it decently . " then , " pursue , " I think I can promise you the place , for will not refuse a professor recommend by I ; but come here again at five o'clock this afternoon , and I will introduce you to he . " the word " professor " struck I . " I be not a professor , " say I . " oh , " return , " professor , here in , mean a teacher , that be all . " my conscience thus quiet , I thank , and , for the present , withdrew . this time I step out into the street with a relieved heart ; the task I have impos on myself for that day be execute . I might now take some hour of holiday . I feel free to look up . for the first time I remark the sparkling clearness of the air , the deep blue of the sky , the gay clean aspect of the white - wash or paint house ; I see what a fine street be the , and , walk leisurely along its broad pavement , I continue to survey it be stately hotel , till the palisade , the gate , and tree of the park appear in sight , offer to my eye a new attraction . I remember , before enter the park , I stand awhile to contemplate the statue of , and then I advanc to the top of the great staircase just beyond , and I look down into a narrow back street , which I afterward learnt be call the . I well recollect that my eye rest on the green door of a rather large house opposite , where , on a brass plate , be inscribe , " . " ! the word excite a uneasy sensation in my mind ; it seem to speak of restraint . some of the demoiselle , externat no doubt , be at that moment issue from the door -- I look for a pretty face amongst they , but they close , little french bonnet hide they feature ; in a moment they be go . I have traverse a good deal of Brussels before five o'clock arrive , but punctually as that hour struck I be again in the . Re-admit to 's breakfast - room , I find he , as before , seat at the table , and he be not alone -- a gentleman stood by the hearth . two word of introduction designate he as my future master . " , ; , " a bow on each side finish the ceremony . I do not know what sort of a bow i make ; a ordinary one , I suppose , for I be in a tranquil , commonplace frame of mind ; I feel none of the agitation which have trouble my first interview with . 's bow be extremely polite , yet not theatrical , scarcely french ; he and I be presently seat opposite to each other . in a pleasing voice , low , and , out of consideration to my foreign ears , very distinct and deliberate , m . intimate that he have just be receive from " le respectable , " a account of my attainment and character , which relieve he from all scruple as to the propriety of engage I as professor of and in he establishment ; nevertheless , for form 's sake , he would put a few question to test ; my power . he do , and express in flattering term he satisfaction at my answer . the subject of salary next come on ; it be fix at one thousand franc per annum , besides board and lodging . " and in addition , " suggest , " as there will be some hour in each day during which you service will not be require in my establishment , you may , in time , obtain employment in other seminary , and thus turn you vacant moment to profitable account . " I think this very kind , and indeed I find afterwards that the term on which m . Pelet have engage I be really liberal for Brussels ; instruction be extremely cheap there on account of the number of teacher . it be further arrange that I should be install in my new post the very next day , after which m . Pelet and I part
part . well , and what be he like ? and what be my impression concern he ? he be a man of about forty year of age , of middle size , and rather emaciate figure ; he face be pale , he cheek be sunk , and he eye hollow ; he feature be pleasing and regular , they have a french turn ( for m . Pelet be no Fleming , but a both by birth and parentage ) , yet the degree of harshness inseparable from lineament be , in he case , soften by a mild blue eye , and a melancholy , almost suffer , expression of countenance ; he physiognomy be " fine et spirituelle . " I use two french word because they define better than any english term the species of intelligence with which he feature be imbue . he be altogether a interesting and prepossesse personage . I wonder only at the utter absence of all the ordinary characteristic of he profession , and almost fear he could not be stern and resolute enough for a schoolmaster . Externally at least m . present a absolute contrast to my late master , . influence by the impression I have receive of he gentleness , I be a good deal surprise when , on arrive the next day at my new employer 's house , and be admit to a first view of what be to be the sphere of my future labour , namely the large , lofty , and well light schoolroom , I beheld a numerous assemblage of pupil , boy of course , whose collective appearance show all the sign of a full , flourish , and well - disciplin seminary . as I traverse the class in company with , a profound silence reign on all side , and if by chance a murmur or a whisper arose , one glance from the pensive eye of this most gentle pedagogue still it instantly . it be astonish , I think , how so mild a check could prove so effectual . when I have perambulate the length and breadth of the class , . turn and say to I -- " would you object to take the boy as they be , and test they proficiency in ? " the proposal be unexpected . I have think I should have be allow at least 3 day to prepare ; but it be a bad oman to commence any career by hesitation , so I just step to the professor 's desk near which we stand , and face the circle of my pupil . I take a moment to collect my thought , and likewise to frame in the sentence by which I propose to open business . I make it as short as possible :-- " Messieur , prenez vos livre de lecture . " " Anglais out , monsieur ? " demand a thickset , moon - face young Flamand in a blouse . the answer be fortunately easy :-- " Anglais . " I determine to give myself as little trouble as possible in this lesson ; it would not do yet to trust my unpractised tongue with the delivery of explanations ; my accent and idiom would be too open to the criticisms of the young gentleman before I , relative to whom I feel already it would be necessary at once to take up a advantageous position , and I proceed to employ mean accordingly . " Commencez ! " cry I , when they have all produce they book . the moon - faced youth ( by name , as I afterwards learn ) take the first sentence . the " livre de lecture " be the " of , " much use in foreign school because it be suppose to contain prime samples of conversational ; it might , however , have be a Runic scroll for any resemblance the word , as enunciate by , bear to the language in ordinary use amongst the native of Great . my ! how he do snuffle , snort , and wheeze ! all he say be say in he throat and nose , for it be thus the speak , but I hear he to the end of he paragraph without proffer a word of correction , whereat he look vastly self - complacent , convinced , no doubt , that he have acquit himself like a real born and breed " Anglais . " in the same unmoved silence I listen to a dozen in rotation , and when the twelfth have conclude with splutter , hiss , and mumble , I solemnly lay down the book . " Arretez ! " say I . there be a pause , during which I regard they all with a steady and somewhat stern gaze ; a dog , if star at hard enough and long enough , will show symptom of embarrassment , and so at length do my bench of . perceive that some of the face before I be begin to look sullen , and other asham , I slowly join my hand , and ejaculate in a deep " voix de poitrine " -- " Comme c'est affreux ! " they look at each other , poute , colour , swing they heel ; they be not please , I see , but they be impressed , and in the way I wish they to be . have thus take they down a peg in they self - conceit , the next step be to raise myself in they estimation ; not a very easy thing , consider that I hardly da to speak for fear of betraie my own deficiencies . " Ecoutez , messieur ! " say I , and I endeavoure to throw into my accent the compassionate tone of a superior being , who
who , touch by the extremity of the helplessness , which at first only excit he scorn , deign at length to bestow aid . I then begin at the very beginning of the " Vicar of , " and read , in a slow , distinct voice , some twenty page , they all the while sit mute and listen with fix attention ; by the time I have do nearly a hour have elapse . I then rise and say :-- " C'est assez pour aujourd 'hui , messieur ; demain nous recommenceron , et j'espere que tout ira bien . " with this oracular sentence I bow , and in company with quit the school - room . " C' est bien ! c'est tr bien ! " say my principal as we enter he parlour . " Je vois que yomonsieu a de l'adresse ; cela , I plait , car , dan l'instruction , l'adresse fait tout autant que le savoir . " from the parlour m . conduct I to my apartment , my " chambre , " as say with a certain air of complacency . it be a very small room , with a excessively small bed , but . give I to understand that I be to occupy it quite alone , which be of course a great comfort . yet , though so limit in dimension , it have two window . light not be tax in , the people never grudge its admission into they house ; just here , however , this observation be not very Apropo , for one of these window be boarde up ; the open window look into the boy 's playground . I glance at the other , as wonder what aspect it would present if disencumber of the board . m . Pelet read , I suppose , the expression of my eye ; he explain :-- " fenetre fermee donne yosu un jardin appartenant a un pensionnat de demoiselle , " say he , " et les convenance exigent -- enfin , vous comprenez -- n'est - ce pa , monsieur ? " " Oui , oui , " be my reply , and I look of course quite satisfied ; but when m . Pelet have retire and close the door after he , the first thing I do be to scrutinize closely the nailed board , hope to find some chink or crevice which I might enlarge , and so get a peep at the consecrated ground . my research be vain , for the board be well join and strongly nail . it be astonish how disappointed I feel . I think it would have be so pleasant to have look out upon a garden plan with flower and tree , so amuse to have watch the demoiselle at they play ; to have study female character in a variety of phase , myself the while shelter from view by a modest muslin curtain , whereas , owe doubtless to the absurd scruple of some old duenna of a directress , I have now only the option of look at a bare gravell court , with a enormous " pa de geant " in the middle , and the monotonous wall and window of a boy ' school - house round . not only then , but many a time after , especially in moment of weariness and low spirit , do I look with dissatisfied eye on that most tantalizing board , long to tear it away and get a glimpse of the green region which I imagine to lie beyond . I know a tree grew close up to the window , for though there be as yet no leave to rustle , I often hear at night the tapping of branch against the pane . in the daytime , when I listen attentively , I could hear , even through the board , the voice of the demoiselle in they hour of recreation , and , to speak the honest truth , my sentimental reflection be occasionally a trifle disarrange by the not quite silvery , in fact the too often brazen sound , which , rise from the unseen paradise below , penetrat clamorously into my solitude . not to mince matter , it really seem to I a doubtful case whether the lung of . 's girl or those of 's boy be the strongest , and when it come to shriek the girl indisputably beat the boy hollow . I forget to say , by - the - by , that be the name of the old lady who have have my window beard up . I say old , for such I , of course , conclude she to be , judge from she cautious , chaperon - like proceedings ; beside , nobody ever speak of she as young . I remember I be very much amuse when I first hear she Christian name ; it be -- . but the continental nation do allow themselves vagary in the choice of name , such as we sober never run into . I think , indeed , we have to limit a list to choose from . meantime my path be gradually grow smooth before I . I , in a few week , conquer the teasing difficulty inseparable from the commencement of almost every career . Ere long I have acquire as much facility in speak as set I at my ease with my pupil ; and as I have encounter they on a right footing at the very beginning , and continue tenaciously to retain the advantage I have early gain , they never attempt mutiny , which circumstance , all who be in any degree acquaint with the ongoing of belgian school , and who know the relation in which professor and pupil too frequently stand towards each other
other in those establishment , will consider a important and uncommon one . before conclude this chapter I will say a word on the system I pursue with regard to my class : my experience may possibly be of use to other . it do not require very keen observation to detect the character of the youth of , but it need a certain degree of tact to adopt one 's measure to they capacity . they intellectual faculty be generally weak , they animal propensity strong ; thus there be at once a impotence and a kind of inert force in they nature ; they be dull , but they be also singularly stubborn , heavy as lead and , like lead , most difficult to move . such be the case , it would have be truly absurd to exact from they much in the way of mental exertion ; have short memory , dense intelligence , feeble reflective power , they recoil with repugnance from any occupation that demand close study or deep thought . have the abhorred effort be extort from they by injudicious and arbitrary measure on the part of the Professor , they would have resist as obstinately , as clamorously , as desperate swine ; and though not brave singly , they be relentless ac . I understand that before my arrival in 's establishment , the combine insubordination of the pupil have effect the dismissal of more than one English master . it be necessary then to exact only the most moderate application from nature so little qualified to apply -- to assist , in every practicable way , understanding so opaque and contract -- to be ever gentle , considerate , yield even , to a certain point , with disposition so irrationally perverse ; but , have reach that culminat point of indulgence , you must fix you foot , plant it , root it in rock -- become immutable as the towers of . Gudule ; for a step -- but half a step farther , and you would plunge headlong into the gulf of imbecility ; there lod , you would speedily receive proof of Flemish gratitude and magnanimity in shower of Brabant saliva and handfuls of low country mud . you might smooth to the utmost the path of learning , remove every pebble from the track ; but then you must finally insist with decision on the pupil take you arm and allow himself to be lead quietly along the prepared road . when I have brotch down my lesson to the lowest level of my dullest pupil 's capacity -- when I have show myself the mildest , the most tolerant of master -- a word of impertinence , a movement of disobedience , change I at once into a despot . I offer then but one alternative -- submission and acknowledgment of error , or ignominious expulsion . this system answer , and my influence , by degree , become establish on a firm basis . " the boy be father to the man , " it be say ; and so I often think when look at my boy and remember the political history of they ancestor . 's school be merely a epitome of the belgian nation . . and Pelet himself ? how do I continue to like he ? oh , extremely well ! nothing could be more smooth , gentlemanlike , and even friendly , than he demeanour to I . I have to endure from he neither cold neglect , irritat interference , nor pretentious assumption of superiority . I fear , however , two poor , hard - work belgian usher in the establishment could not have say as much ; to they the director 's manner be invariably dry , stern , and cool . I believe he perceive once or twice that I be a little shocked at the difference he make between they and I , and account for it by say , with a quiet sarcastic smile -- " Ce ne so not que des Flamand -- allez ! " and then he take he cigar gently from he lip and spat on the pain floor of the room in which we be sitte . Flamands certainly they be , and both have the true Flamand physiognomy , where intellectual inferiority be mark in line none can mistake ; still they be man , and , in the main , honest man ; and I could not see why they be aboriginal of the flat , dull soil should serve as a pretext for treat they with perpetual severity and contempt . this idea , of injustice somewhat poisone the pleasure I might otherwise have derive from 's soft affable manner to myself . certainly it be agreeable , when the day 's work be over , to find one 's employer a intelligent and cheerful companion ; and if he be sometimes a little sarcastic and sometimes a little too insinuating , and if I do discover that he mildness be more a matter of appearance than of reality -- if I do occasionally suspect the existence of flint or steel under a external covering of velvet -- still we be none of we perfect ; and weary as I be of the atmosphere of brutality and insolence in which i have constantly live at ----, I have no inclination now , on casting anchor in calmer region , to institute at once a prying search after defect that be scrupulously withdrawn and carefully veil from my view . I be willing to take Pelet for what he seem -- to believe he benevolent and friendly until some untoward event should prove he otherwise . he be not marry , and I soon perceive he have all a 's , all a Parisian 's notion about matrimony and woman . I suspect a
a degree of laxity in he code of moral , there be something so cold and BLASE in he tone whenever he allude to what he call " le beau sexe ; " but he be too gentlemanlike to intrude topic I do not invite , and as he be really intelligent and really fond of intellectual subject of discourse , he and I always find enough to talk about , without seek theme in the mire . I hate he fashion of mention love ; I abhor , from my soul , mere licentiousness . he feel the difference of we notion , and , by mutual consent , we keep off ground debateable . 's house be keep and he kitchen manage by he mother , a real old ; she have be handsome -- at least she tell I so , and I strove to believe she ; she be now ugly , as only continental old woman can be ; perhaps , though , she style of dress make she look uglier than she really be . indoors she would go about without cap , she grey hair strangely dishevell ; then , when at home , she seldom wear a gown -- only a shabby cotton camisole ; shoe , too , be stranger to she foot , and in lieu of they she sport roomy slipper , trodden down at the heel . on the other hand , whenever it be she pleasure to appear abroad , as on and fete - day , she would put on some very brilliant - coloured dress , usually of thin texture , a silk bonnet with a wreath of flower , and a very fine shawl . she be not , in the main , a ill - nature old woman , but a incessant and most indiscreet talker ; she keep chiefly in and about the kitchen , and see rather to avoid she son 's august presence ; of he , indeed , she evidently stand in awe . when he reprove she , he reproof be bitter and unsparing ; but he seldom give himself that trouble . have she own society , she own circle of chosen visitor , whom , however , I seldom see , as she generally entertaine they in what she call she " cabinet , " a small den of a place adjoin the kitchen , and descende into it by one or two step . on these step , by - the - by , I have not unfrequently see seat with a trencher on she knee , engage in the threefold employment of eat she dinner , gossip with she favourite servant , the housemaid , and scold she antagonist , the cook ; she never dine , and seldom indeed take any meal with she son ; and as to show she face at the boy ' table , that be quite out of the question . these detail will sound very odd in English ear , but be not , and its way be not we way . 's habits of life , then , be take into consideration , I be a good deal surprise when , one evening ( be always a half - holiday ) , as I be sit all alone in my apartment , correct a huge pile of and latin exercise , a servant tap at the door , and , on its be open , present 's compliment , and she would be happy to see I to take my " gouter " ( a meal which answer to we English " tea " ) with she in the dining - room . " Plait - il ? " say I , for I think I must have misunderstood , the message and invitation be so unusual ; the same word be repeat . I accept , of course , and as I descende the stair , I wonder what whe have enter the old lady 's brain ; she son be out -- go to pass the evening at the of the or some other club of which he be a member . just as I lay my hand on the handle of the dining - room door , a queer idea glance across my mind . " surely she be not go to make love to I , " say I . " I have hear of old do odd thing in that line ; and the gouter ? they generally begin such affair with eating and drink , I believe . " there be a fearful dismay in this suggestion of my excited imagination , and if I have allow myself time to dwell upon it , I should no doubt have cut there and then , rush back to my chamber , and bolt myself in ; but whenever a danger or a horror be veil with uncertainty , the primary wish of the mind be to ascertain first the naked truth , reserve the expedient of flight for the moment when its dread anticipation shall be realize . I turn the door - handle , and in a instant have cross the fatal threshold , close the door behind I , and stood in the presence of . gracious heaven ! the first view of she seem to confirm my worst apprehension . there she sit , dress out in a light green muslin gow , on she head a lace cap with flourish red ros in the frill ; she table be carefully spread ; there be fruit , cake , and coffee , with a bottle of something -- I do not know what . already the cold sweat start on my brow , already I glance back over my shoulder at the closed door , when , to my unspeakable relief , my eye , wander mildly in the
the direction of the stove , rest upon a second figure , seat in a large fauteuil beside it . this be a woman , too , and , moreover , a old woman , and as fat and as rubicund as be meagre and yellow ; she attire be likewise very fine , and spring flower of different hue circle in a bright wreath the crown of she violet - colou velvet bonnet . I have only time to make these general observation when , come forward with what she intend should be a graceful and elastic step , thus accost I : " be indeed most obliging to quit he book , he study , at the request of a insignificant person like I -- will yoMonsieu complete he kindness by allow I to present he to my dear friend , who reside in the neighbour house -- the young lady ' school . " " ah ! " think I , " I know she be old , " and I bow and take my seat . place herself at the table opposite to I . " how do you like , ? " ask she , in a accent of the . I could now well distinguish the difference between the fine and pure parisian utterance of , for instance , and the guttural enunciation of the Flamand . I answer politely , and then wonder how so coarse and clumsy a old woman as the one before I should be at the head of a ladie ' seminary , which I have always hear speak of in term of high commendation . in truth there be something to wonder at . look more like a joyous , free - live old Flemish fermiere , or even a maitresse d'auberge , than a staid , grave , rigid directrice de pensionnat . in general the continental , or at least the belgian old woman permit themselves a licence of manners , speech , and aspect , such as we venerable granddame would recoil from as absolutely disreputable , and 's jolly face bore evidence that she be no exception to the rule of she country ; there be a twinkle and leer in she leave eye ; she right she keep habitually half shut , which I think very odd indeed . after several vain attempt to comprehend the motives of these two droll old creature for invite I to join they at they gouter , I at last fairly give it up , and resign myself to inevitable mystification , I sit and look first at one , then at the other , take care meantime to do justice to the confiture , cake , and coffee , with which they amply supply I . they , too , eat , and that with no delicate appetite , and have demolish a large portion of the solid , they propose a " petit verre . " I decline . not so and ; each mix herself what I think rather a stiff tumbler of punch , and place it on a stand near the stove , they draw up they chair to that convenience , and invite I to do the same . I obey ; and be seat fairly between they , I be thus address first by , then by . " we will now speak of business , " say , and she go on to make a elaborate speech , which , be interpret , be to the effect that she have ask for the pleasure of my company that even in order to give she friend a opportunity of broach a important proposal , which might turn out greatly to my advantage . " vous soyez sage , " say , " et a vrai dire , vous en avez bien l'air . take one drop of the punch " ( or ponche , as she pronounce it ) ; " it be a agreeable and wholesome beverage after a full meal . " I bow , but again decline it . she go on : " I feel , " say she , after a solemn sip --" I feel profoundly the importance of the commission with which my dear daughter have entrust I , for you be aware , , that it be my daughter who direct the establishment in the next house ? " " ah ! I think it be yourself , madame . " though , indeed , at that moment I recollect that it be call , not 's pensionnat . " I ! oh , no ! I manage the house and look after the servants , as my friend do for she son -- nothing more . ah ! you think I give lesson in class -- do you ? " and she laugh loud and long , as though the idea tick she fancy amazingly . " Madame be in the wrong to laugh , " I observe ; " if she do not give lesson , I be sure it be not because she can not ; " and I whip out a white pocket - handkerchief and waft it , with a french grace , past my nose , bow at the name time . " Quel charmant jeune homme ! " murmure in a low voice . , be less sentimental , as she be and not french , only laugh again . " you be a dangerous person , I fear , " say she ; " if you can forge compliment at that rate , will positively be afraid of you ; but if you be good , I will keep you secret , and not tell she how well you can flatter . now , listen what sort of a proposal she make to you . she have hear that you be a excellent professor ,
, and as she wish to get the very beet master for she school ( car Zoraide fait tout comme une reine , c'est une veritable maitresse - femme ) , she have commission I to step over this afternoon , and sound as to the possibility of enga you . be a wary general ; she never advance without first examine well she ground I do not think she would be pleased if she know I have already disclose she intentions to you ; she do not order I to go so far , but I think there would be no harm in let you into the secret , and be of the same opinion . take care , however , you do not betray either of we to -- to my daughter , I mean ; she be so discreet and circumspect herself , she can not understand that one should find a pleasure in gossip a little -- " " C' est absolument comme mon fils ! " cry . " all the world be so change since we girlhood ! " rejoin the other : " young people have such old head now . but to return , . Pelet will mention the subject of you give lesson in my daughter 's establishment to she son , and he will speak to you ; and then to - morrow , you will step over to we house , and ask to see my daughter , and you will introduce the subject as if the first intimation of it have reach you from m . Pelet himself , and be sure you never mention my name , for I would not displease Zoraide on any account . " ! bien ! " interrupt I -- for all this chatter and circumlocution begin to bear I very much ; " I will consult , and the thing shall be settled as you desire . good evening , mesdame -- I be infinitely oblige to you . " " comment ! vous vous en allez deja ? " exclaim . " Prenez encore quelquechose , monsieur ; une pomme cuite , des biscuit , encore une tasse de cafe ? " " Merci , merci , madame -- au revoir . " and I back at last out of the apartment . have regain my own room , I set myself to turn over in my mind the incident of the evening . it seem a queer affair altogether , and queerly manage ; the two old woman have make quite a little intricate mess of it ; still I find that the uppermost feeling in my mind on the subject be one of satisfaction . in the first place it would be a change to give lesson in another seminary , and then to teach young lady would be a occupation so interesting -- to be admit at all into a ladie ' boarding - school would be a incident so new in my life . besides , think I , as I glance at the boarded window , " I shall now at last see the mysterious garden : I shall gaze both on the angels and they . " . could not of course object to the proposal make by . reuter ; permission to accept such additional employment , should it offer , have form a article of the term on which he have engage I . it be , therefore , arrange in the course of next day that I should be at liberty to give lesson in . 's establishment four afternoon in every week . when evening come I prepare to step over in order to seek a conference with herself on the subject ; I have not have time to pay the visit before , have be all day closely occupy in class . I remember very well that before quit my chamber , I hold a brief debate with myself as to whether I should change my ordinary attire for something smarter . at last I conclude it would be a waste of labour . " doubtless , " think I , " she be some stiff old maid ; for though the daughter of , she may well number upward of forty winter ; besides , if it be otherwise , if she be both young and pretty , I be not handsome , and no dressing can make I so , therefore I will go as I be . " and off I start , cursorily glance sideway as I pass the toilet - table , surmount by a look - glass : a thin irregular face I see , with sunk , dark eye under a large , square forehead , complexion destitute of bloom or attraction ; something young , but not youthful , no object to win a lady 's love , no butt for the shaft of . I be soon at the entrance of the pensionnat , in a moment I have pull the bell ; in another moment the door be open , and within appear a passage pave alternately with black and white marble ; the wall be pain in imitation of marble also ; and at the far end open a glass door , through which I see shrub and a grass - plat , look pleasant in the sunshine of the mild spring evening - for it be now the middle of . this , then , be my first glimpse of the garden ; but I have not time to look long , the portress , after have answer in the affirmative my question as to whether she mistress be at home , open the folding - door of a room to the left , and have usher I in , close they behind I . I find myself in a salon with a very well - paint ,
, highly varnish floor ; chair and sofa cover with white drapery , a green porcelain stove , wall hang with picture in gilt frame , a gilt pendule and other ornament on the mantelpiece , a large lustre pendent from the centre of the ceiling , mirror , consoles , muslin curtain , and a handsome centre table complete the inventory of furniture . all look extremely clean and glitter , but the general effect would have be somewhat chilling have not a second large pair of folding - door , stand wide open , and disclose another and smaller salon , more snugly furnish , offer some relief to the eye . this room be carpet , and therein be a piano , a couch , a chiffonniere -- above all , it contain a lofty window with a crimson curtain , which , be undrawn , afforde another glimpse of the garden , through the large , clear pane , round which some leave of ivy , some tendril of vine be train . " , n'est ce pa ? " say a voice behind I ; and , start involuntarily , I turn . I have be so take up with the contemplation of the pretty little salon that I have not notice the entrance of a person into the larger room . it be , however , . who now address I , and stand close beside I ; and when I have bow with instantaneously recover sang - froid -- for I be not easily embarrasse -- I commence the conversation by remark on the pleasant aspect of she little cabinet , and the advantage she have over in possesse a garden . " yes , " she say , " she often think so ; " and add , " it be my garden , monsieur , which make I retain this house , otherwise I should probably have remove to larger and more commodious premise long since ; but you see I could not take my garden with I , and I should scarcely find one so large and pleasant anywhere else in town . " I approve she judgment . " but you have not see it yet , " say she , rise ; " come to the window and take a better view . " I follow she ; she open the sash , and lean out I see in full the enclose demesne which have hithertoo been to I a unknown region . it be a long , not very broad strip of cultured ground , with a alley border by enormous old fruit tree down the middle ; there be a sort of lawn , a parterre of rose -tree , some flower - border , and , on the far side , a thickly plan copse of lilac , laburnum , and acacias . it look pleasant , to I -- very pleasant , so long a time have elapse since I have see a garden of any sort . but it be not only on . 's garden that my eye dwelt ; when I have take a view of she well - trim bed and budding shrubbery , I allow my glance to come back to herself , nor do I hastily withdraw it . I have think to see a tall , meagre , yellow , conventual image in black , with a close white cap , bandage under the ching like a nun 's head - gear ; whereas , there stand by I a little and roundly for woman , who might indeed be older than I , but be still young ; she could not , I think , be more than six or seven and twenty ; she be as fair as a fair ; she have no cap ; she hair be nut - brown , and she wear it in curl ; pretty she feature be not , nor very soft , nor very regular , but neither be they in any degree plain , and I already see cause to deem they expressive . what be they predominant cast ? be it sagacity ?-- sense ? yes , I think so ; but I could scarcely as yet be sure . I discover , however , that there be a certain serenity of eye , and freshness of complexion , most pleasing to behold . the colour on she cheek be like the bloom on a good apple , which be as sound at the core as it be red on the rind . . and I enter upon business . she say she be not absolutely certain of the wisdom of the step she be about to take , because I be so young , and parent might possibly object to a professor like I for they daughter : " but it be often well to act on one 's own judgment , " say she , " and to lead parent , rather than be lead by they . the fitness of a professor be not a matter of age ; and , from what I have hear , and from what I observe myself , I would much rather trust you than , the music - master , who be a married man of near fifty . " I remarke that I hope she would find I worthy of she good opinion ; that if I know myself , I be incapable of betraie any confidence repose in I . " do reste , " say she , " the surveillance will be strictly attend to . " and then she proceed to discuss the subject of term . she be very cautious , quite on she guard ; she do not absolutely bargain , but she warily sound I to find out what my expectation might be ; and when she could not
not get I to name a sum , she reason and reason with a fluent yet quiet circumlocution of speech , and at last nai I down to five hundred franc per annum -- not too much , but I agree . before the negotiation be complete , it begin to grow a little dusk . I do not hasten it , for I like well enough to sit and hear she talk ; I be amused with the sort of business talent she display . could not have show himself more practical , though he might have evince more coarseness and urgency ; and then she have so many reason , so many explanation ; and , after all , she succeed in prove herself quite disinterested and even liberal . at last she conclude , she could say no more , because , as I acquiesce in all thing , there be no further ground for the exercise of she part of speech . I be oblige to rise . I would rather have sit a little longer ; what have I to return to but my small empty room ? and my eye have a pleasure in look at . , especially now , when the twilight soften she feature a little , and , in the doubtful dusk , I could fancy she forehead as open as it be really elevate , she mouth touch with turn of sweetness as well as define in line of sense . when I rise to go , I hold out my hand , on purpose , though I know it be contrary to the etiquette of foreign habit ; she smile , and say -- " ah ! c'est comme tous les Anglais , " but give I she hand very kindly . " it be the privilege of my country , , " say I ; " and , remember , I shall always claim it . " she laugh a little , quite good - naturedly , and with the sort of tranquillity obvious in all she do -- a tranquillity which soothe and sui I singularly , at least I think so that even . seem a very pleasant place to I when I get out again into the street , and it appear as if some cheerful , eventful , upward - tending career be even then open to I , on that selfsame mild , still night . so impressionable a being be man , or at least such a man as I be in those day . . next day the morning hour seem to pass very slowly at 's ; I want the afternoon to come that I might go again to the neighbouring pensionnat and give my first lesson within its pleasant precinct ; for pleasant they appear to I . at noon the hour of recreation arrive ; at one o'clock we have lunch ; this get on the time , and at last . 's deep bell , toll slowly two , mark the moment for which i have be wait . at the foot of the narrow back - stair that descend from my room , I meet . " Comme vous avez l'air rayonnant ! " say he . " vous be jamai vu aussi gai . que s'est - il donc passe ? " " Apparemment que j'aime les changement , " reply I . " ah ! je comprend -- c'est cela - soyez sage seulement . Vous ete bien jeune -- trop jeune pour le role que vous allez jouer ; il faut prendre garde-- savez - vous ? " " tMais quel danger y a - t - il ? " " not 'en sais rien -- ne vous laissez pa aller a de vive impressions -- voila tout . " I laugh : a sentiment of exquisite pleasure play over my nerve at the thought that " vive impressions " be likely to be create ; it be the deadness , the sameness of life 's daily ongoing that have hithertoo be my bane ; my blouse - clad " eleve " in the boy 's seminary never stir in I any " vive impressions " except it might be occasionally some of anger . I break from , and as I strode down the passage he follow I with one of he laugh -- a very french , rakish , mock sound . again I stand at the neighbour door , and soon be re-admit into the cheerful passage with its clear dove - colour imitation marble wall . I follow the portress , and descende a step , and make a turn , I find myself in a sort of corridor ; a side - door open , . 's little figure , as graceful as it be plump , appear . I could now see she dress in full daylight ; a neat , simple mousseline - laine gown fit she compact round shape to perfection -- delicate little collar and manchette of lace , tre parisian brodequin show she neck , wrist , and foot , to complete advantage ; but how grave be she face as she come suddenly upon I ! Solicitude and business be in she eye -- on she forehead ; she look almost stern . she " Bon jour , monsieur , " be quite polite , but so orderly , so commonplace , it spread directly a cool , damp towel over my " vive impressions . " the servant turn back when she mistress appear , and I walk slowly along the corridor , side by side with . . " yoMonsieu will give a lesson in the first class to - day , " say she ; " dictation or read will perhaps be the best thing to begin with , for those be the easiest form of communicating instruction in
in a foreign language ; and , at the first , a master naturally feel a little unsettled . " she be quite right , as I have find from experience ; it only remain for I to acquiesce . we proceed now in silence . the corridor terminate in a hall , large , lofty , and square ; a glass door on one side show within a long narrow refectory , with table , a armoire , and two lamps ; it be empty ; large glass door , in front , open on the playground and garden ; a broad staircase ascend spirally on the opposite side ; the remain wall show a pair of great folding - door , now close , and admit : doubtless , to the class . . turn she eye laterally on I , to ascertain , probably , whether I be collect enough to be usher into she sanctum sanctorum . I suppose she judge I to be in a tolerable state of self - government , for she open the door , and I follow she through . a rust sound of uprising greet we entrance ; without look to the right or leave , I walk straight up the lane between two set of bench and desk , and take possession of the empty chair and isolate desk raise on a estrade , of one step high , so as to command one division ; the other division be under the surveillance of a maitresse similarly elevate . at the back of the estrade , and attach to a moveable partition divide this schoolroom from another beyond , be a large tableau of wood pain black and varnish ; a thick crayon of white chalk lay on my desk for the convenience of elucidat any grammatical or verbal obscurity which might occur in my lesson by write it upon the tableau ; a wet sponge appear beside the chalk , to enable I to efface the mark when they have serve the purpose intend . I carefully and deliberately make these observation before allow myself to take one glance at the benche before I ; have handle the crayon , look back at the tableau , finger the sponge in order to ascertain that it be in a right state of moisture , I find myself cool enough to admit of look calmly up and gaze deliberately round I . and first I observ that . reuter have already glide away , she be nowhere visible ; a maitresse or teacher , the one who occupy the corresponding estrade to my own , alone remain to keep guard over I ; she be a little in the shade , and , with my short sight , I could only see that she be of a thin bony figure and rather tallowy complexion , and that she attitude , as she sit , partook equally of listlessness and affectation . more obvious , more prominent , shone on by the full light of the large window , be the occupant of the bench just before I , of whom some be girl of fourteen , fifteen , sixteen , some young woman from eighteen ( as it appear to I ) up to twenty ; the most modest attire , the simplest fashion of wear the hair , be apparent in all ; and good feature , ruddy , bloom complexion , large and brilliant eye , form full , even to solidity , seem to abound . I do not bear the first view like a stoic ; I be dazzl , my eye fell , and in a voice somewhat too low I murmure -- " Prenez vos cahiers de dictee , mesdemoiselle . " not so have I bid the boy at 's take they reading - book . a rustle follow , and a opening of desk ; behind the lift lid which momentarily screen the head bend down to search for exercise - book , I hear tittering and whisper . " , je suis prete a pamer de rire , " observe one . " Comme il a rougi en parlant ! " " Oui , c'est un veritable blanc - bec . " " Tais - toi , Hortense -- il nous ecoute . " and now the lid sank and the head reappear ; I have mark three , the whisperer , and I do not scruple to take a very steady look at they as they emerge from they temporary eclipse . it be astonish what ease and courage they little phrasis of flippancy have give I ; the idea by which i have be aw be that the youthful being before I , with they dark nun -like rob and softly braide hair , be a kind of half - angel . the light titter , the giddy whisper , have already in some measure relieve my mind of that fond and oppressive fancy . the three I allude to be just in front , within half a yard of my estrade , and be among the most womanly - look present . they name I know afterwards , and may as well mention now ; they be , , . be tall , and very finely shape : she be fair , and she feature be those of a country ; many a " figure " have I see in picture exactly resembl hers ; there be no angles in she shape or in she face , all be curve and roundness -- neither think , sentiment , nor passion disturb by line or flush the equality of she pale , clear skin ; she noble bust heav with she regular breathing , she eye move a little -- by these evidences of life alone could I have distinguished she from some large handsome figure mould in wax .
. Hortense be of middle size and stout , she form be ungraceful , she face strik , more alive and brilliant than 's , she hair be dark brown , she complexion richly colou ; there be frolic and mischief in she eye : consistency and good sense she might possess , but none of she feature betoken those qualitie . be little , though evidently full grown ; raven - black hair , very dark eye , absolutely regular feature , with a colourless olive complexion , clear as to the face and sallow about the neck , form in she that assemblage of point whose union many person regard as the perfection of beauty . how , with the tintless pallor of she skin and the classic straightness of she lineament , she manage to look sensual , I do not know . I think she lip and eye contrive the affair between they , and the result leave no uncertainty on the beholder 's mind . she be sensual now , and in ten year ' time she would be coarse -- promise plain be write in she face of much future folly . if I look at these girl with little scruple , they look at I with still less . raise she unmoved eye to mine , and seem to expect , passively but securely , a impromptu tribute to she majestic charms . Hortense regard I boldly , and giggle at the same time , while she say , with a air of impudent freedom -- " Dictez - nous quelquechose de facile pour commencer , monsieur . " shook she loose ringlet of abundant but somewhat coarse hair over she roll black eye ; part she lip , as full as those of a hot - blood , she show she well - set tooth sparkling between they , and treat I at the same time to a smile " de sa facon . " beautiful as , she look at the moment scarcely purer than . be of noble family . I hear she lady - mother 's character afterwards , and then I cease to wonder at the precocious accomplishment of the daughter . these three , I at once see , deem themselves the queens of the school , and conceive that by they splendour they throw all the rest into the shade . in less than five minute they have thus reveal to I they character , and in less than five minute I have buck on a breast - plate of steely indifference , and let down a visor of impassible austerity . " take you pens and commence writing , " say I , in as dry and trite a voice as if I have be address only and . the dictee now commence . my three belle interrupt I perpetually with little silly question and uncalled - for remark , to some of which i make no answer , and to other replie very quietly and briefly . " comment dit - on point et virgule en Anglais , monsieur ? " " , . " " Semi-collong ? ah , comme c'est drole ! " ( giggle . ) " J'ai une si mauvaise plume -- impossible d'ecrire ! " " Mais , monsieur -- je ne sai pa suivre --vous allez sus vite . " " n'ai rien compris , moi ! " here a general murmur arise , and the teacher , open she lip for the first time , ejaculate -- " Silence , mesdemoiselle ! " no silence follow -- on the contrary , the three lady in front begin to talk more loudly . " C' est si difficile , ! " " deteste la dictee . " " Quel ennui d'ecrire quelquechose que l 'on ne comprend pa ! " some of those behind laugh : a degree of confusion begin to pervade the class ; it be necessary to take prompt measure . " Donnez - moi votre cahier , " say I to Eulalie in a abrupt tone ; and bend over , I take it before she have time to give it . " et vous , mademoiselle - donnez - moi le votre , " continue I , more mildly , address a little pale , plain look girl who sit in the first row of the other division , and whom I have remark as be at once the ugliest and the most attentive in the room ; she rise up , walk over to I , and deliver she book with a grave , modest curtsey . I glance over the two dictation ; 's be slur , blot , and full of silly mistake -- 's ( such be the name of the ugly little girl ) be clearly write , it contain no error against sense , and but few fault of orthography . I coolly read aloud both exercise , mark the fault -- then I look at : " C'est honteux ! " say I , and I deliberately tore she dictation in four part , and present she with the fragment . I return she book with a smile , say -- " C' est bien -- je suis content de vous . " look calmly pleased , swell like a incense turkey , but the mutiny be quell : the conceited coquetry and futile flirtation of the first bench be exchange for a taciturn sullenness , much more convenient to I , and the rest of my lesson pass without interruption . a bell clan out in the yard announce the moment for the cessation of school labour . I hear we own bell at the same time , and that of a certain public college immediately after . order dissolve instantly ; up start every pupil , I hasten to seize my hat , bow to
to the maitresse , and quit the room before the tide of externat should pour from the inner class , where I know near a hundred be prison , and whose rise tumult I already hear . I have scarcely cross the hall and gain the corridor , when . come again upon I . " step in here a moment , " say she , and she hold open the door of the side room from whence she have issue on my arrival ; it be a - - , as appear from the beaufet and the armoire vitree , fill with glass and china , which form part of its furniture . Ere she have close the door on I and herself , the corridor be already fill with day - pupil , tear down they cloak , bonnet , and caba from the wooden peg on which they be suspend ; the shrill voice of a maitresse be hear at interval vainly endeavour to enforce some sort of order ; vainly , I say : discipline there be none in these rough rank , and yet this be consider one of the best - conduct school in . " well , you have give you first lesson , " begin . reuter in the most calm , equable voice , as though quite unconscious of the chaos from which we be separate only by a single wall . " be you satisfie with you pupil , or do any circumstance in they conduct give you cause for complaint ? Conceal nothing from I , repose in I entire confidence . " happily , I feel in myself complete power to manage my pupil without aid ; the enchantment , the golden haze which have dazzl my perspicuity at first , have be a good deal dissipate . I can not say I be chagrin or downcast by the contrast which the reality of a pensionnat de demoiselle present to my vague ideal of the same community ; I be only enlighten and amuse ; consequently , I feel in no disposition to complain to . , and I receive she considerate invitation to confidence with a smile . " a thousand thanks , mademoiselle , all have go very smoothly . " she look more than doubtful . " et les trois demoiselle do preme banc ? " say she . " ah ! tout va au mieux ! " be my answer , and . cease to question I ; but she eye -- not large , not brilliant , not melt , or kindling , but astute , penetrat , practical , show she be even with I ; it let out a momentary gleam , which say plainly , " be as close as you like , I be not dependent on you candour ; what you would conceal I already know . " by a transition so quiet as to be scarcely perceptible , the directress 's manner change ; the anxious business - air pass from she face , and she begin chat about the weather and the town , and ask in neighbourly wise after and . I answer all she little question ; she prolonge she talk , I go on follow it be many little windings ; she sit so long , say so much , vari so often the topic of discourse , that it be not difficult to perceive she have a particular aim in thus detain I . she mere word could have afford no clue to this aim , but she countenance aid ; while she lip utter only affable commonplace , she eye revert continually to my face . she glance be not give in full , but out of the corner , so quietly , so stealthily , yet I think I lose not one . I watch she as keenly as she watch I ; I perceive soon that she be feel after my real character ; she be search for salient point , and weak ; point , and eccentric point ; she be apply now this test , now that , hope in the end to find some chink , some niche , where she could put in she little firm foot and stand upon my neck -- mistress of my nature , do not mistake I , reader , it be no amorous influence she wish to gain -- at that time it be only the power of the politician to which she aspire ; I be now install as a professor in she establishment , and she want to know where she mind be superior to mine -- by what feel or opinion she could lead I . I enjoy the game much , and do not hasten its conclusion ; sometimes I give she hope , begin a sentence rather weakly , when she shrewd eye would light up -- she think she have I ; have lead she a little way , I delighte to turn round and finish with sound , hard sense , whereat she countenance would fall . at last a servant enter to announce dinner ; the conflict be thus necessarily terminate , we part without have gain any advantage on either side : . Reuter have not even give I a opportunity of attack she with feeling , and I have manage to baffle she little scheme of craft . it be a regular drawn battle . I again hold out my hand when I leave the room , she give I hers ; it be a small and white hand , but how cool ! I meet she eye too in full -- oblige she to give I a straightforward look ; this last test go against I : it leave she as it find she -- moderate , temperate , tranquil ; I it disappoint . " I be grow
grow wiser , " think I , as I walk back to 's . " look at this little woman ; be she like the woman of novelist and romancer ? to read of female character as depict in and , one would think it be make up of sentiment , either for good or bad -- here be a specimen , and a most sensible and respectable specimen , too , whose staple ingredient be abstract reason . no be ever more passionless than ! " so I think then ; I find afterwards that blunt susceptibility be very consistent with strong propensity . . I have indeed have a very long talk with the crafty little politician , and on regain my quarter , I find that dinner be half over . to be late at meal be against a standing rule of the establishment , and have it be one of the Flemish usher who thus enter after the removal of the soup and the commencement of the first course , m . Pelet would probably have greet he with a public rebuke , and would certainly have mulct he both of soup and fish ; as it be , that polite though partial gentleman only shook he head , and as I take my place , unroll my napkin , and say my heretical grace to myself , he civilly despatch a servant to the kitchen , to bring I a plate of " puree aux carotte " ( for this be a maigre - day ) , and before send away the first course , reserve for I a portion of the stock - fish of which it consist . dinner be over , the boy rush out for they evening play ; and ( the two usher ) of course follow they . poor fellow ! if they have not look so very heavy , so very soulless , so very indifferent to all thing in heaven above or in the earth beneath , I could have pitie they greatly for the obligation they be under to trail after those rough lad everywhere and at all time ; even as it be , I feel dispose to scout myself as a privileged prig when I turn to ascend to my chamber , sure to find there , if not enjoyment , at least liberty ; but this evening ( as have often happen before ) I be to be still farther distinguished . " Eh bien , mauvai sujet ! " say the voice of m . Pelet behind I , as I set my foot on the first step of the stair , " ou allez -vous ? Venez a la salle - a - manger , que je vous gronde un peu . " " I beg pardon , monsieur , " say I , as I follow he to he private sitting - room , " for have return so late -- it be not my fault . " " that be just what I want to know , " rejoin , as he usher I into the comfortable parlour with a good wood - fire -- for the stove have now be remove for the season . have rng the bell he order " coffee for two , " and presently he and I be seat , almost in comfort , one on each side of the hearth , a little round table between we , with a coffee - pot , a sugar - basin , and two large white china cup . . employ himself in choose a cigar from a box , my thought revert to the two outcast usher , whose voice I could hear even now cry hoarsely for order in the playground . " C' est une grande responsabilite , que la surveillance , " observ I . " Plait - il ? " dit . I remarke that I think and must sometimes be a little fatigue with they labour . " Des betes de somme , -- de betes de somme , " murmure scornfully the director . meantime I offer he he cup of coffee . " Servez - vous mon garcon , " say he blandly , when I have put a couple of huge lump of continental sugar into he cup . " and now tell I why you stay so long at . 's . I know that lesson conclude , in she establishment as in mine , at four o'clock , and when you return it be past five . " " . wish to speak with I , monsieur . " " indeed ! on what subject ? if one may ask . " " talk about nothing , monsieur . " " a fertile topic ! and do she discourse thereon in the schoolroom , before the pupil ? " " no ; like you , monsieur , she ask I to walk into she parlour . " " and -- the old duenna -- my mother 's gossip , be there , of course ? " " no , monsieur ; I have the honour of be quite alone with mademoiselle . " " C'est joli -- cela , " observ , and he smile and look into the fire . " Honi soit qui mal y pense , " murmure I , significantly . " Je connai un peu ma petite voisine -- voyez-vous . " " in that case , yomonsieu will be able to aid I in find out what be 's reason for make I sit before she sofa one mortal hour , listen to the most copious and fluent dissertation on the merest frivolity . " " she be sound you character . " " I think so , monsieur . " " do she find out you weak point ? " " what be my weak point ? "
" " why , the sentimental . any woman sink she shaft deep enough , will at last reach a fathomless spring of sensibility in thy breast , . " I feel the blood stir about my heart and rise warm to my cheek . " some woman might , monsieur . " " be . reuter of the number ? come , speak frankly , mon fils ; elle est encore jeune , plus agee que toi peut -etre , tmais juste asset pour unir la tendresse d'une petite maman a l'amour d'une epouse devouee ; n'est - ce pa que cela tg irain superieurement ? " " no , monsieur ; I should like my wife to be my wife , and not half my mother . " " she be then a little too old for you ? " " no , monsieur , not a day too old if she suite I in other thing . " " in what do she not suit you , ? she be personally agreeable , be she not ? " " very ; she hair and complexion be just what I admire ; and she turn of form , though quite belgian , be full of . " " Bravo ! and she face ? she feature ? how do you like they ? " " a little harsh , especially she mouth . " " ah , yes ! she mouth , " say , and he chuckle inwardly . " there be character about she mouth -- firmness -- but she have a very pleasant smile ; do not you think so ? " " rather crafty . " " true , but that expression of craft be owe to she eyebrow ; have you remark she eyebrow ? " I answer that I have not . " you have not see she look down then ? " say he . " no . " " it be a treat , notwithstanding . observe she when she have some knitting , or some other woman 's work in hand , and sit the image of peace , calmly intent on she needle and she silk , some discussion meantime go on around she , in the course of which peculiarity of character be be develop , or important interest canvass ; she take no part in it ; she humble , feminine mind be wholly with she knitting ; none of she feature move ; she neither presume to smile approval , nor fry disapprobation ; she little hand assiduously ply they unpretending task ; if she can only get this purse finish , or this bonnet - grec complete , it be enough for she . if gentleman approach she chair , a deeper quiescence , a meeker modesty settle on she feature , and cloth she general mien ; observe then she eyebrow , et dite - moi 's 'il n'y a pa do chat dan l'un et do renard dan l'autre . " " I will take careful notice the first opportunity , " say I . " and then , " continue , " the eyelid will flicker , the light - coloured lash be lift a second , and a blue eye , glance out from under the screen , will take its brief , sly , search survey , and retreat again . " I smile , and so do , and after a few minute ' silence , I ask : " will she ever marry , do you think ? " " ! will bird pair ? of course it be both she intention and resolution to marry when she find a suitable match , and no one be better aware than herself of the sort of impression she be capable of producing ; no one like better to captivate in a quiet way . I be mistaken if she will not yet leave the print of she steal step on thy heart , . " " of she step ? Confound it , no ! my heart be not a plank to be walk on . " " but the soft touch of a patte de velours will do it no harm . " " she offer I no patte de velour ; she be all form and reserve with I . " " that to begin with ; let respect be the foundation , affection the first floor , love the superstructure ; . be a skilful architect . " " and interest , -- interest . will not mademoiselle consider that point ? " " yes , yes , no doubt ; it will be the cement between every stone . and now we have discuss the directress , what of the pupil ? - a - t - il pa belle etudes parmi ce jeune tete ? " " study of character ? yes ; curious one , at least , I imagine ; but one can not divine much from a first interview . " " ah , you affect discretion ; but tell I now , be you not a little abashed before these blooming young creature ? " at first , yes ; but I rally and get through with all due sang - froid . " " I do not believe you . " " it be true , notwithstanding . at first I think they angels , but they do not leave I long under that delusion ; three of the eldest and handsomest undertake the task of set I right , and they manage so cleverly that in five minute I know they , at least , for what they be -- three arrant coquette . " " les connai ! " exclaim . " Elle so not toujour au premier ring a l'eglise et a la promenade ; une blonde superbe , une jolie espiegle , une belle brune
brune . " " exactly . " " creature all of they -- head for artist ; what a group they would make , take together ! ( I know they name ) , with she smooth braide hair and calm ivory brow . Hortense , with she rich chesnut lock so luxuriantly knot , plait , twiste , as if she do not know how to dispose of all they abundance , with she vermilion lip , damask cheek , and roguish laugh eye . and ! ah , there be beauty ! beauty in perfection . what a cloud of sable curl about the face of a houri ! what fascinate lip ! what glorious black eye ! you would have worship she , and you -- you cold , frigid islander ! -- you play the austere , the insensible in the presence of a Aphrodite so exquisite ? " I might have laugh at the director 's enthusiasm have I believe it real , but there be something in he tone which indicate get - up rapture . I feel he be only affect fervour in order to put I off my guard , to induce I to come out in return , so I scarcely even smile . he go on : " , , do not the mere good look of appear dowdyish and commonplace compare with the splendid charms of some of she pupil ? " the question discompose I , but I now feel plainly that my principal be endeavour ( for reason best know to himself -- at that time I could not fathom they ) to excite idea and wish in my mind alien to what be right and honourable . the iniquity of the instigation prove its antidote , and when he further add :-- " each of those three beautiful girl will have a handsome fortune ; and with a little address , a gentlemanlike , intelligent young fellow like you might make himself master of the hand , heart , and purse of any one of the trio . " I reply by a look and a interrogative " ? " which start he . he laugh a force laugh , affir that he have only be joke , and demand whether I could possibly have think he in earnest . just then the bell rang ; the play - hour be over ; it be a evening on which m . Pelet be accustom to read passage from the drama and the belle lettre to he pupil . he do not wait for my answer , but rise , leave the room , hum as he go some gay strain of 's . . Daily , as I continue my attendance at the seminary of . , do I find fresh occasion to compare the ideal with the real . what have I know of female character previously to my arrival at ? precious little . and what be my notion of it ? something vague , slight , gauzy , glitter ; now when I come in contact with it I find it to be a palpable substance enough ; very hard too sometimes , and often heavy ; there be metal in it , both lead and iron . let the idealist , the dreamer about earthly angel and human flower , just look here while I open my portfolio and show they a sketch or two , pencill after nature . I take these sketch in the second - class schoolroom of . 's establishment , where about a hundred specimen of the genus " jeune fille " collect together , offer a fertile variety of subject . a miscellaneous assortment they be , differ both in caste and country ; as I sit on my estrade and glance over the long range of desk , I have under my eye , , , , and . the majority belong to the class bourgeois ; but there be many countess , there be the daughter of two generals and of several colonel , captain , and government Employe ; these lady sit side by side with young female destin to be demoiselle de magasin , and with some Flamande , genuine aborigine of the country . in dress all be nearly similar , and in manners there be small difference ; exception there be to the general rule , but the majority give the tone to the establishment , and that tone be rough , boisterous , mask by a point - blank disregard of all forbearance towards each other or they teacher ; a eager pursuit by each individual of she own interest and convenience ; and a coarse indifference to the interest and convenience of every one else . most of they could lie with audacity when it appear advantageous to do so . all understand the art of speak fair when a point be to be gain , and could with consummate skill and at a moment 's notice turn the cold shoulder the instant civility cease to be profitable . very little open quarrelling ever take place amongst they ; but backbiting and talebearing be universal . close friendship be forbidden by the rule of the school , and no one girl seem to cultivate more regard for another than be just necessary to secure a companion when solitude would have be irksome . they be each and all suppose to have be rear in utter unconsciousness of vice . the precaution use to keep they ignorant , if not innocent , be innumerable . how be it , then , that scarcely one of those girl have attaine the age of fourteen could look a man in the face with modesty and propriety ? a air of bold , impudent flirtation , or a loose , silly leer , be sure to answer the most ordinary glance from a
a masculine eye . I know nothing of the arcana of the religion , and I be not a bigot in matter of theology , but I suspect the root of this precocious impurity , so obvious , so general in Popish country , be to be find in the discipline , if not the doctrine of the of . I record what I have see : these girl belong to what be call the respectable rank of society ; they have all be carefully bring up , yet be the mass of they mentally deprave . so much for the general view : now for one or two select specimen . the first picture be a full length of , a german fraulein , or rather a half - breed between german and russian . she be eighteen year of age , and have be send to Brussels to finish she education ; she be of middle size , stifinitely make , body long , leg short , bust much developed but not compactly moulded , waist disproportionately compress by a inhumanly brace corset , dress carefully arrange , large foot torture into small bottine , head small , hair smoothe , braide , oil , and gum to perfection ; very low forehead , very diminutive and vindictive grey eye , somewhat Tartar feature , rather flat nose , rather high - cheek bone , yet the ensemble not positively ugly ; tolerably good complexion . so much for person . as to mind , deplorably ignorant and ill - inform : incapable of writing or speak correctly even german , she native tongue , a dunce in , and she attempt at learn a mere farce , yet she have be at school twelve year ; but as she invariably get she exercise , of every description , do by a fellow pupil , and read she lesson off a book ; conceal in she lap , it be not wonderful that she progress have be so snail - like . I do not know what 's daily habits of life be , because I have not the opportunity of observe she at all time ; but from what I see of the state of she desk , book , and papers , I should say she be slovenly and even dirty ; she outward dress , as I have say , be well attend to , but in pass behind she bench , I have remark that she neck be gray for want of washing , and she hair , so glossy with gum and grease , be not such as one feel tempt to pass the hand over , much less to run the finger through . 's conduct in class , at least when I be present , be something extraordinary , consider as a index of girlish innocence . the moment I enter the room , she nudge she next neighbour and indulge in a half - suppress laugh . as I take my seat on the estrade , she fix she eye on I ; she seem resolve to attract , and , if possible , monopolize my notice : to this end she launch at I all sort of look , languishing , provoke , leer , laugh . as I be find quite proof against this sort of artillery -- for we scorn what , unasked , be lavishly offer -- she have recourse to the expedient of make noise ; sometimes she sigh , sometimes groan , sometimes utter inarticulate sound , for which language have no name . if , in walking up the schoolroom , I pass near she , she put out she foot that it may touch mine ; if I do not happen to observe the manoeuvre , and my boot come in contact with she brodequin , she affect to fall into convulsion of suppress laughter ; if I notice the snare and avoid it , she express she mortification in sullen muttering , where I hear myself abuse in bad , pronounce with a intolerable low german accent . not far from . Koslow sit another young lady by name : this be a belgian , rather low of stature , in form heavy , with broad waist , short neck and limb , good red and white complexion , feature well chisell and regular , well - cut eye of a clear brown colour , light brown hair , good tooth , age not much above fifteen , but as full - grow as a stout young of twenty . this portrait give the idea of a somewhat dumpy but good - look damsel , do it not ? well , when I look along the row of young head , my eye generally stop at this of 's ; she gaze be ever wait for mine , and it frequently succeed in arrest it . she be a unnatural - look being -- so young , fresh , bloom , yet so - like . suspicion , sull ill - temper be on she forehead , vicious propensity in she eye , envy and panther - like deceit about she mouth . in general she sit very still ; she massive shape look as if it could not bend much , nor do she large head -- so broad at the base , so narrow towards the top -- thseey make to turn readily on she short neck . she have but two variety of expression ; the prevalent one a forbidding , dissatisfied scowl , vari sometimes by a most pernicious and perfidious smile . she be shunn by she fellow - pupil , for , bad as many of they were , few be as bad as she . and be in the first division of the second class ; the second division be head by a pensionnaire name
name . this girl be of mixed belgian and spanish origin ; she Flemish mother be dead , she Catalonian father be a merchant reside in the ---- , where to have be bear and whence she be send to to be educate . I wonder that any one , look at that girl 's head and countenance , would have receive she under they roof . she have precisely the same shape of skull as the ; she organ of benevolence , veneration , conscientiousness , adhesiveness , be singularly small , those of self - esteem , firmness , destructiveness , combativeness , preposterously large ; she head slop up in the penthouse shape , be contract about the forehead , and prominent behind ; she have rather good , though large and mark feature ; she temperament be fibrous and bilious , she complexion pale and dark , hair and eye black , form angular and rigid but proportionate , age fifteen . be not very thin , but she have a gaunt visage , and she " regard " be fierce and hungry ; narrow as be she brow , it present space enough for the legible graving of two word , and ; in some one of she other lineament I think the eye -- cowardice have also its distinct cipher . . think fit to trouble my first lesson with a coarse work - day sort of turbulence ; she make noise with she mouth like a horse , she eject she saliva , she utter brutal expression ; behind and below she be seat a band of very vulgar , inferior - look Flamande , include two or three example of that deformity of person and imbecility of intellect whose frequency in the would seem to furnish proof that the climate be such as to induce degeneracy of the human mind and body ; these , I soon find , be completely under she influence , and with they aid she get up and sustain a swinish tumult , which I be constrain at last to quell by order she and two of she tool to rise from they seat , and , have keep they stand five minute , turn they bodily out of the schoolroom : the accomplice into a large place adjoin call the grand salle ; the principal into a cabinet , of which I close the door and pocket the key . this judgament I execute in the presence of . , who look much aghast at beholding so decide a proceeding -- the most severe that have ever be venture on in she establishment . she look of affright I answer with one of composure , and finally with a smile , which perhaps flatter , and certainly soothe she . remain in long enough to repay , by malevolence and ingratitude , all who have ever do she a good turn ; and she then go to join she father in the ---- Isle , exult in the thought that she should there have slave , whom , as she say , she could kick and strike at will . these three picture be from the life . I possess other , as mark and as little agreeable , but I will spare my reader the exhibition of they . Doubtless it will be think that I ought now , by way of contrast , to show something charme ; some gentle virgin head , circle with a halo , some sweet personification of innocence , clasp the dove of peace to she bosom . no : I see nothing of the sort , and therefore can not portray it . the pupil in the school possesse the happiest disposition be a young girl from the country , ; she be sufficiently benevolent and oblige , but not well teach nor well mannere ; moreover , the plague - spot of dissimulation be in she also ; honour and principle be unknown to she , she have scarcely hear they name . the least exceptionable pupil be the poor little I have mention once before . be gentle in manners , intelligent in mind ; she be even sincere , as far as she religion would permit she to be so , but she physical organization be defective ; weak health stunt she growth and chill she spirits , and then , destin as she be for the cloister , she whole soul be warp to a conventual bia , and in the tame , train subjection of she manner , one read that she have already prepare herself for she future course of life , by give up she independence of thought and action into the hand of some despotic confessor . she permit herself no original opinion , no preference of companion or employment ; in everything she be guide by another . with a pale , passive , automaton air , she go about all day long do what she be bid ; never what she like , or what , from innate conviction , she think it right to do . the poor little future religieuse have be early teach to make the dictate of she own reason and conscience quite subordinate to the will of she spiritual director . she be the model pupil of . 's establishment ; pale , blight image , where life linger feebly , but whence the soul have be conjure by wizard - craft ! a few pupil there be in this school , and these might be divide into two class . 1 st . the continental -- the daughter chiefly of broken adventurer , whom debt or dishonour have drive from they own country . these poor girl have never know the advantages of settled home , decorous example , or honest Protestant education ; resident a few month now in one school ,
, now in another , as they parent wander from land to land -- from to , from to -- they have pick up some scanty instruction , many bad habit , lose every notion even of the first element of religion and moral , and acquire a imbecile indifference to every sentiment that can elevate humanity ; they be distinguishable by a habitual look of sullen dejection , the result of crush self - respect and constant browbeat from they Popish fellow -pupil , who hate they as , and scorn they as heretic . the second class be british . of these I do not encounter half a dozen during the whole time of my attendance at the seminary ; they characteristic be clean but careless dress , ill - arrange hair ( compare with the tight and trim foreigner ) , erect carriage , flexible figure , white and taper hand , feature more irregular , but also more intellectual than those of the , grave and modest countenance , a general air of native propriety and decency ; by this last circumstance alone I could at a glance distinguish the daughter of Albion and nursling of from the foster - child of , the Protegee of : proud , too , be the aspect of these british girl ; at once envy and ridicule by they continental associate , they warde off insult with austere civility , and meet hate with mute disdain ; they eschew company - keep , and in the midst of number seem to dwell isolate . the teacher presid over this mixed multitude be three in number , all french -- they name Mdlle . , , and ; the two last be commonplace personage enough ; they look be ordinary , they manner be ordinary , they temper be ordinary , they thought , feelings , and views be all ordinary -- be I to write a chapter on the subject I could not elucidate it further . be somewhat more distinguished in appearance and deportment than and , but in character genuine parisian coquette , perfidious , mercenary , and dry - hear . a fourth maitresse I sometimes see who seem to come daily to teach needlework , or net , or lace - mende , or some such flimsy art ; but of she I never have more than a passing glimpse , as she sit in the Carre , with she frame and some dozen of the elder pupil about she , consequently I have no opportunity of study she character , or even of observe she person much ; the latter , I remark , have a very English air for a maitresse , otherwise it be not strike ; of character I should think ; she possess but little , as she pupil see constantly " en revolte " against she authority . she do not reside in the house ; she name , I think , be . Henri . Amidst this assemblage of all that be insignificant and defective , much that be vicious and repulsive ( by that last epithet many would have describe the two or three stiff , silent , decently behave , ill - dress british girl ) , the sensible , sagacious , affable directress shone like a steady star over a marsh full of - of '- lanthorn ; profoundly aware of she superiority , she derive a inward bliss from that consciousness which sustain she under all the care and responsibility inseparable from she position ; it keep she temper calm , she brow smooth , she manner tranquil . she like -- as who would not ?-- on enter the school - room , to feel that she sole presence suffice to diffuse that order and quiet which all the remonstrance , and even command , of she underling frequently fail to enforce ; she like to stand in comparison , or rather -- contrast , with those who surround she , and to know that in personal as well as mental advantage , she bear away the undisputed palm of preference --( the three teacher be all plain . ) she pupil she manage with such indulgence and address , take always on herself the office of recompenser and eulogist , and abandon to she subaltern every invidious task of blame and punishment , that they all regard she with deference , if not with affection ; she teacher do not love she , but they submit because they be she inferior in everything ; the various master who attend she school be each and all in some way or other under she influence ; over one she have acquire power by she skilful management of he bad temper ; over another by little attention to he petty caprice ; a third she have subdue by flattery ; a fourth -- a timid man -- she keep in awe by a sort of austere decision of mien ; I , she still watch , still try by the most ingenious test -- she rove round I , baffle , yet persever ; I believe she think I be like a smooth and bare precipice , which offer neither jutt stone nor tree - root , nor tuft of grass to aid the climber . now she flatter with exquisite tact , now she moralize , now she try how far I be accessible to mercenary motive , then she disport on the brink of affection --know that some man be win by weakness -- anon , she talk excellent sense , aware that other have the folly to admire judgment . I find it at once pleasant and easy to evade all these effort ; it be sweet , when she think I nearly win , to turn round and to smile in she very eye , half scornfully , and then to witness
witness she scarcely veil , though mute mortification . still she persever , and at last , I be bound to confess it , she finger , essay , prove every atom of the casket , touch its secret spring , and for a moment the lid spring open ; she lay she hand on the jewel within ; whether she steal and break it , or whether the lid shut again with a snap on she finger , read on , and you shall know . it happen that I come one day to give a lesson when I be indispose ; I have a bad cold and a cough ; two hour ' incessant talking leave I very hoarse and tired ; as I quit the schoolroom , and be pass along the corridor , I meet . ; she remark , with a anxious air , that I look very pale and tired . " yes , " I say , " I be fatigue ; " and then , with increase interest , she rejoin , " you shall not go away till you have have some refreshment . " she persuade I to step into the parlour , and be very kind and gentle while I stay . the next day she be kinder still ; she come herself into the class to see that the window be close , and that there be no dratch ; she exhort I with friendly earnestness not to over -exer myself ; when I go away , she give I she hand unasked , and I could not but , by a respectful and gentle pressure , that I be sensible of the favour , and grateful for it . my modest demonstration kind a little merry smile on she countenance ; I think she almost charme . during the remainder of the evening , my mind be full of impatience for the afternoon of the next day to arrive , that I might see she again . I be not disappoint , for she sit in the class during the whole of my subsequent lesson , and often look at I almost with affection . at four o'clock she accompany I out of the schoolroom , ask with solicitude after my health , then scold I sweetly because I speak too loud and give myself too much trouble ; I stop at the glass - door which lead into the garden , to hear she lecture to the end ; the door be open , it be a very fine day , and while I listen to the soothing reprimand , I look at the sunshine and flower , and feel very happy . the day -scholar begin to pour from the schoolroom into the passage . " will you go into the garden a minute or two , " ask she , " till they be go ? " I descend the step without answer , but I look back as much as to say -- " you will come with I ? " in another minute I and the directress be walking side by side down the alley border with fruit - tree , whose white blossom be then in full blow as well as they tender green leave . the sky be blue , the air still , the afternoon be full of brightness and fragrance . release from the stifling class , surround with flower and foliage , with a pleasing , smile , affable woman at my side -- how do I feel ? why , very enviably . it seem as if the romantic vision my imagination have suggest of this garden , while it be yet hide from I by the jealous board , be more than realize ; and , when a turn in the alley shut out the view of the house , and some tall shrub exclude 's mansion , and screen we momentarily from the other house , rise amphitheatre - like round this green spot , I give my arm to . , and lead she to a garden - chair , nestle under some lilac near . she sit down ; I take my place at she side . she go on talk to I with that ease which communicate ease , and , as I listen , a revelation dawn in my mind that I be on the brink of fall in love . the dinner - bell rang , both at she house and 's ; we be oblige to part ; I detain she a moment as she be move away . " I want something , " say I . " what ? " ask naively . " only a flower . " " gather it then -- or two , or twenty , if you like . " " no -- one will do - but you must gather it , and give it to I . " " what a caprice ! " she exclaim , but she raise herself on she tip - toe , and , pluck a beautiful branch of lilac , offer it to I with grace . I take it , and go away , satisfied for the present , and hopeful for the future . certainly that day be a lovely one , and it close in moonlight night of summer warmth and serenity . I remember this well ; for , have sit up late that evening , correct devoir , and feel weary and a little oppress with the closeness of my small room , I open the often - mention board window , whose board , however , I have persuade old to have remove since I have fill the post of professor in the pensionnat de demoiselle , as , from that time , it be no longer " inconvenient " for I to overlook my own pupil at
at they sport . I sit down in the window - seat , rest my arm on the sill , and lean out : above I be the clear-obscure of a cloudless night sky -- splendid moonlight subdue the tremulous sparkle of the star -- below lay the garden , vari with silvery lustre and deep shade , and all fresh with dew -- a grateful perfume exhal from the close blossom of the fruit - tree -- not a leaf stir , the night be breezeless . my window look directly down upon a certain walk of . 's , call " l'allee defendue , " so name because the pupil be forbidden to enter it on account of its proximity to the boy ' school . it be here that the lilac and laburnum grow especially thick ; this be the most sheltered nook in the enclosure , it be shrub screen the garden - chair where that afternoon I have sit with the young directress . I need not say that my thought be chiefly with she as I lean from the lattice , and let my eye roam , now over the walk and border of the garden , now along the many - window front of the house which rise white beyond the mass of foliage . I wonder in what part of the building be situate she apartment ; and a single light , shine through the persienne of one croisee , seem to direct I to it . " she watch late , " think I , " for it must be now near midnight . she be a fascinating little woman , " I continue in voiceless soliloquy ; " she image form a pleasant picture in memory ; I know she be not what the world call pretty -- no matter , there be harmony in she aspect , and I like it ; she brown hair , she blue eye , the freshness of she cheek , the whiteness of she neck , all suit my taste . then I respect she talent ; the idea of marry a doll or a fool be always abhorrent to I : I know that a pretty doll , a fair fool , might do well enough for the honeymoon ; but when passion cool , how dreadful to find a lump of wax and wood laid in my bosom , a half idiot clasp in my arm , and to remember that I have make of this my equal -- nay , my idol -- to know that I must pass the rest of my dreary life with a creature incapable of understand what I say , of appreciate what I think , or of sympathizing with what I feel ! " now , , " think I , " have tact , Caractere , judgment , discretion ; have she heart ? what a good , simple little smile play about she lip when she give I the branch of lilac ! I have think she crafty , dissembl , interest sometimes , it be true ; but may not much that look like cunning and dissimulation in she conduct be only the effort make by a bland temper to traverse quietly perplex difficulty ? and as to interest , she wish to make she way in the world , no doubt , and who can blame she ? even if she be truly deficient in sound principle , be it not rather she misfortune than she fault ? she have be bring up a : have she be bear a , and rear a Protestant , might she not have add straight integrity to all she other excellence ? Suppose she be to marry a english and Protestant husband , would she not , rational , sensible as she be , quickly acknowledge the superiority of right over expediency , honesty over policy ? it would be worth a man 's while to try the experiment ; to - morrow I will renew my observation . she know that I watch she : how calm she be under scrutiny ! it seem rather to gratify than annoy she . " here a strain of music stole in upon my monologue , and suspend it ; it be a bugle , very skilfully play , in the neighbourhood of the park , I think , or on the . so sweet be the tone , so subdue they effect at that hour , in the midst of silence and under the quiet reign of moonlight , I cease to think , that I might listen more intently . the strain retreate , it be sound wax fainter and be soon go ; my ear prepare to repose on the absolute hush of midnight once more . no . what yomurmu be that which , low , and yet near and approach nearer , frustrate the expectation of total silence ? it be some one conversing -- yes , evidently , a audible , though subdue speak in the garden immediately below I . another answer ; the first voice be that of a man , the second that of a woman ; and a man and a woman I see come slowly down the alley . they form be at first in shade , I could but discern a dusk outline of each , but a ray of moonlight meet they at the termination of the walk , when they be under my very nose , and reveal very plainly , very unequivocally , . , arm -in - arm , or hand - in - hand ( I forget which ) with my principal , confident , and counsellor , . and m . Pelet be say -- " a quand donc le jour des noce , ma bien - aimee ? " and . answer -- " , , yotu
yotu sai bien qu'il I serait impossible de I mare avant les vacance . " " , , , a whole quarter ! " exclaim the director . " how can I wait so long ?--i who be ready , even now , to expire at you foot with impatience ! " " ah ! if you die , the whole affair will be settle without any trouble about notary and contract ; I shall only have to order a slight mourning dress , which will be much sooner prepare than the nuptial trousseau . " " ! you laugh at the distress of one who love you so devotedly as I do : my torment be you sport ; you scruple not to stretch my soul on the rack of jealousy ; for , deny it as you will , I be certain you have cast encourage glance on that school - boy , Crimsworth ; he have presume to fall in love , which he da not have do unless you have give he room to hope . " " what do you say , ? do you say be in love with I ? " " over head and ears . " " have he tell you so ? " " no -- but I see it in he face : he blush whenever you name be mention . " a little laugh of exulting coquetry announce . 's gratification at this piece of intelligence ( which be a lie , by - the - by -- I have never be so far go as that , after all ) . m . proceed to ask what she intend to do with I , intimat pretty plainly , and not very gallantly , that it be nonsense for she to think of take such a " blanc - bec " as a husband , since she must be at least ten year older than I ( be she then thirty - two ? I should not have think it ) . I hear she disclaim any intention on the subject -- the director , however , still press she to give a definite answer . " , " say she , " you be jealous , " and still she laugh ; then , as if suddenly recollect that this coquetry be not consistent with the character for modest dignity she wish to establish , she proceed , in a demure voice : " , my dear Francois , I will not deny that this young may have make some attempt to ingratiate himself with I ; but , so far from give he any encouragement , I have always treat he with as much reserve as it be possible to combine with civility ; affiance as I be to you , I would give no man false hope ; believe I , dear friend . " utter murmur of distrust -- so I judge , at least , from she reply . " what folly ! how could I prefer a unknown foreigner to you ? and then -- not to flatter you vanity -- could not bear comparison with you either physically or mentally ; he be not a handsome man at all ; some may call he gentleman - like and intelligent - look , but for my part -- " the rest of the sentence be lose in the distance , as the pair , rise from the chair in which they have be seate , move away . I wait they return , but soon the opening and shutting of a door inform I that they have re-enter the house ; I listen a little longer , all be perfectly still ; I listen more than a hour -- at last I hear m . Pelet come in and ascend to he chamber . Glance once more towards the long front of the garden - house , I perceive that its solitary light be at length extinguish ; so , for a time , be my faith in love and friendship . I go to be , but something feverish and fiery have get into my vein which prevent I from sleepe much that night . chapter XIII . next morning I rise with the dawn , and have dress myself and stand half - a - hour , my elbow lean on the chest of drawer , consider what mean I should adopt to restore my spirits , fag with sleeplessness , to they ordinary tone -- for I have no intention of get up a scene with , reproach he with perfidy , send he a challenge , or perform other gambadoe of the sort -- I hit at last on the expedient of walk out in the cool of the morning to a neighbour establishment of bath , and treat myself to a bracing plunge . the remedy produce the desire effect . I come back at seven o'clock steady and invigorate , and be able to greet , when he enter to breakfast , with a unchanged and tranquil countenance ; even a cordial offering of the hand and the flatter appellation of " mon fils , " pronounce in that caresse tone with which have , of late day especially , be accustom to address I , do not elicit any external sign of the feeling which , though subdue , still glow at my heart . not that I nurse vengeance -- no ; but the sense of insult and treachery live in I like a kindling , though as yet smother coal . know I be not by nature vindictive ; I would not hurt a man because I can no longer trust or like he ; but neither my reason nor feeling be of the vacillating order -- they be not of that sand - like sort where impressions , if soon make , be
be as soon efface . once convince that my friend 's disposition be incompatible with my own , once assure that he be indelibly stain with certain defects obnoxious to my principle , and I dissolve the connection . I do so with . as to , the discovery be yet new ; should I act thus with he ? it be the question I place before my mind as I stir my cup of coffee with a half - pistolet ( we never have spoon ) , meantime be seat opposite , he pallid face look as know and more haggard than usual , he blue eye turn , now sternly on he boy and usher , and now graciously on I . " circumstance must guide I , " say I ; and meet 's false glance and insinuat smile , I thank heaven that I have last night open my window and read by the light of a full moon the true meaning of that guileful countenance . I feel half he master , because the reality of he nature be now know to I ; smile and flatter as he would , I see he soul lurk behind he smile , and hear in every one of he smooth phrasis a voice interpret they treacherous import . but ? of course she defection have cut I to the quick ? that stint ; must have go too deep for any consolation of philosophy to be available in cure its smart ? not at all . the night fever over , I look about for balm to that wound also , and find some nearer home than at . be my physician ; she begin by prove that the prize I have miss be of little value : she admit that , physically , might have suit I , but affir that we soul be not in harmony , and that discord must have result from the union of she mind with mine . she then insist on the suppression of all repin , and command I rather to rejoice that I have escape a snare . she medicament do I good . I feel its strengthen effect when I meet the directress the next day ; its stringent operation on the nerve suffer no trembling , no faltering ; it enable I to face she with firmness , to pass she with ease . she have hold out she hand to I -- that I do not choose to see . she have greet I with a charming smile -- it fall on my heart like light on stone . I pass on to the estrade , she follow I ; she eye , fasten on my face , demand of every feature the meaning of my change and careless manner . " I will give she a answer , " think I ; and , meet she gaze full , arrest , fix she glance , I shoot into she eye , from my own , a look , where there be no respect , no love , no tenderness , no gallantry ; where the strictest analysis could detect nothing but scorn , hardihood , irony . I make she bear it , and feel it ; she steady countenance do not change , but she colour rose , and she approach I as if fascinate . she step on to the estrade , and stand close by my side ; she have nothing to say . I would not relieve she embarrassment , and negligently turn over the leaf of a book . " I hope you feel quite recovered to - day , " at last she say , in a low tone . " and I , mademoiselle , hope that you take no cold last night in consequence of you late walk in the garden . " quick enough of comprehension , she understand I directly ; she face become a little blanched -- a very little -- but no muscle in she rather mark feature move ; and , calm and self - possess , she retire from the estrade , take she seat quietly at a little distance , and occupy herself with net a purse . I proceed to give my lesson ; it be a " composition , " i.e. , I dictate certain general question , of which the pupil be to compose the answer from memory , access to book be forbidden . . , , , & c. , be ponder over the string of rather abstruse grammatical interrogatory I have propound , I be at liberty to employ the vacant half hour in further observe the directress herself . the green silk purse be progress fast in she hand ; she eye be bend upon it ; she attitude , as she sit netting within two yard of I , be still yet guard ; in she whole person be express at once , and with equal clearness , vigilance and repose -- a rare union ! look at she , I be force , as I have often be before , to offer she good sense , she wondrous self - control , the tribute of involuntary admiration . she have feel that I have withdraw from she my esteem ; she have see contempt and coldness in my eye , and to she , who covet the approbation of all around she , who thirst after universal good opinion , such discovery must have be a acute wound . I have witness it be effect in the momentary pallor of she cheek - cheek unused to vary ; yet how quickly , by dint of self - control , have she recover she composure ! with what quiet dignity she now sit , almost at my side , sustain by she sound and vigorous sense ; no trembling in she somewhat
somewhat lengthen , though shrewd upper lip , no coward shame on she austere forehead ! " there be metal there , " I say , as I gaze . " would that there be fire also , liive ardou to make the steel glow -- then I could love she . " presently I discover that she know I be watch she , for she stir not , she lift not she crafty eyelid ; she have glance down from she netting to she small foot , pee from the soft fold of she purple merino gow ; thence she eye revert to she hand , ivory white , with a bright garnet ring on the forefinger , and a light frill of lace round the wrist ; with a scarcely perceptible movement she turn she head , cause she nut - brown curl to wave gracefully . in these slight sign I read that the wish of she heart , the design of she brain , be to lure back the game she have scared . a little incident give she the opportunity of address I again . while all be silence in the class -- silence , but for the rustling of copy - book and the travelling of pens over they page -- a leaf of the large folding - door , open from the hall , unclosed , admit a pupil who , after make a hasty obeisance , ensconce herself with some appearance of trepidation , probably occasion by she entering so late , in a vacant seat at the desk nearest the door . be seat , she proceed , still with a air of hurry and embarrassment , to open she caba , to take out she book ; and , while I be wait for she to look up , in order to make out she identity -- for , shortsight as I be , I have not recognize she at she entrance -- . reuter , leave she chair , approach the estrade . " , " say she , in a whisper : for when the schoolroom be silent , the directress always move with velvet tread , and speak in the most subdued key , enforce order and stillness fully as much by example as precept : " , that young person , who have just enter , wish to have the advantage of take lesson with you in ; she be not a pupil of the house ; she be , indeed , in one sense , a teacher , for she give instruction in lace - mending , and in little variety of ornamental needle - work . she very properly propose to qualify herself for a higher department of education , and have ask permission to attend you lesson , in order to perfect she knowledge of , in which language she have , I believe , already make some progress ; of course it be my wish to aid she in a effort so praiseworthy ; you will permit she then to benefit by you instruction -- n'est ce pa , monsieur ? " and . 's eye be raise to mine with a look at once naive , benign , and beseech . I reply , " of course , " very laconically , almost abruptly . " another word , " she say , with softness : " . Henri have not receive a regular education ; perhaps she natural talents be not of the highest order : but I can assure you of the excellence of she intention , and even of the amiability of she disposition . yoMonsieu will then , I be sure , have the goodness to be considerate with she at first , and not expose she backwardness , she inevitable deficiencies , before the young lady , who , in a sense , be she pupil . will favour I by attend to this hint ? " I nod . she continue with subdue earnestness -- " I , monsieur , if I venture to add that what I have just say be of importance to the poor girl ; she already experience great difficulty in impress these giddy young thing with a due degree of deference for she authority , and should that difficulty be increase by new discoveries of she incapacity , she might find she position in my establishment too painful to be retain ; a circumstance I should much regret for she sake , as she can ill afford to lose the profit of she occupation here . " . possess marvellous tact ; but tact the most exclusive , unsupport by sincerity , will sometimes fail of its effect ; thus , on this occasion , the longer she preach about the necessity of be indulgent to the governess pupil , the more impatient I feel as I listen . I discern so clearly that while she profess motive be a wish to aid the dull , though well - mean . Henri , she real one be no other than a design to impress I with a idea of she own exalt goodness and tender considerateness ; so have again hastily nod assent to she remark , I obviate they renewal by suddenly demand the composition , in a sharp accent , and step from the estrade , I proceed to collect they . as I pass the governess - pupil , I say to she -- " you have come in too late to receive a lesson to - day ; try to be more punctual next time . " I be behind she , and could not read in she face the effect of my not very civil speech . probably I should not have troublead myself to do so , have I be full in front ; but I observe that she immediately begin to slip she book
book into she caba again ; and , presently , after I have return to the estrade , while I be arrange the mass of composition , I hear the folding - door again open and close ; and , on look up , I perceive she place vacant . I think to myself , " she will consider she first attempt at take a lesson in something of a failure ; " and I wonder whether she have depart in the sulk , or whether stupidity have induce she to take my word too literally , or , finally , whether my irritable tone have woun she feeling . the last notion I dismiss almost as soon as I have conceive it , for not have see any appearance of sensitiveness in any human face since my arrival in , I have begin to regard it almost as a fabulous quality . whether she physiognomy announce it I could not tell , for she speedy exit have allow I no time to ascertain the circumstance . I have , indeed , on two or three previous occasion , catch a passing view of she ( as I believe have be mention before ) ; but I have never stop to scrutinize either she face or person , and have but the most vague idea of she general appearance . just as I have finish roll up the composition , the four o'clock bell ring ; with my accustomed alertness in obey that signal , I grasp my hat and evacuate the premise . . if I be punctual in quit . 's domicile , I be at least equally punctual in arrive there ; I come the next day at five minute before two , and on reach the schoolroom door , before I open it , I hear a rapid , gabbl sound , which warn I that the " priere du midi " be not yet conclude . I wait the termination thereon ; it would have be impious to intrude my heretical presence during its progress . how the repeater of the prayer do cackle and splutter ! I never before or since hear language enounce with such steam - engine haste . " qui etes au ciel " go off like a shot ; then follow a address to " vierge celeste , reine des ange , maison d'or , tour d' ivoire ! " and then a invocation to the saint of the day ; and then down they all sit , and the solemn ( ? ) rite be over ; and I enter , flinge the door wide and strid in fast , as it be my will not to do now ; for I have find that in enter with aplomb , and mount the estrade with emphasis , consist the grand secret of ensure immediate silence . the folding - door between the two class , open for the prayer , be instantly close ; a maitresse , work - box in hand , take she seat at she appropriate desk ; the pupil sit still with they pens and book before they ; my three beauty in the van , now well humble by a demeanour of consistent coolness , sit erect with they hand fold quietly on they knee ; they have give up giggling and whisper to each other , and no longer venture to utter pert speech in my presence ; they now only talk to I occasionally with they eye , by means of which organd they could still , however , say very audacious and coquettish thing . have affection , goodness , modesty , real talent , ever employ those bright orb as interpreter , I do not think I could have refrain from give a kind and encourage , perhaps a ardent reply now and then ; but as it be , I find pleasure in answer the glance of vanity with the gaze of stoicism . youthful , fair , brilliant , as be many of my pupil , I can truly say that in I they never see any other bearing than such as a austere , though just guardian , might have observe towards they . if any doubt the accuracy of this assertion , as inferr more conscientious self - denial or - like self - control than they feel dispose to give I credit for , let they take into consideration the follow circumstance , which , while detract from my merit , justify my veracity . know , of incredulous reader ! that a master stand in a somewhat different relation towards a pretty , light - head , probably ignorant girl , to that occupy by a partner at a ball , or a gallant on the promenade . a professor do not meet he pupil to see she dress in satin and muslin , with hair perfume and curl , neck scarcely shade by aerial lace , round white arm circle with bracelet , foot dress for the gliding dance . it be not he business to whirl she through the waltz , to feed she with compliment , to heighten she beauty by the flush of gratified vanity . neither do he encounter she on the smooth - roll , tree shade , in the green and sunny park , whither she repair clad in she become walking dress , she scarf throw with over she shoulders , she little bonnet scarcely screen she curl , the red rise under its brim add a new tint to the softer rise on she cheek ; she face and eye , too , illumin with smile , perhaps as transient as the sunshine of the gala - day , but also quite as brilliant ; it be not he office to walk by she side , to listen to she lively chat , to carry she
she parasol , scarcely larger than a broad green leaf , to lead in a ribbon she spaniel or italian greyhound . no : he find she in the schoolroom , plainly dress , with book before she . Ow to she education or she nature book be to she a nuisance , and she open they with aversion , yet she teacher must instil into she mind the contents of these book ; that mind resist the admission of grave information , it recoil , it grow restive , sullen temper be show , disfigur frown spoil the symmetry of the face , sometimes coarse gesture banish grace from the deportment , while mutter expression , redolent of native and ineradicable vulgarity , desecrate the sweetness of the voice . where the temperament be serene though the intellect be sluggish , a unconquerable dullness oppose every effort to instruct . where there be cunning but not energy , dissimulation , falsehand , a thousand scheme and trick be put in play to evade the necessity of application ; in short , to the tutor , female youth , female charms be like tapestry hangings , of which the wrong side be continually turn towards he ; and even when he see the smooth , neat external surface he so well know what knot , long stitch , and jag end be behind that he have scarce a temptation to admire too fondly the seemly form and bright colour expose to general view . we liking be regulate by we circumstance . the artist prefer a hilly country because it be picturesque ; the engineer a flat one because it be convenient ; the man of pleasure like what he call " a fine woman " -- she suit he ; the fashionable young gentleman admire the fashionable young lady -- she be of he kind ; the toil - worn , fag , probably irritable tutor , blind almost to beauty , insensible to air and graces , glory chiefly in certain mental quality : application , love of knowledge , natural capacity , docility , truthfulness , gratefulness , be the charms that attract he notice and win he regard . these he seek , but seldom meet ; these , if by chance he find , he would fain retain for ever , and when separation deprive he of they he feel as if some ruthless hand have snatch from he he only ewe-lamb . such be the case , and the case it be , my reader will agree with I that there be nothing either very meritorious or very marvellous in the integrity and moderation of my conduct at . 's demoiselle . my first business this afternoon consist in read the list of place for the month , determine by the relative correctness of the composition give the preceding day . the list be head , as usual , by the name of , that plain , quiet little girl I have describe before as be at once the best and ugliest pupil in the establishment ; the second place have fall to the lot of a certain , a diminutive , sharp - feature , and parchment - skinn creature of quick wit , frail conscience , and indurate feeling ; a lawyer - like thing , of whom I use to say that , have she be a boy , she would have make a model of a unprincipled , clever attorney . then come , the proud beauty , the of the school , whom six long year of drilling in the simple grammar of the language have compelle , despite the stiff phlegm of she intellect , to acquire a mechanical acquaintance with most of its rule . no smile , no trace of pleasure or satisfaction appear in 's nun -like and passive face as she hear she name read first . I always feel sadden by the sight of that poor girl 's absolute quiescence on all occasion , and it be my custom to look at she , to address she , as seldom as possible ; she extreme docility , she assiduous perseverance , would have recommend she warmly to my good opinion ; she modesty , she intelligence , would have induce I to feel most kindly -- most affectionately towards she , notwithstand the almost ghastly plainness of she feature , the disproportion of she form , the corpse - like lack of animation in she countenance , have I not be aware that every friendly word , every kindly action , would be report by she to she confessor , and by he misinterpret and poisone . once I lay my hand on she head , in token of approbation ; I think be go to smile , she dim eye almost kindle ; but , presently , she shrank from I ; I be a man and a heretic ; she , poor child ! a destin nun and devote : thus a four - fold wall of separation divide she mind from mine . a pert smirk , and a hard glance of triumph , be 's method of testify she gratification ; look sullen and envious -- she have hope to be first . and exchange a reckless grimace on hear they name read out somewhere near the bottom of the list ; the brand of mental inferiority be consider by they as no disgrace , they hope for the future be base solely on they personal attraction . this affair arrange , the regular lesson follow . during a brief interval , employ by the pupil in rule they book , my eye , range carelessly over the bench , observe , for the first time , that the farthest seat in the farthest row -- a seat usually vacant -- be again fill by the new scholar , the
the Mdlle . Henri so ostentatiously recommend to I by the directress . to -day I have on my spectacle ; she appearance , therefore , be clear to I at the first glance ; I have not to puzzle over it . she look young ; yet , have I be require to name she exact age , I should have be somewhat nonpluss ; the slightness of she figure might have suite seventeen ; a certain anxious and pre-occupied expression of face see the indication of riper year . she be dress , like all the rest , in a dark stuff gown and a white collar ; she feature be dissimilar to any there , not so reound , more define , yet scarcely regular . the shape of she head too be different , the superior part more develop , the base considerably less . I feel assure , at first sight , that she be not a belgian ; she complexion , she countenance , she lineament , she figure , be all distinct from theirs , and , evidently , the type of another race -- of a race less gift with fullness of flesh and plenitude of blood ; less jocund , material , unthinking . when I first cast my eye on she , she sit look fixedly down , she ching rest on she hand , and she do not change she attitude till I commence the lesson . none of the belgian girl would have retain one position , and that a reflective one , for the same length of time . yet , have intimate that she appearance be peculiar , as be unlike that of she Flemish companion , I have little more to say respect it ; I can pronounce no encomium on she beauty , for she be not beautiful ; nor offer condolence on she plainness , for neither be she plain ; a careworn character of forehead , and a correspond moulding of the mouth , strike I with a sentiment resembling surprise , but these trait would probably have pass unnoticed by any less crotchety observer . now , reader , though I have spend more than a page in describe . Henri , I know well enough that I have leave on you mind 's eye no distinct picture of she ; I have not paint she complexion , nor she eye , nor she hair , nor even draw the outline of she shape . you can not tell whether she nose be aquiline or retrousse , whether she ching be long or short , she face square or oval ; nor could I the first day , and it be not my intention to communicate to you at once a knowledge I myself gain by little and little . I give a short exercise : which they all write down . I see the new pupil be puzzl at first with the novelty of the form and language ; once or twice she look at I with a sort of painful solicitude , as not comprehend at all what I mean ; then she be not ready when the other be , she could not write she phrase so fast as they do ; I would not help she , I go on relentless . she look at I ; she eye say most plainly , " I can not follow you . " I disregarde the appeal , and , carelessly lean back in my chair , glance from time to time with a Nonchal Ant air out of the window , I dictate a little faster . on look towards she again , I perceive she face cloude with embarrassment , but she be still write on most diligently ; I pause a few seconds ; she employ the interval in hurriedly re-peruse what she have write , and shame and discomfiture be apparent in she countenance ; she evidently find she have make great nonsense of it . in ten minute more the dictation be complete , and , have allow a brief space in which to correct it , I take they book ; it be with a reluctant hand Mdlle . Henri give up hers , but , have once yield it to my possession , she compose she anxious face , as if , for the present she have resolve to dismiss regret , and have make up she mind to be think unprecedentedly stupid . Glance over she exercise , I find that several line have be omit , but what be write contain very few fault ; I instantly inscribe " " at the bottom of the page , and return it to she ; she smile , at first incredulously , then as if reassure , but do not lift she eye ; she could look at I , it seem , when perplex and bewilder , but not when gratify ; I think that scarcely fair . . some time elapse before I again give a lesson in the first class ; the holiday of occupy three day , and on the fourth it be the turn of the second division to receive my instruction . as i make the transit of the , I observe , as usual , the band of sewer surround . Henri ; there be only about a dozen of they , but they make as much noise as might have suffice for fifty ; they see very little under she control ; three or four at once assail she with importunate requirement ; she look harassed , she demand silence , but in vain . she see I , and I read in she eye pain that a stranger should witness the insubordination of she pupil ; she seem to entreat order -- she prayer be useless ; then I remark that she compress she
she lip and contract she brow ; and she countenance , if I read it correctly , say -- " I have do my best ; I seem to merit blame notwithstanding ; blame I then who will . " I pass on ; as I close the school - room door , I hear she say , suddenly and sharply , address one of the eldest and most turbulent of the lot -- " , ask I no question , and request of I no assistance , for a week to come ; during that space of time I will neither speak to you nor help you . " the word be uttere with emphasis -- nay , with vehemence -- and a comparative silence follow ; whether the calm be permanent , I know not ; two door now close between I and the Carre . next day be appropriate to the first class ; on my arrival , I find the directress seate , as usual , in a chair between the two estrade , and before she be stand . Henri , in a attitude ( as it seem to I ) of somewhat reluctant attention . the directress be knitt and talk at the same time . Amidst the hum of a large school - room , it be easy so to speak in the ear of one person , as to be hear by that person alone , and it be thus Mdlle . parley with she teacher . the face of the latter be a little flushed , not a little troubled ; there be vexation in it , whence result I know not , for the directress look very placid indeed ; she could not be scold in such gentle whisper , and with so equable a mien ; no , it be presently prove that she discourse have be of the most friendly tendency , for I hear the closing word -- " C'est assez , ma bonne amie ; a present je ne veux pa vous retenir davantage . " without reply , . Henri turn away ; dissatisfaction be plainly evinced in she face , and a smile , slight and brief , but bitter , distrustful , and , I think , scornful , curl she lip as she take she place in the class ; it be a secret , involuntary smile , which last but a second ; a air of depression succeed , chase away presently by one of attention and interest , when I give the word for all the pupil to take they reading - book . in general I hate the reading - lesson , it be such a torture to the ear to listen to they uncouth mouthing of my native tongue , and no effort of example or precept on my part ever seem to effect the slightest improvement in they accent . to -day , each in she appropriate key , lisp , stutter , mumble , and jabber as usual ; about fifteen have rack I in turn , and my auricular nerve be expect with resignation the discord of the sixteenth , when a full , though low voice , read out , in clear correct . " on he way to , the king be meet by a woman , call herself a prophetess ; she stand at the side of the ferry by which he be about to travel to the north , and cry with a loud voice , ' my lord the king , if you pass this water you will never return again alive !' " --( Vide the History of Scotland ) . I look up in amazement ; the voice be a voice of ; the accent be pure and silvery ; it only want firmness , and assurance , to be the counterpart of what any well - educated lady in or might have enounce , yet the speaker or reader be no other than . Henri , in whose grave , joyless face I see no mark of consciousness that she have perform any extraordinary feat . no one else evince surprise either . . knit away assiduously ; I be aware , however , that at the conclusion of the paragraph , she have lift she eyelid and honoure I with a glance sideway ; she do not know the full excellency of the teacher 's style of reading , but she perceive that she accent be not that of the other , and want to discover what I think ; I mask my visage with indifference , and order the next girl to proceed . when the lesson be over , I take advantage of the confusion cause by break up , to approach . Henri ; she be stand near the window and retire as I advance ; she think I want to look out , and do not imagine that I could have anything to say to she . I take she exercise - book ; out of she hand ; as I turn over the leave I address she :-- " you have have lesson in before ? " I ask . " no , sir . " " no ! you read it well ; you have be in ? " " oh , no ! " with some animation . " you have be in English family ? " still the answer be " no . " here my eye , rest on the flyleaf of the book , see write , " . " " you name ? " I ask " yes , sir . " my interrogation be cut short ; I hear a little rustling behind I , and close at my back be the directress , professe to be examine the interior of a desk . " , " say she , look up and address the
the teacher , " will you have the goodness to go and stand in the corridor , while the young lady be put on they thing , and try to keep some order ? " . Henri obey . " what splendo weather ! " observe the directress cheerfully , glance at the same time from the window . I assent and be withdraw . " what of you new pupil , monsieur ? " continue she , follow my retreating step . " be she likely to make progress in ? " " indeed I can hardly judge . she possess a pretty good accent ; of she real knowledge of the language I have as yet have no opportunity of form a opinion . " " and she natural capacity , monsieur ? I have have my fear about that : can you relieve I by a assurance at least of its average power ? " " I see no reason to doubt it be average power , mademoiselle , but really I scarcely know she , and have not have time to study the calibre of she capacity . I wish you a very good afternoon . " she still pursue I . " you will observe , monsieur , and tell I what you think ; I could so much better rely on you opinion than on my own ; woman can not judge of these thing as man can , and , excuse my pertinacity , monsieur , but it be natural I should feel interested about this poor little girl ( pauvre petite ) ; she have scarcely any relation , she own effort be all she have to look to , she acquirement must be she sole fortune ; she present position have once be mine , or nearly so ; it be then but natural I should sympathize with she ; and sometimes when I see the difficulty she have in manage pupil , I reel quite chagrined . I doubt not she do she best , she intention be excellent ; but , monsieur , she want tact and firmness . I have talk to she on the subject , but I be not fluent , and probably do not express myself with clearness ; she never appear to comprehend I . now , would you occasionally , when you see a opportunity , slip in a word of advice to she on the subject ; man have so much more influence than woman have -- they argue so much more logically than we do ; and you , monsieur , in particular , have so paramount a power of make yourself obey ; a word of advice from you could not but do she good ; even if she be sullen and headstrong ( which I hope she be not ) , she would scarcely refuse to listen to you ; for my own part , I can truly say that I never attend one of you lesson without derive benefit from witnesse you management of the pupil . the other master be a constant source of anxiety to I ; they can not impress the young lady with sentiment of respect , nor restrain the levity natural to youth : in you , monsieur , I feel the most absolute confidence ; try then to put this poor child into the way of control we giddy , high - spirited Brabantoise . but , monsieur , I would add one word more ; do not alarm she AMOUR Propre ; beware of inflict a wound there . I reluctantly admit that in that particular she be blameably -- some would say ridiculously -- susceptible . I fear I have touch this sore point inadvertently , and she can not get over it . " during the greater part of this harangue my hand be on the lock of the outer door ; I now turn it . " revoir , mademoiselle , " say I , and I escape . I see the directress 's stock of word be yet far from exhaust . she look after I , she would fain have detain I longer . she manner towards I have be alter ever since i have begin to treat she with hardness and indifference : she almost cringe to I on every occasion ; she consult my countenance incessantly , and beset I with innumerable little officious attention . Servility create despotism . this slavish homage , instead of softene my heart , only pamper whatever be stern and exact in its mood . the very circumstance of she hover round I like a fascinated bird , seem to transform I into a rigid pillar of stone ; she flattery irritate my scorn , she blandishment confirm my reserve . at time I wonder what she mean by give herself such trouble to win I , when the more profitable Pelet be already in she net , and when , too , she be aware that I possess she secret , for I have not scruple to tell she as much : but the fact be that as it be she nature to doubt the reality and under - value the worth of modesty , affection , disinterestedness -- to regard these qualitie as foible of character -- so it be equally she tendency to consider pride , hardness , selfishness , as proof of strength . she would trample on the neck of humility , she would kneel at the foot of disdain ; she would meet tenderness with secret contempt , indifference she would woo with ceaseless assiduity . Benevolence , devotedness , enthusiasm , be she antipathy ; for dissimulation and self - interest she have a preference -- they be real wisdom in she eye ; moral and physical degradation , mental and bodily inferiority , she regard with indulgence ; they be foil
foil capable of be turn to good account as set - offs for she own endowment . to violence , injustice , tyranny , she succumb -- they be she natural master ; she have no propensity to hate , no impulse to resist they ; the indignation they behest awake in some heart be unknown in hers . from all this it result that the false and selfish call she wise , the vulgar and debase term she charitable , the insolent and unjust dub she amiable , the conscientious and benevolent generally at first accept as valid she claim to be consider one of themselves ; but ere long the plating of pretension wear off , the real material appear below , and they lay she aside as a deception . . in the course of another fortnight I have see sufficient of , to enable I to form a more definite opinion of she character . I find she possess in a somewhat remarkable degree of at least two good point , viz. , perseverance and a sense of duty ; I find she be really capable of apply to study , of contending with difficulty . at first I offer she the same help which I have always find it necessary to confer on the other ; I begin with unloosing for she each knotty point , but I soon discover that such help be regard by my new pupil as degrading ; she recoil from it with a certain proud impatience . Hereupon I appoint she long lesson , and leave she to solve alone any perplexity they might present . she set to the task with serious ardour , and have quickly accomplish one labour , eagerly demand more . so much for she perseverance ; as to she sense of duty , it evince itself thus : she like to learn , but hat to teach ; she progress as a pupil depend upon herself , and I see that on herself she could calculate with certainty ; she success as a teacher rest partly , perhaps chiefly , upon the will of other ; it cost she a most painful effort to enter into conflict with this foreign will , to endeaavor to bend it into subjection to she own ; for in what regard people in general the action of she will be imped by many scruple ; it be as unembarrassed as strong where she own affair be concerned , and to it she could at any time subject she inclination , if that inclination go counter to she conviction of right ; yet when call upon to wrestle with the propensity , the habit , the fault of other , of child especially , who be deaf to reason , and , for the most part , insensate to persuasion , she will sometimes almost refuse to act ; then come in the sense of duty , and force the reluctant will into operation . a wasteful expense of energy and labou be frequently the consequence ; Frances toil for and with she pupil like a drudge , but it be long ere she conscientious exertion be reward by anything like docility on they part , because they see that they have power over she , inasmuch as by resist she painful attempt to convince , persuade , control -- by force she to the employment of coercive measure -- they could inflict upon she exquisite suffer . human being --human child especially -- seldom deny themselves the pleasure of exercise a power which they be conscious of possessing , even though that power consist only in a capacity to make other wretch ; a pupil whose sensation be duller than those of he instructor , while he nerve be tougher and he bodily strength perhaps greater , have a immense advantage over that instructor , and he will generally use it relentlessly , because the very young , very healthy , very thoughtless , know neither how to sympathize nor how to spare . Frances , I fear , suffer much ; a continual weight seem to oppress she spirits ; I have say she do not live in the house , and whether in she own abode , wherever that might be , she wear the same preoccupy , unsmiling , sorrowfully resolve air that always shade she feature under the roof of . , I could not tell . one day I give , as a devoir , the trite little anecdote of Alfred ten cake in the herdsman 's hut , to be related with amplification . a singular affair most of the pupil make of it ; brevity be what they have chiefly study ; the majority of the narrative be perfectly unintelligible ; those of and alone pretend to anything like sense and connection . , indeed , have hit , upon a clever expedient for at once ensure accuracy and save trouble ; she have obtain access somehow to a abridge history of , and have copy the anecdote out fair . I write on the margin of she production " and deceitful , " and then tore it down the middle . last in the pile of single - leave devoir , I find one of several sheet , neatly write out and stitch together ; I know the hand , and scarcely need the evidence of the signature " " to confirm my conjecture as to the writer 's identity . night be my usual time for correcting devoir , and my own room the usual scene of such task -- task most onerous hitherto ; and it seem strange to I to feel rise within I a incipient sense of interest , as I snuff the candle and address myself to the perusal of the poor teacher 's manuscript . " now , " think I , " I shall
shall see a glimpse of what she really be ; I shall get a idea of the nature and extent of she power ; not that she can be expect to express herself well in a foreign tongue , but still , if she have any mind , here will be a reflection of it . " the narrative commence by a description of a 's hut , situate within the confines of a great , leafless , winter forest ; it represent a evening in ; flake of snow be fall , and the herdsman foretold a heavy storm ; he summon he wife to aid he in collect they flock , roam far away on the pastoral bank of the Thone ; he warn she that it will be late ere they return . the good woman be reluctant to quit she occupation of baking cake for the evening meal ; but acknowledge the primary importance of secure the herd and flock , she put on she sheep - skin mantle ; and , address a stranger who rest half recline on a bed of rush near the hearth , bids he mind the bread till she return . " take care , young man , " she continue , " that you fasten the door well after we ; and , above all , open to none in we absence ; whatever sound you hear , stir not , and look not out . the night will soon fall ; this forest be most wild and lonely ; strange noise be often hear therein after sunset ; wolf haunt these glade , and Danish warrior infest the country ; worse thing be talk of ; you might chance to hear , as it be , a child cry , and on open the door to afford it succour , a greet black bull , or a shadowy goblin dog , might rush over the threshold ; or , more awful still , if something flap , as with wing , against the lattice , and then a raven or a white dove fly in and settle on the hearth , such a visitor would be a sure sign of misfortune to the house ; therefore , heed my advice , and lift the latchet for nothing . " she husband call she away , both depart . the stranger , leave alone , listen awhile to the muffled snow - wind , the remote , swoll sound of the river , and then he speak . " it be , " say he , " I mark the date ; here I sit alone on a rude couch of rush , shelter by the thatch of a herdsman 's hut ; I , whose inheritance be a kingdom , owe my night 's harbourage to a poor serf ; my throne be usur , my crown press the brow of a invader ; I have no friend ; my troops wander break in the hill of Wale ; reckless robber spoil my country ; my subject lie prostrate , they breast crush by the heel of the brutal . Fate ! thou hast do thy worst , and now thou standest before I rest thy hand on thy blunt blade . ay ; I see thine eye confro not mine and demand why I still live , why I still hope . Pagan demon , I credit not thine omnipotence , and so can not succumb to thy power . my , whose , as on this night , take on the form of man , and for man vouchsaf to suffer and bleed , control thy hand , and without he behest thou canst not strike a stroke . my be sinless , eternal , all - wise -- in be my trust ; and though stripp and crush by thee -- though naked , desolate , void of resource -- I do not despair , I can not despair : be the lance of now wet with my blood , I should not despair . I watch , I toil , I hope , I pray ; , in he own time , will aid . " I need not continue the quotation ; the whole devoir be in the same strain . there be error of orthography , there be foreign idiom , there be some fault of construction , there be verb irregular transform into verb regular ; it be mostly make up , as the above example show , of short and somewhat rude sentence , and the style stand in great need of polish and sustain dignity ; yet such as it be , I have hithertoo see nothing like it in the course of my professorial experience . the girl 's mind have conceive a picture of the hut , of the two peasant , of the crownless king ; she have imagine the wintry forest , she have recal the old ghost - legend , she have appreciate 's courage under calamity , she have remember he education , and have show he , with the root confidence of those primitive day , rely on the scriptural for aid against the mythological destiny . this she have do without a hint from I : I have give the subject , but not say a word about the manner of treat it . " I will find , or make , a opportunity of speak to she , " I say to myself as I roll the devoir up ; " I will learn what she have of in she besides the name of ; she be no novice in the language , that be evident , yet she tell I she have neither be in , nor take lesson in , nor live in family . " in the course of my next lesson , I make a report of
of the other devoir , deal out praise and blame in very small retail parcel , accord to my custom , for there be no use in blame severely , and high encomium be rarely merit . I say nothing of . 's exercise , and , spectacle on nose , I endeavoure to decipher in she countenance she sentiment at the omission . I want to find out whether in she exist a consciousness of she own talents . " if she think she do a clever thing in composing that devoir , she will now look mortified , " think I . grave as usual , almost sombre , be she face ; as usual , she eye be fasten on the cahier open before she ; there be something , I think , of expectation in she attitude , as I conclude a brief review of the last devoir , and when , cast it from I and rub my hand , I bay they take they grammar , some slight change do pass over she air and mien , as though she now relinquish a faint prospect of pleasant excitement ; she have be wait for something to be discuss in which she have a degree of interest ; the discussion be not to come on , so expectation sank back , shrunk and sad , but attention , promptly fill up the void , repair in a moment the transient collapse of feature ; still , I feel , rather than saw , during the whole course of the lesson , that a hope have be wrench from she , and that if she do not show distress , it be because she would not . at four o'clock , when the bell rang and the room be in immediate tumult , instead of take my hat and start from the estrade , I sit still a moment . I look at , she be put she book into she caba ; have fasten the button , she raise she head ; encounter my eye , she make a quiet , respectful obeisance , as bid good afternoon , and be turn to depart :-- " come here , " say I , lift my finger at the same time . she hesitate ; she could not hear the word amidst the uproar now pervad both school - room ; I repeat the sign ; she approach ; again she pause within half a yard of the estrade , and look shy , and still doubtful whether she have mistake my meaning . " step up , " I say , speak with decision . it be the only way of deal with diffident , easily embarrassed character , and with some slight manual aid I presently get she place just where I want she to be , that be , between my desk and the window , where she be screen from the rush of the second division , and where no one could sneak behind she to listen . " take a seat , " I say , place a tabouret ; and I make she sit down . I know what I be do would be consider a very strange thing , and , what be more , I do not care . France know it also , and , I fear , by a appearance of agitation and trembling , that she car much . I draw from my pocket the roll - up devoir . " this it , yours , I suppose ? " say I , address she in , for I now feel sure she could speak . " yes , " she answer distinctly ; and as I unroll it and lay it out flat on the desk before she with my hand upon it , and a pencil in that hand , I see she move , and , as it be , kind ; she depression beam as a cloud might behind which the sun be burn . " this devoir have numerous fault , " say I . " it will take you some year of careful study before you be in a condition to write with absolute correctness . attend : I will point out some principal defects . " and I go through it carefully , note every error , and demonstrate why they be error , and how the word or phrase ink to have be write . in the course of this sober process she become calm . I now go on : " as to the substance of you devoir , . Henri , it have surprise I ; I peruse it with pleasure , because I see in it some proof of taste and fancy . and fancy be not the highest gift of the human mind , but such as they be you possess they -- not probably in a paramount degree , but in a degree beyond what the majority can boast . you may then take courage ; cultivate the faculty that and nature have bestow on you , and do not fear in any crisis of suffering , under any pressure of injustice , to derive free and full consolation from the consciousness of they strength and rarity . " " strength and rarity ! " I repeat to myself ; " ay , the word be probably true , " for on look up , I see the sun have dissever its screening cloud , she countenance be transfigure , a smile shone in she eye -- a smile almost triumphant ; it seem to say -- " I be glad you have be force to discover so much of my nature ; you need not so carefully moderate you language . do you think I be myself a stranger to myself ? what you tell I in term so qualified , I
I have know fully from a child . " she do say this as plainly as a frank and flash glance could , but in a moment the glow of she complexion , the radiance of she aspect , have subsid ; if strongly conscious of she talents , she be equally conscious of she harassing defect , and the remembrance of these obliterate for a single second , now revive with sudden force , at once subdue the too vivid character in which she sense of she power have be express . so quick be the revulsion of feeling , I have not time to check she triumph by reproof ; ere I could contract my brows to a frown she have become serious and almost mournful - look . " thank you , sir , " say she , rise . there be gratitude both in she voice and in the look with which she accompany it . it be time , indeed , for we conference to terminate ; for , when I glance around , behold all the boarder ( the day - scholar have depart ) be congregate within a yard or two of my desk , and stood star with eye and mouth wide open ; the three maitress form a whispering knot in one corner , and , close at my elbow , be the directress , sit on a low chair , calmly clipp the tassel of she finish purse . . after all I have profit but imperfectly by the opportunity I have so boldly achieve of speak to . Henri ; it be my intention to ask she how she come to be possess of two English baptismal name , Frances and , in addition to she french surname , also whence she derive she good accent . I have forget both point , or , rather , we colloquy have be so brief that I have not have time to bring they forward ; moreover , I have not half test she power of speak ; all I have draw from she in that language be the word " yes , " and " thank you , sir . " " no matter , " I reflect . " what have be leave incomplete now , shall be finish another day . " do I fail to keep the promise thus make to myself . it be difficult to get even a few word of particular conversation with one pupil among so many ; but , accord to the old proverb , " where there be a will , there be a way ; " and again and again I manage to find a opportunity for exchange a few word with . Henri , regardless that envy stared and detraction whisper whenever I approached she . " you book a instant . " such be the mode in which I often begin these brief dialogue ; the time be always just at the conclusion of the lesson ; and motion to she to rise , I install myself in she place , allow she to stand deferentially at my side ; for I esteem it wise and right in she case to enforce strictly all form ordinarily in use between master and pupil ; the rather because I perceive that in proportion as my manner grow austere and magisterial , hers become easy and self - possess -- a odd contradiction , doubtless , to the ordinary effect in such case ; but so it be . " a pencil , " say I , hold out my hand without look at she . ( I be now about to sketch a brief report of the first of these conferences . ) she give I one , and while I underlin some error in a grammatical exercise she have write , I observe -- " you be not a native of ? " " no . " " of ? " " no . " " where , then , be you birthplace ? " " I be bear at . " " you do not call Frances and name , I presume ? " " no , sir ; they be English name . " " just so ; and be it the custom of the to give they child English appellative ? " " non , Monsieur ; mais -- " " , if you please . " " Mais -- " " -- " " but " ( slowly and with embarrassment ) " my parent be not all the two Genevese . " " , instead of ' all the two , ' mademoiselle . " " not both Swiss : my mother be English . " " ah ! and of English extraction ? " " yes -- she ancestor be all English . " " and you father ? " " he be swiss . " " what besides ? what be he profession ? " " Ecclesiastic -- pastor -- he have a church . " " since you mother be a , why do you not speak with more facility ? " " Maman est morte , il y a dix ans . " " and you do homage to she memory by forget she language . have the goodness to put french out of you mind so long as I converse with you -- keep to . " " C' est sus difficile , monsieur , quand on n'en a plus l'habitude . " " you have the habitude formerly , I suppose ? now answer I in you mother tongue . " " yes , sir , I speak the more than the french when I be a child . " " why do you not speak it now ? " " because I have no English friend . " " you live with you father , I suppose ?
? " " my father be dead . " " you have brothers and sister ? " " not one . " " do you live alone ? " " no -- I have a aunt -- ma tante . " " you father 's sister ? " " Justement , monsieur . " " be that English ? " " no -- but I forget -- " " for which , mademoiselle , if you be a child I should certainly devise some slight punishment ; at you age -- you must be two or three and twenty , I should think ? " " Pas encore , monsieur -- en un mois j'aurai dix - neuf ans . " " well , nineteen be a mature age , and , have attain it , you ought to be so solicitous for you own improvement , that it should not be needful for a master to remind you twice of the expediency of you speak whenever practicable . " to this wise speech I receive no answer ; and , when I look up , my pupil be smile to herself a much - mean , though not very gay smile ; it seem to say , " he talk of he know not what : " it say this so plainly , that I determine to request information on the point concern which my ignorance seem to be thus tacitly affir . " be you solicitous for you own improveament ? " " . " " how do you prove it , mademoiselle ? " a odd question , and bluntly put ; it excite a second smile . " why , monsieur , I be not inattentive -- be I ? I learn my lesson well -- " " oh , a child can do that ! and what more do you do ? " " what more can I do ? " " oh , certainly , not much ; but you be a teacher , be you not , as well as a pupil ? " " yes . " " you teach lace - mende ? " " yes . " " a dull , stupid occupation ; do you like it ? " " no -- it be tedious . " " why do you pursue it ? why do you not rather teach history , geography , grammar , even arithmetic ? " " be yomonsieu certain that I be myself thoroughly acquaint with these study ? " " I do not know ; you ink to be at you age . " " but I never be at school , monsieur -- " " indeed ! what then be you friend -- what be you aunt about ? she be very much to blame . " " no monsieur , no --my aunt be good -- she be not to blame -- she do what she can ; she lodge and nourish I " ( I report . 's phrase literally , and it be thus she translate from the ) . " she be not rich ; she have only a annuity of twelve hundred franc , and it would be impossible for she to send I to school . " " , " think I to myself on hear this , but I continue , in the dogmatical tone I have adopt :-- " it be sad , however , that you should be bring up in ignorance of the most ordinary branch of education ; have you know something of history and grammar you might , by degree , have relinquish you lace - mende drudgery , and risen in the world . " " it be what I mean to do . " " how ? by a knowledge of alone ? that will not suffice ; no respectable family will receive a governess whose whole stock of knowledge consist in a familiarity with one foreign language . " " Monsieur , I know other thing . " " yes , yes , you can work with wool , and embroider handkerchief and collar -- that will do little for you . " . 's lip be unclosed to answer , but she check herself , as think the discussion have be sufficiently pursue , and remain silent . " , " I continue , impatiently ; " I never like the appearance of acquiescence when the reality be not there ; and you have a contradiction at you tongue 's end . " " Monsieur , I have have many lesson both in grammar , history , geography , and arithmetic . I have go through a course of each study . " " Bravo ! but how do you manage it , since you aunt could not afford lo send you to school ? " " by lace - mende ; by the thing monsieur despise so much . " " truly ! and now , mademoiselle , it will be a good exercise for you to explain to I in how such a result be produce by such means . " " Monsieur , I beg my aunt to have I teach lace - mende soon after we come to , because I know it be a Metier , a trade which be easily learnt , and by which I could earn some money very soon . I learn it in a few day , and I quickly get work , for all the lady have old lace -- very precious -- which must be mende all the time it be wash . I earn money a little , and this money I grave for lesson in the study I have mention ; some of it I spend in buying book , book especially ; soon I shall try to find a place of governess , or school - teacher , when I can write
write and speak well ; but it will be difficult , because those who know I have be a lace - mender will despise I , as the pupil here despise I . 'ai mon projet , " she add in a lower tone . " what be it ? " " I will go and live in ; I will teach french there . " the word be pronounce emphatically . she say " " as you might suppose a of 's day would have say . " have you a wish to see ? " " yes , and a intention . " and here a voice , the voice of the directress , interpose : " , je crois qu'il va pleuvoir ; vous feriez bien , ma bonne amie , retourner chez vous tout de suite . " in silence , without a word of thanks for this officious warning , . Henri collect she book ; she move to I respectfully , endeavoure to move to she superior , though the endeavour be almost a failure , for she head seem as if it would not bend , and thus depart . where there be one grain of perseverance or wilfulness in the composition , trifling obstacle be ever know rather to stimulate than discourage . . reuter might as well have spa herself the trouble of give that intimation about the weather ( by - the - by she prediction be falsify by the event -- it do not rain that evening ) . at the close of the next lesson I be again at . 's desk . thus do I accost she :-- " what be you idea of , ? why do you wish to go there ? " Accustom by this time to the calculate abruptness of my manner , it no longer discompose or surprise she , and she answer with only so much of hesitation as be render inevitable by the difficulty she experience in improvise the translation of she thought from to . " be something unique , as I have hear and read ; my idea of it be vague , and I want to go there to render my idea clear , definite . " " Hum ! how much of do you suppose you could see if you go there in the capacity of a teacher ? a strange notion you must have of get a clear and definite idea of a country ! all you could see of great would be the interior of a school , or at most of one or two private dwelling . " " it would be a english school ; they would be English dwelling . " " Indisputably ; but what then ? what would be the value of observation make on a scale so narrow ? " " Monsieur , might not one learn something by analogy ? a - echantillon -- a -- a sample often serve to give a idea of the whole ; besides , narrow and wide be word comparative , be they not ? all my life would perhaps seem narrow in you eye -- all the life of a -- that little animal subterranean -- une taupe -- comment dit - on ? " " . " " yes -- a mole , which lives underground would seem narrow even to I . " " well , mademoiselle -- what then ? proceed . " " Mais , monsieur , vous I comprenez . " " not in the least ; have the goodness to explain . " " why , monsieur , it be just so . in I have do but little , learnt but little , and see but little ; my life there be in a circle ; I walk the same round every day ; I could not get out of it ; have I rest -- remain there even till my death , I should never have enlarge it , because I be poor and not skilful , I have not great acquirement ; when I be quite tired of this round , I beg my aunt to go to ; my existence be no larger here , because I be no richer or higher ; I walk in as narrow a limit , but the scene be change ; it would change again if I go to . I know something of the bourgeois of , now I know something of the bourgeois of ; if I go to , I would know something of the bourgeois of . can you make any sense out of what I say , monsieur , or be it all obscure ? " " I see , I see -- now let we advert to another subject ; you propose to devote you life to teach , and you be a most unsuccessful teacher ; you can not keep you pupil in order . " a flush of painful confusion be the result of this harsh remark ; she bend she head to the desk , but soon raise it reply -- " Monsieur , I be not a skilful teacher , it be true , but practice improve ; besides , I work under difficulty ; here I only teach sewing , I can show no power in sewing , no superiority -- it be a subordinate art ; then I have no associate in this house , I be isolate ; I be too a heretic , which deprive I of influence . " " and in you would be a foreigner ; that too would deprive you of influence , and would effectually separate you from all round you ; in you would have as few connection , as little importance as you have here . " " but I should be learn something ; for the rest , there be probably difficulty for
for such as I everywhere , and if I must contend , and perhaps : be conquer , I would rather submit to pride than to Flemish coarseness ; besides , monsieur -- " she stop -- not evidently from any difficulty in find word to express herself , but because discretion seem to say , " you have say enough . " " finish you phrase , " I ur . " besides , monsieur , I long to live once more among ; they be more honest than ; a Romish school be a building with porous wall , a hollow floor , a false ceiling ; every room in this house , monsieur , have eyehole and ear - hole , and what the house be , the inhabitant be , very treacherous ; they all think it lawful to tell lie ; they all call it politeness to profess friendship where they feel hatred . " " all ? " say I ; " you mean the pupil -- the mere child -- inexperienc , giddy thing , who have not learn to distinguish the difference between right and wrong ? " " on the contrary , monsieur -- the child be the most sincere ; they have not yet have time to become accomplished in duplicity ; they will tell lie , but they do it inartificially , and you know they be lie ; but the grow - up people be very false ; they deceive stranger , they deceive each other -- " a servant here enter :-- " . Henri-- . Reuter vous prie de vouloir bien conduire la petite de chez elle , elle vous attend dans le cabinet de Rosalie la portiere -- c'est que sa bonne n'est pa venue la chercher -- voyez-vous . " " Eh bien ! est - ce que je suis sa bonne -- moi ? " demand . Henri ; then smile , with that same bitter , derisive smile I have see on she lip once before , she hastily rise and make she exit . . the young - evidently derive both pleasure and profit from the study of she mother - tongue . in teaching she I do not , of course , confine myself to the ordinary school routine ; I make instruction in a channel for instruction in literature . I prescribe to she a course of reading ; she have a little selection of English classic , a few of which have be leave she by she mother , and the other she have purchase with she own penny - fee . I lent she some more modern work ; all these she read with avidity , give I , in writing , a clear summary of each work when she have peruse it . composition , too , she delighte in . such occupation seem the very breath of she nostril , and soon she improve production wrung from I the avowal that those qualitie in she I have term taste and fancy ought rather to have be denominate judgment and imagination . when I intimate so much , which I do as usual in dry and stinted phrase , I look for the radiant and exult smile my one word of eulogy have elicit before ; but colour . if she do smile , it be very softly and shyly ; and instead of look up to I with a conquering glance , she eye rest on my hand , which , stretch over she shoulder , be write some direction with a pencil on the margin of she book . " well , be you please that I be satisfied with you progress ? " I ask . " yes , " say she slowly , gently , the blush that have half subsided returning . " but I do not say enough , I suppose ? " I continue . " my praise be too cool ? " she make no answer , and , I think , look a little sad . I divine she thought , and should much have like to have respond to they , have it be expedient so to do . she be not now very ambitious of my admiration -- not eagerly desirous of dazzl I ; a little affection -- ever so little -- please she better than all the panegyric in the world . feel this , I stand a good while behind she , write on the margin of she book . I could hardly quit my station or relinquish my occupation ; something retain I bend there , my head very near hers , and my hand near hers too ; but the margin of a copy - book be not a illimitable space -- so , doubtless , the directress think ; and she take occasion to walk past in order to ascertain by what be I prolonge so disproportionately the period necessary for fill it . I be oblige to go . Distasteful effort -- to leave what we must prefer ! Frances do not become pale or feeble in consequence of she sedentary employment ; perhaps the stimulus it communicate to she mind counterbalance the inaction it impos on she body . she change , indeed , change obviously and rapidly ; but it be for the better . when I first see she , she countenance be sunless , she complexion colourless ; she look like one who have no source of enjoyment , no store of bliss anywhere in the world ; now the cloud have pass from she mien , leave space for the dawn of hope and interest , and those feeling rise like a clear morning , anima what have be depresse , tinte what have be pale . she eye , whose colour I have not at first know , so de be they with
with repress tear , so shadow with ceaseless dejection , now , light by a ray of the sunshine that cheer she heart , reveal irid of bright hazel -- irids large and full , screen with long lash ; and pupil instinct with fire . that look of wan emaciation which anxiety or low spirits often communicate to a thoughtful , thin face , rather long than round , have vanish from hers ; a clearness of skin almost bloom , and a plumpness almost embonpoint , soften the decided line of she feature . she figure share in this beneficial change ; it become rounder , and as the harmony of she form be complete and she stature of the graceful middle height , one do not regret ( or at least I do not regret ) the absence of confirm fulness , in contour , still slight , though compact , elegant , flexible -- the exquisite turning of waist , wrist , hand , foot , and ankle satisfy completely my notion of symmetry , and allow a lightness and freedom of movement which correspond with my idea of . thus improve , thus wake to life , . Henri begin to take a new footing in the school ; she mental power , manifest gradually but steadily , ere long extort recognition even from the envious ; and when the young and healthy see that she could smile brightly , converse gaily , move with vivacity and alertness , they acknowledge in she a sisterhood of youth and health , and tolerate she as of they kind accordingly . to speak truth , I watch this change much as a gardener watch the growth of a precious plant , and I contribute to it too , even as the say gardener contribute to the development of he favourite . to I it be not difficult to discover how I could best foster my pupil , cherish she starve feeling , and induce the outward manifestation of that inward vigour which sunless drink and blight blast have hitherto forbidden to expand . Constancy of attention -- a kindness as mute as watchful , always stand by she , cloak in the rough garb of austerity , and make its real nature know only by a rare glance of interest , or a cordial and gentle word ; real respect mask with seem imperiousness , direct , urge she action , yet help she too , and that will devot care : these be the means I use , for these mean best suit ' feeling , as susceptible as deep vibrating -- she nature at once proud and shy . the benefit of my system become apparent also in she altered demeanour as a teacher ; she now take she place amongst she pupil with a air of spirit and firmness which assure they at once that she mean to be obey -- and obey she be . they feel they have lose they power over she . if any girl have rebel , she would no longer have take she rebellion to heart ; she possess a source of comfort they could not drain , a pillar of support they could not overthrow : formerly , when insulted , she weep ; now , she smile . the public reading of one of she devoir achieve the revelation of she talents to all and sundry ; I remember the subject -- it be a emigrant 's letter to he friend at home . it open with simplicity ; some natural and graphic touch disclose to the reader the scene of virgin forest and great , - river -- bar of sail and flag -- amidst which the epistle be suppose to be indit . the difficulty and danger that attend a settler 's life , be hint at ; and in the few word say on that subject , . Henri fail not to render audible the voice of resolve , patience , endeavour . the disaster which have drive he from he native country be allude to ; stainless honour , inflexible independence , indestructible self - respect there take the word . past day be speak of ; the grief of parting , the regret of absence , be touch upon ; feel , forcible and fine , breathe eloquent in every period . at the close , consolation be suggest ; religious faith become there the speaker , and she speak well . the devoir be powerfully write in language at once chaste and choice , in a style nerve with vigour and grac with harmony . . be quite sufficientely acquaint with to understand it when read or speak in she presence , though she could neither speak nor write it herself . during the perusal of this devoir , she sit placidly busy , she eye and finger occupy with the formation of a " riviere " or open - work hem round a cambric handkerchief ; she say nothing , and she face and forehead , clothed with a mask of purely negative expression , be as blank of comment as she lip . as neither surprise , pleasure , approbation , nor interest be evince in she countenance , so no more be disdain , envy , annoyance , weariness ; if that inscrutable mien say anything , it be simply this -- " the matter be too trite to excite a emotion , or call forth a opinion . " as soon as I have do , a hum rise ; several of the pupil , press round . Henri , begin to beset she with compliment ; the compose voice of the directress be now hear :-- " young lady , such of you as have cloak and umbrella will hasten to return home before the shower become heavier " ( it be rain a little )
) , " the remainder will wait till they respective servants arrive to fetch they . " and the school disperse , for it be four o'clock . " Monsieur , a word , " say . reuter , step on to the estrade , and signify , by a movement of the hand , that she wish I to relinquish , for a instant , the castor I have clutch . " Mademoiselle , I be at you service . " " , it be of course a excellent plan to encourage effort in young people by make conspicuous the progress of any particularly industrious pupil ; but do you not think that in the present instance , . Henri can hardly be consider as a concurrent with the other pupil ? she be older than most of they , and have have advantage of a exclusive nature for acquire a knowledge of ; on the other hand , she sphere of life be somewhat beneath theirs ; under these circumstance , a public distinction , confer upon . Henri , may be the means of suggest comparison , and excit feeling such as would be far from advantageous to the individual form they object . the interest I take in . 's real welfare make I desirous of screen she from annoyance of this sort ; besides , monsieur , as I have before hinte to you , the sentiment of - PROPRE have a somewhat mark preponderance in she character ; celebrity have a tendency to foster this sentiment , and in she it should be rather repress -- she rather need keep down than bring forward ; and then I think , monsieur -- it appear to I that ambition , LITERARy ambition especially , be not a feeling to be cherish in the mind of a woman : would not . Henri be much safer and happier if teach to believe that in the quiet discharge of social duty consist she real vocation , than if stimulate to aspire after applause and publicity ? she may never marry ; scanty as be she resource , obscure as be she connection , uncertain as be she health ( for I think she consumptive , she mother die of that complaint ) , it be more than probable she never will . I do not see how she can rise to a position , whence such a step would be possible ; but even in celibacy it would be better for she to retain the character and habits of a respectable decorous female . " " Indisputably , mademoiselle , " be my answer . " you opinion admit of no doubt ; " and , fearful of the harangue be renew , I retreat under cover of that cordial sentence of assent . at the date of a fortnight after the little incident note above , I find it record in my diary that a hiatus occur in . Henri 's usually regular attendance in class . the first day or two I wonder at she absence , but do not like to ask a explanation of it ; I think indeed some chance word might be drop which would afford I the information I wish to obtain , without my run the risk of exciting silly smile and gossip whisper by demand it . but when a week pass and the seat at the desk near the door still remain vacant , and when no allusion be make to the circumstance by any individual of the class -- when , on the contrary , I find that all observe a mark silence on the point -- I determine , , to break the ice of this silly reserve . I select as my informant , because from she I know that I should at least get a sensible answer , unaccompany by wriggle , titter , or other flourish of folly . " Ou donc est . Henri ? " I say one day as I return a exercise - book I have be examine . " est partie , monsieur . " " ? et pwe combien de temp ? Quand reviendra - t - elle ? " " est partire pour toujour , monsieur ; elle ne reviendra plus . " " ah ! " be my involuntary exclamation ; then after a pause :-- " etes - vous bien sure , ? " " Oui , oui , monsieur , mademoiselle la directrice nous l'a dit elle - meme il y a deux out ttrois jour . " and I could pursue my inquirie no further ; time , place , and circumstance forbade my add another word . I could neither comment on what have be say , nor demand further particular . a question as to the reason of the teacher 's departure , as to whether it have be voluntary or otherwise , be indeed on my lip , but I suppress it -- there be listener all round . a hour after , in pass in the corridor as she be put on she bonnet , I stop short and ask :-- " , do you know . 's address ? I have some book of hers , " I add carelessly , " and I should wish to send they to she . " " no , monsieur , " reply ; " but perhaps , the portress , will be able to give it you . " 's cabinet be just at hand ; I step in and repeat the inquiry . -- a smart french grisette -- look up from she work with a know smile , precisely the sort of smile I have be so desirous to avoid exciting . she answer be prepare ; she know nothing whatever of . 's address -- have never know it . turn from she with impatience --
-- for I believe she lie and be hire to lie -- I almost knock down some one who have be stand at my back ; it be the directress . my abrupt movement make she recoil two or three step . I be oblige to apologize , which I do more concisely than politely . no man like to be dog , and in the very irritable mood in which I then be the sight of . thoroughly incense I . at the moment I turn she countenance look hard , dark , and inquisitive ; she eye be bend upon I with a expression of almost hungry curiosity . I have scarcely catch this phase of physiognomy ere it have vanish ; a bland smile play on she feature ; my harsh apology be receive with good - humoured facility . " oh , do not mention it , monsieur ; you only touch my hair with you elbow ; it be no worse , only a little dishevell . " she shook it back , and pass she finger through she curl , loose they into more numerous and flow ringlet . then she go on with vivacity : " , I be come to tell you to go instantly and close the window of the salon ; the wind be rise , and the muslin curtain will be cover with dust . " depart . " now , " think I , " this will not do ; . think she meanness in eave - dropping be screen by she art in devise a pretext , whereas the muslin curtain she speak of be not more transparent than this same pretext . " a impulse come over I to thrust the flimsy screen aside , and confront she craft boldly with a word or two of plain truth . " the rough - shod foot tread most firmly on slippery ground , " think I ; so I begin : " have leave you establishment -- be dismiss , I presume ? " " ah , I wish to have a little conversation with you , monsieur , " reply the directress with the most natural and affable air in the world ; " but we can not talk quietly here ; will yoMonsieu step into the garden a minute ? " and she proceed I , step out through the glass - door I have before mention . " there , " say she , when we have reach the centre of the middle alley , and when the foliage of shrub and tree , now in they summer pride , close behind end around we , shut out the view of the house , and thus impart a sense of seclusion even to this little plot of ground in the very core of a capital . " there , one feel quiet and free when there be only pear-tree and rose - bushes about one ; I dare say you , like I , monsieur , be sometimes tired of be eternally in the midst of life ; of have human face always round you , human eye always upon you , human voice always in you ear . I be sure I often wish intensely for liberty to spend a whole month in the country at some little farm - house , bien gentille , bien propre , tout entouree de champ et de bois ; quelle vie charmante que la vie champetre ! N'est - ce pa , monsieur ? " " Cela depend , mademoiselle . " " que le vent est bon et frais ! " continue the directress ; and she be right there , for it be a south wind , soft and sweet . I carry my hat in my hand , and this gentle breeze , pass through my hair , soothe my temple like balm . it be refresh effect , however , penetrat no deeper than the mere surface of the frame ; for as I walk by the side of . , my heart be still hot within I , and while I be muse the fire burn ; then spake I with my tongue :-- " I understand . Henri be go from hence , and will not return ? " " ah , true ! I mean to have name the subject to you some day ago , but my time be so completely take up , I can not do half the thing I wish : have you never experience what it be , monsieur , to find the day too short by twelve hour for you numerous duty ? " " not often . . 's departure be not voluntary , I presume ? if it have be , she would certainly have give I some intimation of it , be my pupil . " " oh , do she not tell you ? that be strange ; for my part , I never think of adverting to the subject ; when one have so many thing to attend to , one be apt to forget little incidents that be not of primary importance . " " you consider . 's dismission , then , as a very insignificant event ? " " Dismission ? ah ! she be not dismiss ; I can say with truth , monsieur , that since I become the head of this establishment no master or teacher have ever be dismiss from it . " " yet some have leave it , mademoiselle ? " " many ; I have find it necessary to change frequently -- a change of instructor be often beneficial to the interest of a school ; it give life and variety to the proceedings ; it amuse the pupil , and suggest to the parent the idea of exertion and progress . " " yet when you be tired
tired of a professor or maitresse , you scruple to dismiss they ? " " no need to have recourse to such extreme measure , I assure you . Allon , monsieur le professeur-- asseyon - nous ; je tvais vous donner une petite lecon dan votre etat d' yoinstituteu . " ( I wish I might write all she say to I in -- it lose sadly by be translate into . ) we have now reach the garden - chair ; the directress sit down , and sign to I to sit by she , but I only rest my knee on the seat , and stood lean my head and arm against the embowering branch of a huge laburnum , whose golden flower , blent with the dusky green leave of a lilac - bush , form a mixed arch of shade and sunshine over the retreat . . sit silent a moment ; some novel movement be evidently work in she mind , and they show they nature on she astute brow ; she be meditat some chef D'oeuvre of policy . convince by several month 's experience that the affectation of virtue she do not possess be unavailing to ensnare I -- aware that I have read she real nature , and would believe nothing of the character she give out as be hers -- she have determine , at last , to try a new key , and see if the lock of my heart would yield to that ; a little audacity , a word of truth , a glimpse of the real . " yes , I will try , " be she inward resolve ; and then she blue eye glitter upon I -- it do not flash -- nothing of flame ever kindle in its temperate gleam . " yoMonsieu fear to sit by I ? " she inquire playfully . " I have no wish to usurp 's place , " I answer , for I have get the habit of speak to she bluntly -- a habit begin in anger , but continue because I see that , instead of offending , it fascinate she . she cast down she eye , and droop she eyelid ; she sigh uneasily ; she turn with a anxious gesture , as if she would give I the idea of a bird that flutter in its cage , and would fain fly from its jail and jailer , and seek its natural mate and pleasant nest . " well -- and you lesson ? " I demand briefly . " ah ! " she exclaim , recover herself , " you be so young , so frank and fearless , so talented , so impatient of imbecility , so disdainful of vulgarity , you need a lesson ; here it be then : far more be to be do in this world by dexterity than by strength ; but , perhaps , you know that before , for there be delicacy as well as power in you character -- policy , as well as pride ? " " go on , " say I ; and I could hardly help smile , the flattery be so piquant , so finely season . she catch the prohibit smile , though I pass my hand over my month to conceal it ; and again she make room for I to sit beside she . I shook my head , though temptation penetrate to my sense at the moment , and once more I tell she to go on . " well , then , if ever you be at the head of a large establishment , dismiss nobody . to speak truth , monsieur ( and to you I will speak truth ) , I despise people who be always make row , bluster , send off one to the right , and another to the left , urge and hurrie circumstance . I will tell you what I like best to do , monsieur , shall I ? " she look up again ; she have compound she glance well this time -- much archness , more deference , a spicy dash of coquetry , a unveiled consciousness of capacity . I nod ; she treat I like the great Mogul ; so I become the great as far as she be concerned . " I like , monsieur , to take my knitting in my hand , and to sit quietly down in my chair ; circumstance defile past I ; I watch they march ; so long as they follow the course I wish , I say nothing , and do nothing ; I do not clap my hand , and cry out ' ! how lucky I be ! ' to attract the attention and envy of my neighbour -- I be merely passive ; but when event 's fall out ill -- when circumstance become adverse -- I watch very vigilantly ; I knit on still , and still I hold my tongue ; but every now and then , monsieur , I just put my toe out -- so -- and give the rebellious circumstance a little secret push , without noise , which send it the way I wish , and I be successful after all , and nobody have see my expedient . so , when teacher or master become troublesome and inefficient -- when , in short , the interest of the school would suffer from they retain they place -- I mind my knitting , event progress , circumstance glide past ; I see one which , if push ever so little awry , will render untenable the post I wish to have vacated -- the deed be done -- the stumbling - block remove -- and no one see I : I have not make a enemy , I be rid of a
a incumbrance . " a moment since , and I think she alluring ; this speech conclude , I look on she with distaste . " just like you , " be my cold answer . " and in this way you have oust . Henri ? you want she office , therefore you render it intolerable to she ? " " not at all , monsieur , I be merely anxious about . 's health ; no , you moral sight be clear and pierce , but there you have fail to discover the truth . I take -- I have always take a real interest in . 's welfare ; I do not like she go out in all weathers ; I think it would be more advantageous for she to obtain a permanent situation ; beside , I consider she now qualified to do something more than teach sewing . I reason with she ; leave the decision to herself ; she see the correctness of my view , and adopt they . " " excellent ! and now , mademoiselle , you will have the goodness to give I she address . " " she address ! " and a sombre and stony change come over the mien of the directress . " she address ? ah ?-- well -- I wish I could oblige you , monsieur , but I cannot , and I will tell you why ; whenever I myself ask she for she address , she always evad the inquiry . I think -- I may be wrong -- but I think she motive for do so , be a natural , though mistaken reluctance to introduce I to some , probably , very poor abode ; she mean be narrow , she origin obscure ; she live somewhere , doubtless , in the ' basse ville . ' " " I will not lose sight of my best pupil yet , " say I , " though she be bear of beggar and lod in a cellar ; for the rest , it be absurd to make a bugbear of she origin to I -- I happen to know that she be a swiss pastor 's daughter , neither more nor less ; and , as to she narrow mean , I care nothing for the poverty of she purse so long as she heart overflow with affluence . " " you sentiment be perfectly noble , monsieur , " say the directress , affect to suppress a yawn ; she sprightliness be now extinct , she temporary candour shut up ; the little , red -coloured , piratical - look pennon of audacity she have allow to float a minute in the air , be furl , and the broad , sober - hue flag of dissimulation again hang low over the citadel . I do not like she thus , so I cut short the Tete - a - Tete and depart . . Novelist should never allow themselves to weary of the study of real life . if they observ this duty conscientiously , they would give we fewer picture cheque with vivid contrast of light and shade ; they would seldom elevate they heroe and heroine to the height of rapture -- still seldomer sink they to the depth of despair ; for if we rarely taste the fulness of joy in this life , we yet more rarely saavor the acrid bitterness of hopeless anguish ; unless , indeed , we have plunge like beasts into sensual indulgence , abuse , strain , stimulate , again overstrain , and , at last , destroy we faculty for enjoyment ; then , truly , we may find ourselves without support , rob of hope . we agony be great , and how can it end ? we have break the spring of we power ; life must be all suffer -- too feeble to conceive faith -- death must be darkness -- , spirit , religion can have no place in we collapsed mind , where linger only hideous and pollute recollection of vice ; and time bring we on to the brink of the grave , and dissolution fling we in -- a rag eat through and through with disease , wring together with pain , stamp into the churchyard sod by the inexorable heel of despair . but the man of regular life and rational mind never despairs . he lose he property -- it be a blow -- he stagger a moment ; then , he energie , rouse by the smart , be at work to seek a remedy ; activity soon mitigate regret . sickness affect he ; he take patience -- endure what he can not cure . Acute pain rack he ; he writh limb know not where to find rest ; he lean on 's anchor . death take from he what he love ; root up , and tear violently away the stem round which he affections be twin - - a dark , dismal time , a frightful wrench -- but some morning religion look into he desolate house with sunrise , and say , that in another world , another life , he shall meet he kindred again . she speak of that world as a place unsully by sin -- of that life , as a era unembitter by suffering ; she mightily strengthen she consolation by connect with it two idea -- which mortal can not comprehend , but on which they love to repose -- Eternity , Immortality ; and the mind of the mourner , be fill with a image , fbe not yet glorious , of heavenly hill all light and peace -- of a spirit rest there in bliss -- of a day when he spirit shall also alight there , free and disembody -- of a reunion perfect by love
love , purify from fear -- he take courage -- go out to encounter the necessity and discharge the duty of life ; and , though sadness may never lift she burden from he mind , hope will enable he to support it . well -- and what suggest all this ? and what be the inference to be draw therefrom ? what suggest it , be the circumstance of my best pupil -- my treasure -- be snatch from my hand , and put away out of my reach ; the inference to be draw from it be -- that , be a steady , reasonable man , I do not allow the resentment , disappointment , and grief , engender in my mind by this evil chance , to grow there to any monstrous size ; nor do I allow they to monopolize the whole space of my heart ; I pend they , on the contrary , in one strait and secret nook . in the daytime , too , when I be about my duty , I put they on the silent system ; and it be only after I have close the door of my chamber at night that I somewhat relax my severity towards these morose nursling , and allow vent to they language of murmur ; then , in revenge , they sit on my pillow , haunt my bed , and keep I awake with they long , midnight cry . a week pass . I have say nothing more to . . I have be calm in my demeanour to she , though stony cold and hard . when I look at she , it be with the glance fit to be bestow on one who I know have consult jealousy as a adviser , and employ treachery as a instrument -- the glance of quiet disdain and root distrust . on evening , ere I leave the house , I steep into the - - , where she be sit alone , and , place myself before she , I ask , with the same tranquil tone and manner that I should have use have I put the question for the first time -- " Mademoiselle , will you have the goodness to give I the address of ? " a little surprised , but not disconcert , she smilingly disclaim any knowledge of that address , add , " have perhaps forgote that I explain all about that circumstance before -- a week ago ? " " , " I continue , " you would greatly oblige I by direct I to that young person 's abode . " she seem somewhat puzzl ; and , at last , look up with a admirably counterfeit air of naivete , she demand , " do think I be tell a untruth ? " still avoid to give she a direct answer , I say , " it be not then you intention , mademoiselle , to oblige I in this particular ? " " but , monsieur , how can I tell you what I do not know ? " " very well ; I understand you perfectly , mademoiselle , and now I have only two or three word to say . this be the last week in ; in another month the vacation will commence , have the goodness to avail yourself of the leisure it will afford you to look out for another english master -- at the close of , I shall be under the necessity of resign my post in you establishment . " I do not wait for she comment on this announcement , but bow and immediately withdraw . that same evening , soon after dinner , a servant bring I a small packet ; it be direct in a hand I know , but have not hope so soon to see again ; be in my own apartment and alone , there be nothing to prevent my immediately open it ; it contain four five - franc piece , and a note in . " Monsieur , " I come to . 's house yesterday , at the time when I know you would be just about finish you lesson , and I ask if I might go into the schoolroom and speak to you . . come out and say you be already go ; it have not yet strike four , so I think she must be mistaken , but conclude it would be vain to call another day on the same errand . in one sense a note will do as well -- it will wrap up the 20 franc , the price of the lesson I have receive from you ; and if it will not fully express the thanks I owe you in addition -- if it will not bid you good - bye as I could wish to have do -- if it will not tell you , as I long to do , how sorry I be that I shall probably never see you more -- why , spoken word would hardly be more adequate to the task . have I see you , I should probably have stammer out something feeble and unsatisfactory -- something bely my feeling rather than explain they ; so it be perhaps as well that I be deny admission to you presence . you often remark , monsieur , that my devoir dwelt a great deal on fortitude in bearing grief -- you say I introduce that theme too often : I find indeed that it be much easier to write about a severe duty than to perform it , for I be oppress when I see and feel to what a reverse fate have condemn I ; you be kind to I , monsieur -- very kind ; I be afflict -- I be heart - break to be
be quite separate from you ; soon I shall have no friend on earth . but it be useless troubl you with my distress . what clae have I on you sympathy ? none ; I will then say no more . " farewell , . " . . " I put up the note in my pocket - book . I slip the five - franc piece into my purse -- then I take a turn through my narrow chamber . " . talk about she poverty , " say I , " and she be poor ; yet she pay she debt and more . I have not yet give she a quarter 's lesson , and she have send I a quarter 's due . I wonder of what she deprive herself to scrape together the twenty franc -- I wonder what sort of a place she have to live in , and what sort of a woman she aunt be , and whether she be likely to get employment to supply the place she have lose . no doubt she will have to trudge about long enough from school to school , to inquire here , and apply there -- be reject in this place , disappointed in that . many a evening she will go to she bed tired and unsuccessful . and the directress would not let she in to bid I good - bye ? I might not have the chance of stand with she for a few minute at a window in the schoolroom and exchange some half - dozen of sentence -- get to know where she liv -- put matter in train for have all thing arrange to my mind ? no address on the note " -- I continue , draw it again from the pocket - book and examine it on each side of the two leave : " woman be woman , that be certain , and always do business like woman ; men mechanically put a date and address to they communication . and these five - franc piece ? " --( I haul they forth from my purse ) --" if she have offer I they herself instead of tie they up with a thread of green silk in a kind of Lilliputian packet , I could have thrust they back into she little hand , and shut up the small , taper finger over they -- so -- and compelle she shame , she pride , she shyness , all to yield to a little bit of determined -- now where be she ? how can I get at she ? " open my chamber door I walk down into the kitchen . " who bring the packet ? " I ask of the servant who have deliver it to I . " commissionaire , monsieur . " " do he say anything ? " " . " and I wend my way up the back - stair , wondrously the wiser for my inquiry . " no matter , " say I to myself , as I again close the door . " no matter -- I will seek she through Brussels . " and I do . I seek she day by day whenever I have a moment 's leisure , for four week ; I seek she on all day long ; I seek she on the , in the , in the ; I seek she in . and ; I seek she in the two Protestant chapels ; I attend these latter at the german , french , and English service , not doubt that I should meet she at one of they . all my research be absolutely fruitless ; my security on the last point be prove by the event to be equally groundless with my other calculation . I stand at the door of each chapel after the service , and wait till every individual have come out , scrutinize every gown drape a slender form , pee under every bonnet cover a young head . in vain ; I see girlish figure pass I , draw they black scarf over they sloping shoulders , but none of they have the exact turn and air of . 's ; I see pale and thoughtful face " encadree " in band of brown hair , but I never find she forehead , she eye , she eyebrow . all the feature of all the face I meet seem fritter away , because my eye fail to recognize the peculiarity it be bend upon ; a ample space of brow and a large , dark , and serious eye , with a fine but decide line of eyebrow trace above . " she have probably leave Brussels -- perhaps be go to , as she say she would , " mutter I inwardly , as on the afternoon of the fourth , I turn from the door of the chapel - which the door - keeper have just close and lock , and follow in the wake of the last of the congregation , now disperse and disperse over the square . I have soon outwalk the couple of English gentleman and lady . ( gracious goodness ! why do not they dress better ? my eye be yet fill with vision of the high - flounce , slovenly , and tumble dress in costly silk and satin , of the large unbecoming collar in expensive lace ; of the ill - cut coat and strangely fashioned pantaloon which every , at the service , fill the choir of the chapel - , and after it , issue forth into the square , come into disadvantageous contrast with freshly and trimly attire foreign figure , hasten to attend salut at the church of . ) I have pass these pair of Britons , and the group of pretty british
british child , and the british footman and waiting - maid ; I have cross the , and get into the , thence I have diverge into the -- a old and quiet street . I remember that , feel a little hungry , and not desire to go back and take my share of the " gouter , " now on the refectory - table at 's -- to wit , pistolet and water -- I step into a baker 's and refresh myself on a Couc ( ?) -- it be a Flemish word , I do not know how to spell it -- a corinthe - Anglice , a currant bun -- and a cup of coffee ; and then I stroll on towards the . very soon I be out of the city , and slowly mount the hill , which ascend from the gate , I take my time ; for the afternoon , though cloudy , be very sultry , and not a breeze stir to refresh the atmosphere . no inhabitant of need wander far to search for solitude ; let he but move half a league from he own city and he will find she brood still and blank over the wide field , so drear though so fertile , spread out treeless and trackless round the capital of . have gain the summit of the hill , and have stood and look long over the cultured but lifeless campaign , I feel a wish to quit the high road , which I have hithertoo follow , and get in among those tilled grounds -- fertile as the bed of a Brobdignagian kitchen - garden -- spread far and wide even to the boundary of the horizon , where , from a dusk green , distance change they to a sullen blue , and confuse they tints with those of the livid and thunderous - look sky . accordingly I turn up a by - path to the right ; I have not follow it far ere it bring I , as I expect , into the field , amidst which , just before I , stretch a long and lofy white wall enclose , as it see from the foliage show above , some thickly plan nursery of yew and cypress , for of that species be the branch rest on the pale parapet , and crowd gloomily about a massive cross , plant doubtless on a central eminence and extend its arm , which see of black marble , over the summit of those sinister tree . I approach , wonder to what house this well - protect garden appertain ; I turn the angle of the wall , think to see some stately residence ; I be close upon great iron gate ; there be a hut serve for a lodge near , but I have no occasion to apply for the key -- the gate be open ; I push one leaf back -- rain have rust its hinge , for it groan dolefully as they revolve . plan embower the entrance . pass up the avenue , I see object on each hand which , in they own mute language of inscription and sign , explain clearly to what abode I have make my way . this be the house appoint for all liive ; cross , monument , and garland of everlasting announce , " the , outside the gate of . " the place be large enough to afford half a hour 's strolling without the monotony of tread continually the same path ; and , for those who love to peruse the annal of graveyard , here be variety of inscription enough to occupy the attention for double or treble that space of time . Hither people of many kindred , tongue , and nation , have bring they dead for interment ; and here , on page of stone , of marble , and of brass , be write name , dates , last tribute of pomp or love , in , in french , in german , and . here the have erect a marble monument over the remains of he or , and inscribe it only with she name . there the french widower have shade the grave : of he or with a brilliant thicket of rose , amidst which a little tablet rise , bear a equally bright testimony to she countless virtue . every nation , tribe , and kind , mourn after its own fashion ; and how soundless be the mourning of all ! my own tread , though slow and upon smooth - roll path , seem to startle , because it form the sole break to a silence otherwise total . not only the wind , but the very fitful , wander air , be that afternoon , as by common consent , all fall asleep in they various quarter ; the north be hush , the south silent , the east sob not , nor do the west whisper . the clouds in heaven be condense and dull , but apparently quite motionless . under the tree of this cemetery nestle a warm breathless gloom , out of which the cypress stand up straight and mute , above which the willows hang low and still ; where the flower , as languid as fair , wait listless for night dew or thunder - shower ; where the tomb , and those they hide , lay impassible to sun or shadow , to rain or drink . Importune by the sound of my own footstep , I turn off upon the turf , and slowly advanced to a grove of yew ; I see something stir among the stem ; I think it might be a broken branch swing , my short - sighted vision have catch no form , only a sense of motion
motion ; but the dusky shade pass on , appear and disappear at the opening in the avenue . I soon discern it be a living thing , and a human thing ; and , draw nearer , I perceive it be a woman , pace slowly to and fro , and evidently deem herself alone as I have deem myself alone , and meditat as I have be meditat . Ere long she return to a seat which I fancy she have but just quit , or I should have catch sight of she before . it be in a nook , screen by a clump of tree ; there be the white wall before she , and a little stone set up against the wall , and , at the foot of the stone , be a allotment of turf freshly turn up , a new -made grave . I put on my spectacle , and pass softly close behind she ; glance at the inscription on the stone , I read , " , die at , a sixty . 10th , 18--. " have peruse the inscription , I look down at the form sit bent and thoughtful just under my eye , unconscious of the vicinity of any liive thing ; it be a slim , youthful figure in mourn apparel of the plainest black stuff , with a little simple , black crape bonnet ; I feel , as well as saw , who it be ; and , move neither hand nor foot , I stand some moment enjoy the security of conviction . I have seek she for a month , and have never discover one of she trace -- never meet a hope , or seize a chance of encounter she anywhere . I have be force to loosen my grasp on expectation ; and , but a hour ago , have sunk slackly under the discouraging think that the current of life , and the impulse of destiny , have sweep she for ever from my reach ; and , behold , while bend suddenly earthward beneath the pressure of despondency -- while follow with my eye the track of sorrow on the turf of a graveyard -- here be my lost jewel drop on the tear - feed herbage , nestle in the messy and mouldy root of yew - tree . France sit very quiet , she elbow on she knee , and she head on she hand . I know she could retain a think attitude a long time without change ; at last , a tear fell ; she have be look at the name on the stone before she , and she heart have no doubt endure one of those constriction with which the desolate live , regret the dead , be , at time , so sorely oppress . many tear roll down , which she wip away , again and again , with she handkerchief ; some distress sob escape she , and then , the paroxysm over , she sit quiet as before . I put my hand gently on she shoulder ; no need further to prepare she , for she be neither hysterical nor liable to faint - fit ; a sudden push , indeed , might have start she , but the contact of my quiet touch merely woke attention as I wish ; and , though she turn quickly , yet so lightning - swift be think -- in some mind especially -- I believe the wonder of what -- the consciousness of who it be that thus steal unawar on she solitude , have pass through she brain , and flash into she heart , even before she have effect that hasty movement ; at least , Amazement have hardly open she eye and raise they to mine , ere recognition inform they irid with most speak brightness . nervous surprise have hardly discompose she feature ere a sentiment of most vivid joy shone clear and warm on she whole countenance . I have hardly time to observe that she be waste and pale , ere call to feel a responsive inward pleasure by the sense of most full and exquisite pleasure glow in the animated flush , and shine in the expansive light , now diffuse over my pupil 's face . it be the summer sun flash out after the heavy summer shower ; and what fertilize more rapidly than that beam , burn almost like fire in its ardour ? I hate boldness -- that boldness which be of the brassy brow and insensate nerve ; but I love the courage of the strong heart , the fervour of the generous blood ; I love with passion the light of 's clear hazel eye when it do not fear to look straight into mine ; I love the tone with which she utter the word -- " Mon maitre ! mon maitre ! " I love the movement with which she confide she hand to my hand ; I love she as she stand there , penniless and parentless ; for a sensualist charmless , for I a treasure -- my best object of sympathy on earth , think such thought as I think , feel such feeling as I feel ; my ideal of the shrine in which to seal my store of love ; personification of discretion and forethotch , of diligence and perseverance , of self - denial and self - control -- those guardian , those trusty keeper of the gift I longe to confer on she -- the gift of all my affections ; model of truth and honour , of independence and conscientiousness -- those refiner and sustainer of a honest life ; silent possessor of a well of tenderness , of a flame , as genial as still , as pure as quenchless , of natural feeling ,
, natural passion -- those source of refreshment and comfort to the sanctuary of home . I know how quietly and how deeply the well bubble in she heart ; I know how the more dangerous flame burn safely under the eye of reason ; I have see when the fire shoot up a moment high and vivid , when the accelerated heat trouble life 's current in its channel ; I have see reason reduce the rebel , and humble it be blaze to ember . I have confidence in ; I have respect for she , and as I draw she arm through mine , and lead she out of the cemetery , I feel I have another sentiment , as strong as confidence , as firm as respect , more fervid than either -- that of love . " well , my pupil , " say I , as the ominous sounding gate swing to behind we -- " well , I have find you again : a month 's search have see long , and I little think to have discover my lost sheep stray amongst grave . " never have I address she but as " " before , and to speak thus be to take up a tone new to both she and I . she answer suprise I that this language ruffle none of she feeling , wake no discord in she heart : " maitre , " she say , " have you trouble yourself to seek I ? I little imagine you would think much of my absence , but I grieve bitterly to be take away from you . I be sorry for that circumstance when heavier troubles ought to have make I forget it . " " you aunt be dead ? " " yes , a fortnight since , and she die full of regret , which I could not chase from she mind ; she keep repeat , even during the last night of she existence , ' France , you will be so lonely when I be go , so friendless :' she wish too that she could have be bury in , and it be I who persuade she in she old age to leave the bank of , and to come , only as it seem to die , in this flat region of Flander . willingly would I have observ she last wish , and take she remain back to we own country , but that be impossible ; I be force to lay she here . " " she be ill but a short time , I presume ? " " but three week . when she begin to sink I ask . have leave to stay with she and wait on she ; I readily get leave . " " do you return to the pensionnat ! " I demand hastily . " Monsieur , when I have be at home a week Mdlle . call one evening , just after I have get my aunt to bed ; she go into she room to speak to she , and be extremely civil and affable , as she always be ; afterwards she come and sit with I a long time , and just as she rise to go away , she say : " , I shall not soon cease to regret you departure from my establishment , though indeed it be true that you have teach you class of pupil so well that they be all quite accomplished in the little work you manage so skilfully , and have not the slightest need of further instruction ; my second teacher must in future supply you place , with regard to the younger pupil , as well as she can , though she be indeed a inferior artiste to you , and doubtless it will be you part now to assume a higher position in you calling ; I be sure you will everywhere find school and family willing to profit by you talents . ' and then she pay I my last quarter 's salary . I ask , as mademoiselle would no doubt think , very bluntly , if she design to discharge I from the establishment . she smile at my inelegance of speech , and answer that 'our connection as employer and employ be certainly dissolve , but that she hope still to retain the pleasure of my acquaintance ; she should always be happy to see I as a friend ; ' and then she say something about the excellent condition of the street , and the long continuance of fine weather , and go away quite cheerful . " I laugh inwardly ; all this be so like the directress -- so like what I have expect and guess of she conduct ; and then the exposure and proof of she lie , unconsciously afforde by Frances :--" she have frequently apply for . 's address , " forsooth ; " . Henri have always evad give it , " &c. , & c. , and here I find she a visitor at the very house of whose locality she have profess absolute ignorance ! any comment I might have intend to make on my pupil 's communication , be check by the plashing of large rain - drop on we face and on the path , and by the muttering of a distant but come storm . the warning obvious in stagnant air and leaden sky have already induce I to take the road lead back to , and now I hasten my own step and those of my companion , and , as we way lay downhill , we get on rapidly . there be a interval after the fall of the first broad drop before heavy rain come on ; in the meantime we have pass through the , and be again
again in the city . " where do you live ? " I ask ; " I will see you safe home . " " , " answer Frances . it be not far from the , and we stand on the doorstep of the house we seek ere the cloud , severe with loud peal and shatte cataract of lightning , empty they livid fold in a torrent , heavy , prone , and broad . " come in ! come in ! " say , as , after put she into the house , I pause ere I follow : the word decide I ; I step across the threshold , shut the door on the rushing , flash , whiten storm , and follow she upstairs to she apartment . neither she nor I be wet ; a projection over the door have war off the straight - descende flood ; none but the first , large drop have touch we garment ; one minute more and we should not have have a dry thread on we . step over a little mat of green wool , I find myself in a small room with a painted floor and a square of green carpet in the middle ; the article of furniture be few , but all bright and exquisitely clean ; order reign through its narrow limit -- such order as it soothe my punctilious soul to behold . and I have hesitate to enter the abode , because I apprehend after all that Mdlle . 's hind about its extreme poverty might be too well - foun , and I fear to embarrass the lace - mender by enter she lodging unaware ! poor the place might be ; poor truly it be ; but it be neatness be better than elegance , and have but a bright little fire shone on that clean hearth , I should have deem it more attractive than a palace . no fire be there , however , and no fuel laid ready to light ; the lace - mender be unable to allow herself that indulgence , especially now when , deprive by death of she sole relative , she have only she own unaided exertion to rely on . France go into a inner room to take off she bonnet , and she come out a model of frugal neatness , with she well - fit black stuff dress , so accurately define she elegant bust and taper waist , with she spotless white collar turn back from a fair and shapely neck , with she plenteous brown hair arrange in smooth band on she temple , and in a large Grecian plait behind : ornament she have none -- neither brooch , ring , nor ribbon ; she do well enough without they -- perfection of fit , proportion of form , grace of carriage , agreeably supply they place . she eye , as she re-enter the small sitting - room , instantly seek mine , which be just then linger on the hearth ; I know she read at once the sort of inward ruth and pity pain which the chill vacancy of that hearth stir in my soul : quick to penetrate , quick to determine , and quicker to put in practice , she have in a moment tie a holland apron round she waist ; then she disappear , and reappear with a basket ; it have a cover ; she open it , and produce wood and coal ; deftly and compactly she arrange they in the grate . " it be she whole stock , and she will exhaust it out of hospitality , " think I . " what be you go to do ? " I ask : " not surely to light a fire this hot evening ? I shall be smother . " " indeed , monsieur , I feel it very chilly since the rain begin ; besides , I must boil the water for my tea , for I take tea on ; you will be oblige to try and bear the heat . " she have struck a light ; the wood be already in a blaze ; and truly , when contrast with the darkness , the wild tumult of the tempest without , that peaceful glow which begin to beam on the now animate hearth , see very cheering . a low , purr sound , from some quarter , announce that another being , besides myself , be pleased with the change ; a black cat , rouse by the light from it be sleep on a little cushioned foot - stool , come and rub its head against 's gown as she knelt ; she caress it , say it have be a favourite with she " pauvre tante . " the fire be lit , the hearth swept , and a small kettle of a very antique pattern , such as I think I remember to have see in old farmhouse in , place over the now ruddy flame , France ' hand be wash , and she apron remove in a instant then she open a cupboard , and take out a tea -tray , on which she have soon arrange a china tea -equipage , whose pattern , shape , and size , denote a remote antiquity ; a little , old - fashioned silver spoon be deposite in each saucer ; and a pair of silver tong , equally old - fashioned , be laid on the sugar - basin ; from the cupboard , too , be produce a tidy silver cream - ewer , not larger than a egg-shell . while make these preparations , she chance to look up , and , read curiosity in my eye , she smile and ask -- " be this like , yomonsieu ? " "
" like the of a hundred year ago , " I reply . " be it truly ? well , everything on this tray be at least a hundred year old : these cup , these spoon , this ewer , be all heirloom ; my great - grandmother leave they to my grandmother , she to my mother , and my mother bring they with she from to , and leave they to I ; and , ever since I be a little girl , I have think I should like to carry they back to , whence they come . " she put some pistolet on the table ; she make the tea , as foreigner do make tea -- i.e. , at the rate of a teaspoonful to half - a - dozen cup ; she place I a chair , and , as I take it , she ask , with a sort of exaltation -- " will it make you think yourself at home for a moment ? " " if I have a home in , I believe it would recall it , " I answer ; and , in truth , there be a sort of illusion in see the fair - complexioned - look girl presiding at the meal , and speak in the english language . " you have then no home ? " be she remark . " none , nor ever have have . if ever I possess a home , it must be of my own make , and the task be yet to begin . " and , as I speak , a pang , new to I , shoot across my heart : it be a pang of mortification at the humility of my position , and the inadequacy of my mean ; while with that pang be bear a strong desire to do more , earn more , be more , possess more ; and in the increase possession , my roused and eager spirit pan to include the home I have never have , the wife I inwardly vow to win . France ' tea be little better than hot water , sugar , and milk ; and she pistolet , with which she could not offer I butter , be sweet to my palate as manna . the repast over , and the treasure plate and porcelain be wash and put by , the bright table rub still brighter , " le chat de ma tante " also be feed with provision bring forth on a plate for its special use , a few stray cinder , and a scattering of ash too , be sweep from the hearth , France at last sat down ; and then , as she take a chair opposite to I , she betraye , for the first time , a little embarrassment ; and no wonder , for indeed I have unconsciously watch she rather too closely , follow all she step and all she movement a little too perseveringly with my eye , for she mesmerize I by the grace and alertness of she action -- by the deft , cleanly , and even decorative effect result from each touch of she slight and fine finger ; and when , at last , she subsid to stillness , the intelligence of she face seem beauty to I , and I dwelt on it accordingly . she colour , however , rise , rather than settling with repose , and she eye remain downcast , though I keep wait for the lid to be raise that I might drink a ray of the light I love -- a light where fire dissolve in softness , where affection tempere penetration , where , just now at least , pleasure play with thought -- this expectation not be gratify , I begin at last to suspect that I have probably myself to blame for the disappointment ; I must cease gazing , and begin talk , if I wish to break the spell under which she now sit motionless ; so recollect the composing effect which a authoritative tone and manner have ever be will not to produce on she , I say -- " get one of you English book , mademoiselle , for the rain yet fall heavily , and will probably detain I half a hour longer . " release , and set at ease , up she rise , get she book , and accept at once the chair I place for she at my side . she have select " paradise lose " from she shelf of classic , think , I suppose , the religious character of the book best adapt it to ; I tell she to begin at the beginning , and while she read 's invocation to that heavenly muse , who on the " secret top of or " have teach the shepherd how in the womb of chaos , the conception of a world have originate and ripen , I enjoy , undistur , the treble pleasure of have she near I , hear the sound of she voice -- a sound sweet and satisfye in my ear -- and look , by interval , at she face : of this last privilege , I chiefly avail myself when I find fault with a intonation , a pause , or a emphasis ; as long as I dogmatize , I might also gaze , without excit too warm a flush . " enough , " say I , when she have go through some half dozen page ( a work of time with she , for she read slowly and pause often to ask and receive information ) --" enough ; and now the rain be cease , and I must soon go . " for indeed , at that moment , look towards the window , I
I see it all blue ; the thunder - cloud be break and scatter , and the set sun send a gleam like the reflection of ruby through the lattice . I get up ; I draw on my glove . " you have not yet find another situation to supply the place of that from which you be dismiss by . ? " " no , monsieur ; I have make inquirie everywhere , but they all ask I for reference ; and to speak truth , I do not like to apply to the directress , because I consider she act neither justly nor honourably towards I ; she use underhand means to set my pupil against I , and thereby render I unhappy while I hold my place in she establishment , and she eventually deprive I of it by a masked and hypocritical manoeuvre , pretend that she be act for my good , but really snatch from I my chief means of subsistence , at a crisis when not only my own life , but that of another , depend on my exertion : of she I will never more ask a favour . " " how , then , do you propose to get on ? how do you live now ? " " I have still my lace - mende trade ; with care it will keep I from starvation , and I doubt not by dint of exertion to get better employment yet ; it be only a fortnight since I begin to try ; my courage or hope be by no means wear out yet . " " and if you get what you wish , what then ? what be you ultimate views ? " " to save enough to cross the channel : I always look to as my . " " well , well -- ere long I shall pay you another visit ; good evening now , " and I leave she rather abruptly ; I have much ado to resist a strong inward impulse , urge I to take a warmer , more expressive leave : what so natural as to fold she for a moment in a close embrace , to imprint one kiss on she cheek or forehead ? I be not unreasonable -- that be all I want ; satisfied in that point , I could go away content ; and deny I even this ; she order I to turn my eye from she face , and my step from she apartment -- to quit she as dryly and coldly as I would have quit old . I obey , but I swore rancorously to be avenge one day . " I will earn a right to do as I please in this matter , or I will die in the contest . I have one object before I now -- to get that Genevese girl for my wife ; and my wife she shall be -- that be , provide she have as much , or half as much regard for she master as he have for she . and would she be so docile , so smiling , so happy under my instructions if she have not ? would she sit at my side when I dictate or correct , with such a still , contente , halcyon mien ? " for I have ever remark , that however sad or harass she countenance might be when I enter a room , yet after I have be near she , speak to she a few word , give she some direction , uttere perhaps some reproof , she would , all at once , nestle into a nook of happiness , and look up serene and revive . the reproof suite she best of all : while I scolde she would chip away with she pen-knife at a pencil or a pen ; fidgett a little , pout a little , defend herself by monosyllable , and when I deprive she of the pen or pencil , fear it would be all cut away , and when I interdict even the monosyllabic defence , for the purpose of work up the subdue excitement a little higher , she would at last raise she eye and give I a certain glance , sweeten with gaiety , and point with defiance , which , to speak truth , thrill I as nothing have ever do , and make I , in a fashion ( though happily she do not know it ) , she subject , if not she slave . after such little scene she spirits would maintain they flow , often for some hour , and , as I remark before , she health therefrom take a sustenance and vigour which , previously to the event of she aunt 's death and she dismissal , have almost recreate she whole frame . it have take I several minute to write these last sentence ; but I have think all they purport during the brief interval of descende the stair from 's room . just as I be open the outer door , I remember the twenty franc which I have not restore ; I pause : impossible to carry they away with I ; difficult to force they back on they original owner ; I have now see she in she own humble abode , witness the dignity of she poverty , the pride of order , the fastidious care of conservatism , obvious in the arrangement and economy of she little home ; I be sure she would not suffer herself to be excuse pay she debt ; I be certain the favour of indemnity would be accept from no hand , perhaps least of all from mine : yet these four five - franc piece be a burden to my self - respect , and I must get rid
rid of they . a expedient -- a clumsy one no doubt , but the best I could devise -suggest itself to I . I dart up the stair , knock , re-enter the room as if in haste :-- " Mademoiselle , I have forget one of my glove ; I must have leave it here . " she instantly rise to seek it ; as she turn she back , I -- be now at the hearth -- noiselessly lift a little vase , one of a set of china ornament , as old - fashioned as the tea -cup -- slipp the money under it , then say -- " oh here be my glove ! I have drop it within the fender ; good evening , mademoiselle , " I make my second exit . brief as my impromptu return have be , it have afforde I time to pick up a heart -ache ; I remark that have already remove the red ember of she cheerful little fire from the grate : force to calculate every item , to save in every detail , she have instantly on my departure retrench a luxury too expensive to be enjoy alone . " I be glad it be not yet winter , " think I ; " but in two month more come the wind and rain of ; would to that before then I could earn the right , and the power , to shovel coals into that grate ad LIBITUm ! " already the pavement be dry ; a balmy and fresh breeze stir the air , purify by lightning ; I feel the behind I , where spread a sky like opal ; azure immingle with crimson : the enlarge sun , glorious in Tyrian tint , dip he brim already ; stepping , as I be , eastward , I face a vast bank of cloud , but also I have before I the arch of a evening rainbow ; a perfect rainbow -- high , wide , vivid . I look long ; my eye drank in the scene , and I suppose my brain must have absorb it ; for that night , after lie awake in pleasant fever a long time , watch the silent sheet - lightning , which still play among the retreat cloud , and flash silvery over the star , I at last fell asleep ; and then in a dream be reproduce the setting sun , the bank of cloud , the mighty rainbow . I stand , methotch , on a terrace ; I lean over a parapet wall ; there be space below I , depth I could not fathom , but hear a endless dash of wave , I believe it to be the sea ; sea spread to the horizon ; sea of changeful green and intense blue : all be soft in the distance ; all vapour- veil . a spark of gold glisten on the line between water and air , float up , approach , enlarge , change ; the object hung midway between heaven and earth , under the arch of the rainbow ; the soft but dusk clouds diffuse behind . it hover as on wing ; pearly , fleecy , gleam air stream like raiment round it ; light , tinte with carnation , colour what seem face and limb ; a large star shone with still lustre on a angel 's forehead ; a upraised arm and hand , glance like a ray , point to the bow overhead , and a voice in my heart whisper -- " hope smile on ! " . a COMPETENCy be what I want ; a competency it be now my aim and resolve to secure ; but never have I be farther from the mark . with the school - year ( l'annee scolaire ) close , the examination conclude , the prize be adjudge , the school disperse , the gate of all college , the door of all pensionnat shut , not to be reopen till the beginning or middle of . the last day of be at hand , and what be my position ? have I advance a step since the commencement of the past quarter ? on the contrary , I have reced one . by renounce my engagement as English master in . 's establishment , I have voluntarily cut off 20 l . from my yearly income ; I have diminish my 60 l . per annum to 40 l. , and even that sum I now hold by a very precarious tenure . it be some time since I make any reference to . the moonlight walk be , I think , the last incident record in this narrative where that gentleman cut any conspicuous figure : the fact be , since that event , a change have come over the spirit of we intercourse . he , indeed , ignorant that the still hour , a cloudless moon , and a open lattice , have reveal to I the secret of he selfish love and false friendship , would have continue smooth and complaisant as ever ; but I grow spiny as a porcupine , and inflexible as a blackthorn cudgel ; I never have a smile for he raillery , never a moment for he society ; he invitations to take coffee with he in he parlour be invariably reject , and very stifinitely and sternly reject too ; he jest allusion to the directress ( which he still continue ) be hear with a grim calm very different from the petulant pleasure they be formerly will not to excite . for a long time Pelet bear with my frigid demeanour very patiently ; he even increase he attention ; but find that even a cringing politeness fail to thaw or move I , he at last
last altered too ; in he turn he cool ; he invitation cease ; he countenance become suspicious and overcast , and I read in the perplex yet brood aspect of he brow , a constant examination and comparison of premise , and a anxious endeavour to draw thence some explanatory inference . Ere long , I fancy , he succeed , for he be not without penetration ; perhaps , too , . might have aide he in the solution of the enigma ; at any rate I soon find that the uncertainty of doubt have vanish from he manner ; renounce all pretence of friendship and cordiality , he adopt a reserved , formal , but still scrupulously polite deportment . this be the point to which i have wish to bring he , and I be now again comparatively at my ease . I do not , it be true , like my position in he house ; but be free from the annoyance of false profession and double - deal I could endure it , especially as no heroic sentiment of hatred or jealousy of the director distract my philosophical soul ; he have not , I find , wound I in a very tender point , the wound be so soon and so radically heale , leave only a sense of contempt for the treacherous fashion in which it have be inflict , and a last mistrust of the hand which I have detect attempt to stab in the dark . this state of thing continue till about the middle of , and then there be a little change ; come home one night , a hour after he usual time , in a state of unequivocal intoxication , a thing anomalous with he ; for if he have some of the worst fault of he countryman , he have also one at least of they virtue , i.e. sobriety . so drunk , however , be he upon this occasion , that after have rouse the whole establishment ( except the pupil , whose dormitory be over the class in a building apart from the dwelling - house , be consequently out of the reach of disturbance ) by violently ring the hall - bell and order lunch to be bring in immediately , for he imagine it be noon , whereas the city bell have just toll midnight ; after have furiously rate the servants for they want of punctuality , and go near to chastise he poor old mother , who advise he to go to bed , he begin rave dreadfully about " le maudit , . " I have not yet retir ; some german book I have get hold of have keep I up late ; I hear the uproar below , and could distinguish the director 's voice exalt in a manner as appal as it be unusual . open my door a little , I become aware of a demand on he part for " " to be bring down to he that he might cut he throat on the hall - table and wash he honour , which he affir to be in a dirty condition , in infernal british blood . " he be either mad or drunk , " think I , " and in either case the old woman and the servants will be the better of a man 's assistance , " so I descende straight to the hall . I find he stagger about , he eye in a fine frenzy roll -- a pretty sight he be , a just medium between the fool and the lunatic . " come , , " say I , " you have better go to bed , " and I take hold of he arm . he excitement , of course , increase greatly at sight and touch of the individual for whose blood he have be make application : he struggle and strike with fury -- but a drunken man be no match for a sober one ; and , even in he normal state , 's worn out frame could not have stand against my sound one . I get he up - stair , and , in process of time , to bed . during the operation he do not fail to utter commination which , though break , have a sense in they ; while stigmatize I as the treacherous spawn of a perfidious country , he , in the same breath , anathematize ; he term she " femme sotte et vicieuse , " who , in a fit of lewd caprice , have throw herself away on a unprincipled adventurer ; direct the point of the last appellation by a furious blow , obliquly aim at I . I leave he in the act of bounding elastically out of the bed into which I have tuck he ; but , as I take the precaution of turn the key in the door behind I , I retire to my own room , assure of he safe custody till the morning , and free to draw undisturbed conclusion from the scene I have just witness . now , it be precisely about this time that the directress , sting by my coldness , bewitch by my scorn , and excit by the preference she suspect I of cherishing for another , have fall into a snare of she own laying -- be herself catch in the mesh of the very passion with which she wish to entangle I . conscious of the state of thing in that quarter , I gather , from the condition in which I see my employer , that he lady - love have betraye the alienation of she affections -- inclination , rather , I would say ; affection be a word at once too warm and too pure for the subject -- have
have let he see that the cavity of she hollow heart , empty of he image , be now occupy by that of he usher . it be not without some surprise that I find myself oblige to entertain this view of the case ; Pelet , with he old - establish school , be so convenient , so profitable a match -- be so calculating , so interested a woman -- I wonder mere personal preference could , in she mind , have prevail for a moment over worldly advantage : yet , it be evident , from what say , that , not only have she repulse he , but have even let slip expression of partiality for I . one of he drunken exclamation be , " and the jade doat on you youth , you ree blockhead ! and talk of you noble deportment , as she call you accurse formality -- and you pure moral , forsooth ! des moeur de Caton a -t - elle dit -- sotte ! " hers , I think , must be a curiious soul , where in spite of a strong , natural tendency to estimate unduly advantage of wealth and station , the sardonic disdain of a fortuneless subordinate have wrotch a deeper impression than could be imprint by the most flattering assiduity of a prosperous . I smile inwardly ; and strange to say , though my be excite not disagreeably by the conquest , my better feeling remain untouched . next day , when I see the directress , and when she make a excuse to meet I in the corridor , and besotch my notice by a demeanour and look subdue to Helot humility , I could not love , I could scarcely pity she . to answer briefly and dryly some interesting inquiry about my health -- to pass she by with a stern bow -- be all I could ; she presence and manner have then , and for some time previously and consequently , a singular effect upon I : they seal up all that be good elicit all that be noxious in my nature ; sometimes they enervate my sense , but they always harden my heart . I be aware of the detriment do , and quarrell with myself for the change . I have ever hate a tyrant ; and , behold , the possession of a slave , self - give , go near to transform I into what I abhor ! there be at once a sort of low gratification in receive this luscious incense from a attractive and still young worshipper ; and a irritat sense of degradation in the very experience of the pleasure . when she steal about I with the soft step of a slave , I feel at once barbarous and sensual as a pasha . I endure she homage sometimes ; sometimes I rebuk it . my indifference or harshness serve equally to increase the evil I desire to check . " que le dedain lui sy bien ! " I once overheard she say to she mother : " il est beau comme quand il sourit de son air hautain . " and the jolly old dame laugh , and say she think she daughter be bewitch , for I have no point of a handsome man about I , except be straight and without deformity . " pour moi , " she continue , " il I fait tout l'effet would 'un chat - huant , avec se besicle . " Worthy old girl ! I could have go and kiss she have she not be a little too old , too fat , and too red - faced ; she sensible , truthful word seem so wholesome , contrast with the morbid illusion of she daughter . when awoke on the morning after he frenzy fit , he retain no recollection of what have happen the previous night , and he mother fortunately have the discretion to refrain from inform he that I have be a witness of he degradation . he do not again have recourse to wine for cure he grief , but even in he sober mood he soon show that the iron of jealousy have enter into he soul . a thorough , the national characteristic of ferocity have not be omit by nature in compound the ingredient of he character ; it have appear first in he access of drunken wrath , when some of he demonstration of hatred to my person be of a truly fiendish character , and now it be more covertly betraye by momentary contraction of the feature , and flash of fierceness in he light blue eye , when they glance chance to encounter mine . he absolutely avoid speak to I ; I be now spare even the falsehood of he politeness . in this state of we mutual relation , my soul rebel sometimes almost ungovernably , against live in the house and discharge the service of such a man ; but who be free from the constraint of circumstance ? at that time , I be not : I use to rise each morning eager to shake off he yoke , and go out with my portmanteau under my arm , if a beggar , at least a freeman ; and in the evening , when I come back from the pensionnat de demoiselle , a certain pleasant voice in my ear ; a certain face , so intelligent , yet so docile , so reflective , yet so soft , in my eye ; a certain cast of character , at once proud and pliant , sensitive and sagacious , serious and ardent , in my head ; a certain tone of feeling , fervid and modest , refined and practical , pure and powerful , delighting and trouble my memory -- vision of
of new tie I longe to contract , of new duty I longe to undertake , have take the rover and the rebel out of I , and have show endurance of my hated lot in the light of a virtue . but 's fury subside ; a fortnight suffice for its rise , progress , and extinction : in that space of time the dismissal of the obnoxious teacher have be effect in the neighbouring house , and in the same interval I have declare my resolution to follow and find out my pupil , and upon my application for she address be refuse , I have summarily resign my own post . this last act seem at once to restore . Reuter to she sense ; she sagacity , she judgment , so long misl by a fascinating delusion , strike again into the right track the moment that delusion vanish . by the right track , I do not mean the steep and difficult path of principle -- in that path she never trod ; but the plain highway of common sense , from which she have of late widely diverge . when there she carefully seek , and have find , industriously pursue the trail of she old suitor , . she soon overtake he . what be be she employ to soothe and blind he I know not , but she succeed both in allay he wrath , and hoodwink he discernment , as be soon prove by the alteration in he mien and manner ; she must have manage to convince he that I neither be , nor ever have been , a rival of he , for the fortnight of fury against I terminate in a fit of exceeding graciousness and amenity , not unmix with a dash of exulting self - complacency , more ludicrous than irritat . 's bachelor 's life have be pass in proper french style with due disregard to moral restraint , and I think he married life promise to be very french also . he often boast to I what a terror he have be to certain husband of he acquaintance ; I perceive it would not now be difficult to pay he back in he own coin . the crisis draw on . no sooner have the holiday commence than note of preparation for some momentous event sound all through the premise of Pelet : painter , polisher , and upholsterer be immediately set to work , and there be talk of " la chambre , " " le . " not deem it probable that the old duen na at present grac with that title in we house , have inspire she son with such enthusiasm of filial piety , as to induce he to fit up apartment expressly for she use , I conclude , in common with the cook , the two housemaid , and the kitchen - scullion , that a new and more juvenile be destin to be the tenant of these gay chamber . presently official announcement of the come event be put forth . in another week 's time , directeur , and . , directrice , be to be join together in the bands of matrimony . , in person , herald the fact to I ; terminate he communication by a obliging expression of he desire that I should continue , as heretofore , he ablest assistant and most trust friend ; and a proposition to raise my salary by a additional two hundred franc per annum . I thank he , give no conclusive answer at the time , and , when he have leave I , throw off my blouse , put on my coat , and set out on a long walk outside the , in order , as I think , to cool my blood , calm my nerve , and shake my disarrange idea into some order . in fact , I have just receive what be virtually my dismissal . I could not conceal , I do not desire to conceal from myself the conviction that , be now certain that . be destin to become it would not do for I to remain a dependent dweller in the house which be soon to be hers . she present demeanou towards I be deficient neither in dignity nor propriety ; but I know she former feeling be unchanged . now repress , and mask it , but opportunity would be too strong for either of these -- would shiver they restraint . I be no pope -- I could not boast infallibility : in short , if I stay , the probability be that , in three month ' time , a practical modern french novel would be in full process of concoction under the roof of the unsuspecting Pelet . now , modern french novel be not to my taste , either practically or theoretically . limit as have yet be my experience of life , I have once have the opportunity of contemplating , near at hand , a example of the result produce by a course of interesting and romantic domestic treachery . no golden halo of fiction be about this example , I see it bare and real , and it be very loathsome . I see a mind degrad by the practice of mean subterfuge , by the habit of perfidious deception , and a body deprave by the infectious influence of the vice - pollute soul . I have suffer much from the force and prolonge view of this spectacle ; those suffering I do not now regret , for they simple recollection act as a most wholesome antidote to temptation . they have inscribe on my reason the conviction that unlawful pleasure , trench on another 's rights , be delusive and envenom pleasure -- its hollowness disappoints at the time , it be poison
poison cruelly torture afterwards , its effect deprave for ever . from all this result the conclusion that I must leave 's , and that instantly ; " but , " say , " you know not where to go , nor how to live ; " and then the dream of true love come over I : France Henri seem to stand at my side ; she slender waist to invite my arm ; she hand to court my hand ; I feel it be make to nestle in mine ; I could not relinquish my right to it , nor could I withdraw my eye for ever from hers , where I see so much happiness , such a correspondence of heart with heart ; over whose expression I have such influence ; where I could kindle bliss , infuse awe , sty deep delight , rouse sparkling spirit , and sometimes wake pleasurable dread . my hope to will and possess , my resolution to merit and rise , rise in array against I ; and here I be about to plunge into the gulf of absolute destitution ; " and all this , " suggest a inward voice , " because you fear a evil which may never happen ! " " it will happen ; you know it will , " answer that stubborn monitor , conscience . " do what you feel be right ; obey I , and even in the slough of want I will plant for you firm foot . " and then , as I walk fast along the road , there rise upon I a strange , inly - feel idea of some great being , unseen , but all present , who in he beneficence desire only my welfare , and now watch the struggle of good and evil in my heart , and wait to see whether I should obey he voice , hear in the whisper of my conscience , or lend a ear to the sophism by which he enemy and mine -- the Spirit of -- seek to lead I astray . and steep be the path indicate by divine suggestion ; mossy and decline the green way along which Temptation strew flower ; but whereas , methotch , the Deity of , the friend of all that exist , would smile well - pleased be I to gird up my loin and address myself to the rude ascent ; so , on the other hand , each inclination to the velvet declivity seem to kindle a gleam of triumph on the brow of the man - hate , - defy demon . sharp and short I turn round ; fast I retrace my step ; in half a hour I be again at m . 's : I seek he in he study ; brief parley , concise explanation suffice ; my manner prove that I be resolve ; he , perhaps , at heart approve my decision . after twenty minute ' conversation , I re-enter my own room , self - deprive of the means of living , self - sentence to leave my present home , with the short notice of a week in which to provide another . . directly as I close the door , I see laid on the table two letter ; my thought be , that they be note of invitation from the friend of some of my pupil ; I have receive such mark of attention occasionally , and with I , who have no friend , correspondence of more interest be out of the question ; the postman 's arrival have never yet be a event of interest to I since I come to . I lay my hand carelessly on the document , and coldly and slowly glance at they , I prepare to break the seal ; my eye be arrest and my hand too ; I see what excit I , as if I have find a vivid picture where I expect only to discover a blank page : on one cover be a english postmark ; on the other , a lady 's clear , fine autograph ; the last I open first :-- " Monsieur , " I find out what you have do the very morning after you visit to I ; you might be sure I should dust the china , every day ; and , as no one but you have be in my room for a week , and as fairy - money be not current in , I could not doubt who leave the twenty franc on the chimney - piece . I think I hear you stir the vase when I be stoop to look for you glove under the table , and I wonder you should imagine it have get into such a little cup . now , monsieur , the money be not mine , and I shall not keep it ; I will not send it in this note because it might be lose -- besides , it be heavy ; but I will restore it to you the first time I see you , and you must make no difficulty about take it ; because , in the first place , I be sure , monsieur , you can understand that one like to pay one 's debt ; that it be satisfactory to owe no man anything ; and , in the second place , I can now very well afford to be honest , as I be provide with a situation . this last circumstance be , indeed , the reason of my write to you , for it be pleasant to communicate good news ; and , in these day , I have only my master to whom I can tell anything . " a week ago , monsieur , I be send for by a
a , a english lady ; she eldest daughter be go to be married , and some rich relation have make she a present of a veil and dress in costly old lace , as precious , they say , almost as jewel , but a little damage by time , I be commission to put they in repair . I have to do it at the house ; they give I , besides , some embroidery to complete , and nearly a week elapse before I have finish everything . while I work , often come into the room and sit with I , and so do . ; they make I talk ; ask how I have learn to speak it so well ; then they inquire what I know besides -- what book I have read ; soon they seem to make a sort of wonder of I , consider I no doubt as a learn grisette . one afternoon , . brotch in a parisian lady to test the accuracy of my knowledge of ; the result of it : be that , owe probably in a great degree to the mother 's and daughter 's good humour about the marriage , which inclin they to do beneficent deed , and partly , I think , because they be naturally benevolent people , they decide that the wish I have express to do something more than mend lace be a very legitimate one ; and the same day they take I in they carriage to . 's , who be the directress of the first school at . it seem she happen to be in want of a french lady to give lesson in geography , history , grammar , and composition , in the french language . recommend I very warmly ; and , as two of she younger daughter be pupil in the house , she patronage avail to get I the place . it be settle that I be to attend six hour daily ( for , happily , it be not require that I should live in the house ; I should have be sorry to leave my lodging ) , and , for this , . will give I twelve hundred franc per annum . " you see , therefore , monsieur , that I be now rich ; richer almost than I ever hope to be : I feel thankful for it , especially as my sight be begin to be injure by constant work at fine lace ; and I be get , too , very weary of sit up late at night , and yet not be able to find time for reading or study . I begin to fear that I should fall ill , and be unable to pay my way ; this fear be now , in a great measure , remove ; and , in truth , monsieur , I be very grateful to for the relief ; and I feel it necessary , almost , to speak of my happiness to some one who be kind - hear enough to derive joy from see other joyful . I could not , therefore , resist the temptation of writing to you ; I argue with myself it be very pleasant for I to write , and it will not be exactly painful , though it may be tiresome to monsieur to read . do not be too angry with my circumlocution and inelegancy of expression , and , believe I " you attach pupil , " . . " have read this letter , I muse on its contents for a few moment -- whether with sentiment pleasurable or otherwise I will hereafter note -- and then take up the other . it be direct in a hand to I unknown -- small , and rather neat ; neither masculine nor exactly feminine ; the seal bear a coat of arm , concern which i could only decipher that it be not that of the family , consequently the epistle could be from none of my almost forget , and certainly quite forget patrician relation . from whom , then , be it ? I remove the envelope ; the note fold within ran as follow : " I have no doubt in the world that you be do well in that greasy Flander ; live probably on the fat of the unctuous land ; sit like a black - haired , tawny - skinned , long - nos Israelite by the flesh - pots of ; or like a rascally son of near the brass cauldron of the sanctuary , and every now and then plunge in a consecrate hook , and draw out of the sea , of broth the fattest of heave - shoulders and the fleshiest of wave - breast . I know this , because you never write to any one in . thankless dog that you be ! I , by the sovereign efficacy of my recommendation , get you the place where you be now live in clover , and yet not a word of gratitude , or even acknowledgment , have you ever offer in return ; but I be come to see you , and small conception can you , with you add aristocratic brain , form of the sort of moral kicking I have , ready pack in my carpet - bag , destin to be present to you immediately on my arrival . " meantime I know all about you affair , and have just get information , by 's last letter , that you be say to be on the point of form a advantageous match with a pursy , little belgian schoolmistress -- a Mdlle . , or some such name . will not I have a look at she when I come over ! and this you may rely on :
: if she please my taste , or if I think it worth while in a pecuniary point of view , I will pounce on you prize and bear she away triumphant in spite of you tooth . yet I do not like dumpy either , and say she be little and stout -- the better fitte for a wiry , starve - look chap like you . " be on the look - out , for you know neither the day nor hour when you ---- " ( I do not wish to blaspheme , so I will leave a blank ) -- cometh . " yours truly , " . " " Humph ! " say I ; and ere I lay the letter down , I again glance at the small , neat handwriting , not a bit like that of a mercantile man , nor , indeed , of any man except himself . they talk of affinity between the autograph and the character : what affinity be there here ? I recall the writer 's peculiar face and certain trait I suspect , rather than knew , to appertain to he nature , and I answer , " a great deal . " , then , be come to , and come I know not when ; come charge with the expectation of find I on the summit of prosperity , about to be marry , to step into a warm nest , to lie comfortably down by the side of a snug , well - feed little mate . " I wish he joy of the fidelity of the picture he have paint , " think I . " what will he say when , instead of a pair of plump turtle dove , billing and cooe in a bower of rose , he find a single lean cormorant , stand mateless and shelterless on poverty 's bleak cliff ? oh , confound he ! let he come , and let he laugh at the contrast between rumour and fact . be he the himself , instead of be merely very like he , I would not condescmend to get out of he way , or to forge a smile or a cheerful word wherewith to avert he sarcasm . " then I recur to the other letter : that strike a chord whose sound I could not deae by thrust my finger into my ear , for it vibrate within ; and though its swell might be exquisite music , its cadence be a groan . that be relieve from the pressure of want , that the curse of excessive labour be take off she , fill I with happiness ; that she first thought in prosperity should be to augment she joy by share it with I , meet and satisfy the wish of my heart . two result of she letter be then pleasant , sweet as two draught of nectar ; but apply my lip for the third time to the cup , and they be excoriate as with vinegar and gall . two person whose desire be moderate may live well enough in on a income which would scarcely afford a respectable maintenance for one in : and that , not because the necessaries of life be so much dearer in the latter capital , or tax so much higher than in the former , but because the english surpass in folly all the nation on 's earth , and be more abject slave to custom , to opinion , to the desire to keep up a certain appearance , than the be to priestcraft , the french to vain - glory , the to they Czar , or the Germans to black beer . I have see a degree of sense in the modest arrangement of one homely belgian household , that might put to shame the elegance , the superfluity , the luxuries , the strained refinement of a hundred genteel English mansion . in , provide you can make money , you may save it ; this be scarcely possible in ; ostentation there lavish in a month what industry have earn in a year . more shame to all class in that most bountiful and beggarly country for they servile follow of ; I could write a chapter or two on this subject , but must forbear , at least for the present . have I retain my 60 l . per annum I could , now that be in possession of 50 l. , have go straight to she this very evening , and speak out the word which , repress , keep frett my heart with fever ; we united income would , as we should have manage it , have suffice well for we mutual support ; since we live in a country where economy be not confound with meanness , where frugality in dress , food , and furniture , be not synonymous with vulgarity in these various point . but the placeless usher , bare of resource , and unsupport by connection , must not think of this ; such a sentiment as love , such a word as marriage , be misplace in he heart , and on he lip . now for the first time do I truly feel what it be to be poor ; now do the sacrifice I have make in casting from I the means of live put on a new aspect ; instead of a correct , just , honourable act , it seem a deed at once light and fanatical ; I take several turn in my room , under the goading influence of most poignant remorse ; I walk a quarter of a hour from the wall to the window ; and at the window , self - reproach seem to face I ; at the wall , self - disdain :
: all at once out speak conscience :-- " down , stupid tormenter ! " cry she ; " the man have do he duty ; you shall not bait he thus by thought of what might have be ; he relinquish a temporary and contingent good to avoid a permanent and certain evil he do well . let he reflect now , and when you blinding dust and deafen hum subside , he will discover a path . " I sit down ; I prop my forehead on both my hand ; I think and think a hour - two hour ; vainly . I seem like one seal in a subterranean vault , who gaze at utter blackness ; at blackness ensure by yard - thick stone wall around , and by pile of building above , expect light to penetrate through granite , and through cement firm as granite . but there be chink , or there may be chink , in the best adjust masonry ; there be a chink in my cavernous cell ; for , eventually , I see , or seem to see , a ray -- pallid , indeed , and cold , and doubtful , but still a ray , for it show that narrow path which conscience have promise after two , three hour ' torture research in brain and memory , I disinter certain remains of circumstance , and conceive a hope that by put they together a expedient might be fram , and a resource discover . the circumstance be brieinitely these : some three month ago m . Pelet have , on the occasion of he fete , give the boy a treat , which treat consiste in a party of pleasure to a certain place of public resort in the outskirt of , of which I do not at this moment remember the name , but near it be several of those lakelet call etang ; and there be one etang , larger than the rest , where on holiday people be accustom to amuse themselves by row round it in little boat . the boy have eat a unlimited quantity of " gaufre , " and drank several bottle of beer , amid the shade of a garden make and provide for such crams , petition the director for leave to take a row on the etang . half a dozen of the eldest succeed in obtain leave , and I be commission to accompany they as surveillant . among the half dozen happen to be a certain , a most ponderous young Flamand , not tall , but even now , at the early age of sixteen , possesse a breadth and depth of personal development truly national . it chance that be the first lad to step into the boat ; he stumble , roll to one side , the boat revolt at he weight and capsize . sank like lead , rose , sank again . my coat and waistcoat be off in a instant ; I have not be brotch up at and boat and bath and swam there ten long year for nothing ; it be a natural and easy act for I to leap to the rescue . the lad and the boatman yell ; they think there would be two death by drown instead of one ; but as rise the third time , I clutch he by one leg and the collar , and in three minute more both he and I be safe lande . to speak heaven 's truth , my merit in the action be small indeed , for I have run no risk , and subsequently do not even catch cold from the wetting ; but when and , of whom be the sole hope , come to hear of the exploit , they seem to think I have evince a bravery and devotion which no thanks could sufficiently repay . , in particular , be " certain I must have dearly love they sweet son , or I would not thus have hazard my own life to save he . " , a honest - look , though phlegmatic man , say very little , but he would not suffer I to leave the room , till I have promise that in case I ever stand in need of help I would , by apply to he , give he a chance of discharge the obligation under which he affir I have lay he . these word , then , be my glimmer of light ; it be here I find my sole outlet ; and in truth , though the cold light rouse , it do not cheer I ; nor do the outlet seem such as I should like to pass through . right I have none to 's good office ; it be not on the ground of merit I could apply to he ; no , I must stand on that of necessity : I have no work ; I want work ; my best chance of obtain it lay in secure he recommendation . this I know could be have by ask for it ; not to ask , because the request revolt my pride and contradict my habits , would , I feel , be a indulgence of false and indolent fastidiousness . I might repent the omission all my life ; I would not then be guilty of it . that evening I go to 's ; but I have bend the bow and adjust the shaft in vain ; the string break . I ring the bell at the great door ( it be a large , handsome house in a expensive part of the town ) ; a manservant open ; I ask for ; and family be all out of town -- go to -- do not know when they would be back
back . I leave my card , and retrace my step . a week be go ; arrive ; the marriage be solemnize at ; . become , ; and , in about a hour after this transformation , " the happy pair , " as newspaper phrase it , be on they way to ; where , accord to previous arrangement , the honeymoon be to be spend . the next day i quit the pensionnat . myself and my chattel ( some book and clothes ) be soon transfer to a modest lodging I have hire in a street not far off . in half a hour my clothes be arrange in a commode , my book on a shelf , and the " flitting " be effect . I should not have be unhappy that day have not one pang torture I -- a longing to go to the aux Neige , resist , yet irritate by a inward resolve to avoid that street till such time as the mist of doubt should clear from my prospect . it be a sweet evening -- very mild , very still ; I have nothing to do ; at that hour I know Frances would be equally release from occupation ; I think she might possibly be wish for she master , I know I wish for my pupil . imagination begin with she low whisper , infus into my soul the soft tale of pleasure that might be . " you will find she read or write , " say she ; " you can take you seat at she side ; you need not startle she peace by undue excitement ; you need not embarrass she manner by unusual action or language . be as you always be ; look over what she have write ; listen while she read ; chide she , or quietly approve ; you know the effect of either system ; you know she smile when pleased , you know the play of she look when rouse ; you have the secret of awakening that expression you will , and you can choose amongst that pleasant variety . with you she will sit silent as long as it suit you to talk alone ; you can hold she under a potent spell : intelligent as she be , eloquent as she can be , you can seal she lip , and veil she bright countenance with diffidence ; yet , you know , she be not all monotonous mildness ; you have see , with a sort of strange pleasure , revolt , scorn , austerity , bitterness , lay energetic claim to a place in she feeling and physiognomy ; you know that few could rule she as you do ; you know she might break , but never bend under the hand of and , but and can guide she by a sign . try they influence now . go -- they be not passion ; you may handle they safely . " " I will not go be my answer to the sweet temptress . a man be master of himself to a certain point , but not beyond it . could I seek Frances to - night , could I sit with she alone in a quiet room , and address she only in the language of reason and affection ? " " no , " be the brief , fervent reply of that love which have conquer and now control I . time seem to stagnate ; the sun would not go down ; my watch tick , but I think the hand be paralyze . " what a hot evening ! " I cry , throw open the lattice ; for , indeed , I have seldom felt so feverish . hear a step ascend the common stair , I wonder whether the " locataire , " now mount to he apartment , be as unsettled in mind and condition as I be , or whether he live in the calm of certain resource , and in the freedom of unfettered feeling . what ! be he come in person to solve the problem hardly propose in inaudible thought ? he have actually knock at the door -- at my door ; a smart , prompt rap ; and , almost before I could invite he in , he be over the threshold , and have close the door behind he . " and how be you ? " ask a indifferent , quiet voice , in the language ; while my visitor , without any sort of bustle or introduction , put he hat on the table , and he glove into he hat , and draw the only armchair the room afforde a little forward , seat himself tranquilly therein . " can not you speak ? " he inquire in a few moment , in a tone whose nonchalance seem to intimate that it be much the same thing whether I answer or not . the fact be , I find it desirable to have recourse to my good friend " les besicle ; " not exactly to ascertain the identity of my visitor -- for I already know he , confound he impudence ! but to see how he look -- to get a clear notion of he mien and countenance . I wip the glass very deliberately , and put they on quite as deliberately ; adjust they so as not to hurt the bridge of my nose or get entangle in my short tuft of dun hair . I be sit in the window - seat , with my back to the light , and I have he tVis - a - Vis ; a position he would much rather have have reverse ; for , at any time , he prefer scrutinize to be scrutinize . yes , it be
be he , and no mistake , with he six foot of length arrange in a sit attitude ; with he dark travel surtout with its velvet collar , he gray pantaloon , he black stock , and he face , the most original one nature ever model , yet the least obtrusively so ; not one feature that could be term marked or odd , yet the effect of the whole unique . there be no use in attempt to describe what be indescribable . be in no hurry to address he , I sit and star at my ease . " oh , that be you game -- be it ? " say he at last . " well , we will see which be soonest tired . " and he slowly draw out a fine cigar - case , pick one to he taste , light it , take a book from the shelf convenient to he hand , then lean back , proceed to smoke and read as tranquilly as if he have be in he own room , in - street , X --- shire , . I know he be capable of continue in that attitude till midnight , if he conceive the whim , so I rise , and take the book from he hand , I say ,-- " you do not ask for it , and you shall not have it . " " it be silly and dull , " he observ , " so I have not lose much ; " then the spell be break , he go on . " I think you live at 's ; I go there this afternoon expect to be starve to death by sit in a boarding - school drawing - room , and they tell I you be go , have depart this morning ; you have leave you address behind you though , which I wonder at ; it be a more practical and sensible precaution than I should have imagine you capable of . why do you leave ? " " because m . Pelet have just marry the lady whom you and assign to I as my wife . " " oh , indeed ! " reply with a short laugh ; " so you have lose both you wife and you place ? " " precisely so . " I see he give a quick , covert glance all round my room ; he mark its narrow limit , its scanty furniture : in a instant he have comprehend the state of matter -- have absolve I from the crime of prosperity . a curious effect this discovery wrotch in he strange mind ; I be morally certain that if he have find I install in a handsome parlour , lounge on a soft couch , with a pretty , wealthy wife at my side , he would have hate I ; a brief , cold , haughty visit , would in such a case have be the extreme limit of he civility , and never would he have come near I more , so long as the tide of fortune bear I smoothly on its surface ; but the pain furniture , the bare wall , the cheerless solitude of my room relax he rigid pride , and I know not what soften change have take place both in he voice and look ere he speak again . " you have get another place ? " " no . " " you be in the way of get one ? " " no . " " that be bad ; have you apply to ? " " no , indeed . " " you have better ; he often have it in he power to give useful information in such matters . " " he serve I once very well ; I have no claim on he , and be not in the humour to bother he again . " " oh , if you be bashful , and dread be intrusive , you need only commission I . I shall see he to - night ; I can put in a word . " " I beg you will not , ; I be in you debt already ; you do I a important service when I be at X ---- ; get I out of a den where I be die : that service I have never repay , and at present I decline positively add another item to the account . " " if the wind sit that way , I be satisfied . I think my unexampled generosity in turn you out of that accurse counting - house would be duly appreciate some day : ' cast you bread on the water , and it shall be find after many day , ' say the Scripture . yes , that be right , lad -- make much of I -- I be a nonpareil : there be nothing like I in the common herd . in the meantime , to put all humbug aside and talk sense for a few moment , you would be greatly the better of a situation , and what be more , you be a fool if you refuse to take one from any hand that offer it . " " very well , ; now you have settle that point , talk of something else . what news from ----? " " I have not settle that point , or at least there be another to settle before we get to ---- . be this " ( , interpose I ) --" well , -- be she really marry to ? " " I tell you yes -- and if you do not believe I , go and ask the cure of . " " and you heart be break ? " " I be not
not aware that it be ; it feel all right -- beat as usual . " " then you feeling be less superfine than I take they to be ; you must be a coarse , callous character , to bear such a thwack without stagger under it . " " Stagger under it ? what the deuce be there to stagger under in the circumstance of a belgian schoolmistress marry a french schoolmaster ? the progeny will doubtless be a strange hybrid race ; but that be they look out -- not mine . " " he indulge in scurrilous jest , and the bride be he affiance one ! " " who say so ? " " . " " I will tell you what , -- be a old gossip . " " he be ; but in the meantime , if he gossip be found on less than fact -- if you take no particular interest in -- why , of youthful pedagogue ! do you leave you place in consequence of she become ? " " because -- " I feel my face grow a little hot ; " because -- in short , , I decline answer any more question , " and I plunge my hand deep in my breech pocket . triumph : he eye -- he laugh announced victory . " what the deuce be you laugh at , ? " " at you exemplary composure . well , lad , I will not bear you ; I see how it be : have jilt you -- marry some one richer , as any sensible woman would have do if she have have the chance . " I make no reply -- I let he think so , not feel inclin to enter into a explanation of the real state of thing , and as little to forge a false account ; but it be not easy to blind ; my very silence , instead of convince he that he have hit the truth , seem to render he doubtful about it ; he go on :-- " I suppose the affair have be conduct as such affair always be amongst rational people : you offer she you youth and you talents - such as they be -- in exchange for she position and money : I do not suppose you take appearance , or what be call , into the account -- for I understand she be older than you , and say , rather sensible - look than beautiful . she , have then no chance of make a better bargain , be at first inclin to come to term with you , but -- the head of a flourishing school -- step in with a higher bid ; she accept , and he have get she : a correct transaction -- perfectly so -- business - like and legitimate . and now we will talk of something else . " " do , " say I , very glad to dismiss the topic , and especially glad to have baffle the sagacity of my cross -questioner -- if , indeed , I have baffle it ; for though he word now lead away from the dangerous point , he eye , keen and watchful , see still preoccupy with the former idea . " you want to hear news from ---- ? and what interest can you have in ---- ? you leave no friend there , for you make none . nobody ever ask after you -- neither man nor woman ; and if I mention you name in company , the man look as if I have speak of ; and the woman sneer covertly . we x ---- belle must have dislike you . how do you excite they displeasure ? " " I do not know . I seldom speak to they -- they be nothing to I . I consider they only as something to be glance at from a distance ; they dress and face be often pleasing enough to the eye : but I could not understand they conversation , nor even read they countenance . when I catch snatch of what they say , I could never make much of it ; and the play of they lip and eye do not help I at all . " " that be you fault , not theirs . there be sensible , as well as handsome woman in ---- ; women it be worth any man 's while to talk to , and with whom I can talk with pleasure : but you have and have no pleasant address ; there be nothing in you to induce a woman to be affable . I have remark you sit near the door in a room full of company , bend on hearing , not on speak ; on observing , not on entertaining ; look frigidly shy at the commencement of a party , confusingly vigilant about the middle , and insultingly weary towards the end . be that the way , do you think , ever to communicate pleasure or excite interest ? no ; and if you be generally unpopular , it be because you deserve to be so . " " content ! " I ejaculate . " no , you be not contend ; you see beauty always turn it be back on you ; you be mortified and then you sneer . I verily believe all that be desirable on earth -- wealth , reputation , love -- will for ever to you be the ripe grape on the high trellis : you will look up at they ; they will tantalize in you the lust of the eye ; but they be out of reach : you have not the address to fetch a ladder , and you will go away call they sour . " cut
cut as these word might have be under some circumstance , they draw no blood now . my life be change ; my experience have be vari since I leave -- -- , but could not know this ; he have see I only in the character of 's clerk -- a dependent amongst wealthy stranger , meeting disdain with a hard front , conscious of a unsocial and unattractive exterior , refuse to sue for notice which I be sure would be withheld , decline to evince a admiration which I know would be scorn as worthless . he could not be aware that since then youth and loveliness have be to I every day object ; that I have study they at leisure and closely , and have see the plain texture of truth under the embroidery of appearance ; nor could he , kee -sighted as he be , penetrate into my heart , search my brain , and read my peculiar sympathy and antipathy ; he have not know I long enough , or well enough , to perceive how low my feeling would ebb under some influence , powerful over most mind ; how high , how fast they would flow under other influence , that perhaps act with the more intense force on I , because they act on I alone . neither could he suspect for a instant the history of my communication with . reuter ; secret to he and to all other be the tale of she strange infatuation ; she blandishment , she wile have be see but by I , and to I only be they know ; but they have change I , for they have prove that I could impress . a sweeter secret nestle deeper in my heart ; one full of tenderness and as full of strength : it take the sting out of 's sarcasm ; it keep I unbent by shame , and unstir by wrath . but of all this I could say nothing -- nothing decisive at least ; uncertainty seal my lip , and during the interval of silence by which alone I reply to , I make up my mind to be for the present wholly misjudge by he , and misjudge I be ; he think he have be rather too hard upon I , and that I be crush by the weight of he upbraiding ; so to re-assure I he say , doubtless I should mmend some day ; I be only at the beginning of life yet ; and since happily I be not quite without sense , every false step I make would be a good lesson . just then I turn my face a little to the light ; the approach of twilight , and my position in the window - seat , have , for the last ten minute , prevent he from study my countenance ; as I move , however , he catch a expression which he thus interpret :-- " Confound it ! how doggedly self - approve the lad look ! I think he be fit to die with shame , and there he sit grinn smile , as good as to say , ' let the world wag as it will , I have the philosopher 's stone in my waist - coat pocket , and the elixir of life in my cupboard ; I be independent of both and . ' " " -- you speak of grape ; I be think of a fruit I like better than you x ---- hot - house grape -- a unique fruit , grow wild , which I have mark as my own , and hope one day to gather and taste . it be of no use you offer I the dratch of bitterness , or threaten I with death by thirst : I have the anticipation of sweetness on my palate ; the hope of freshness on my lip ; I can reject the unsavoury , and endure the exhausting . " " for how long ? " " till the next opportunity for effort ; and as the prize of success will be a treasure after my own heart , I will bring a bull 's strength to the struggle . " " bad luck crush bull as easily as bullace ; and , I believe , the fury dog you : you be bear with a wooden spoon in you mouth , depend on it . " " I believe you ; sad I mean to make my wooden spoon do the work of some people 's silver ladle : grasp firmly , and hand nimbly , even a wooden spoon will shovel up broth . " rise : " I see , " say he ; " I suppose you be one of those who develop best unwatched , and act best unaided - work you own way . now , I will go . " and , without another word , he be go ; at the door he turn :-- " be sell , " say he . " ! " be my echo . " yes ; you know , of course , that you brother fail three month ago ? " " what ! ? " " precisely ; and he wife go home to she father ; when affairs go awry , he temper sympathize with they ; he use she ill ; I tell you he would be a tyrant to she some day ; as to he - - " " ay , as to he -- what be become of he ? " " nothing extraordinary -- do not be alarm ; he put himself under the protection of the court , compound with he creditor -- tenpence in the pound ; in six week set up again , coax back he wife , and be
be flourish like a green bay - tree . " " and -- be the furniture sell too ? " " everything -- from the grand piano down to the roll -pin . " " and the contents of the oak dining - room -- be they sell ? " " of course ; why should the sofa and chair of that room be hold more sacred than those of any other ? " " and the picture ? " " what picture ? have no special collection that I know of -- he do not profess to be a amateur . " " there be two portrait , one on each side the mantelpiece ; you can not have forget they , ; you once notice that of the lady -- " " oh , I know ! the thing - face gentlewoman with a shawl put on like drapery .-- why , as a matter of course , it would be sell among the other thing . if you have be rich , you might have buy it , for I remember you say it represent you mother : you see what it be to be without a sou . " I do . " but surely , " I think to myself , " I shall not always be so poverty - stricken ; I may one day buy it back yet .-- who purchase it ? do you know ? " I ask . " how be it likely ? I never inquire who purchase anything ; there speak the unpractical man -- to imagine all the world be interested in what interest himself ! now , good night -- I be off for to -morrow morning ; I shall be back here in six week , and possibly I may call and see you again ; I wonder whether you will be still out of place ! " he laugh , as mockingly , as heartlessly as , and so laugh , vanish . some people , however indifferent they may become after a considerable space of absence , always contrive to leave a pleasant impression just at parting ; not so Hunsden , a conference with he affect one like a dratch of Peruvian bark ; it seem a concentration of the specially harsh , stringent , bitter ; whether , like bark , it invigorate , I scarcely know . a ruffle mind make a restless pillow ; I sleep little on the night after this interview ; towards morning I begin to doze , but hardly have my slumber become sleep , when I be rouse from it by hear a noise in my sitting room , to which my bed - room adjoin -- a step , and a shoving of furniture ; the movement last barely two minute ; with the closing of the door it cease . I listen ; not a mouse stir ; perhaps I have dreamt it ; perhaps a locataire have make a mistake , and enter my apartment instead of he own . it be yet but five o'clock ; neither I nor the day be wide awake ; I turn , and be soon unconscious . when I do rise , about two hour later , I have forget the circumstance ; the first thing I see , however , on quit my chamber , recal it ; just push in at the door of my sitting - room , and still stand on end , be a wooden packing - case -- a rough deal affair , wide but shallow ; a porter have doubtless shove it forward , but see no occupant of the room , have leave it at the entrance . " that be none of mine , " think I , approach ; " it must be mean for somebody else . " I stoop to examine the address :-- " Wm . , , no --, -- , . " I be puzzl , but conclude that the best way to obtain information be to ask within , I cut the cord and open the case . green baize envelo its contents , sew carefully at the side ; I rip the pack -thread with my pen-knife , and still , as the seam give way , glimpse of gilding appear through the widening interstice . board and baize be at length remove , I lift from the case a large picture , in a magnificent frame ; lean it against a chair , in a position where the light from the window fall favourably upon it , I step back -- already I have mount my spectacle . a portrait - painter 's sky ( the most sombre and threaten of welkin ) , and distant tree of a conventional depth of hue , raise in full relief a pale , pensive - look female face , shadowed with soft dark hair , almost blend with the equally dark cloud ; large , solemn eye look reflectively into mine ; a thin cheek rest on a delicate little hand ; a shawl , artistically drape , half hid , half show a slight figure . a listener ( have there be one ) might have hear I , after ten minute ' silent gazing , utter the word " mother ! " I might have say more -- but with I , the first word utter aloud in soliloquy rouse consciousness ; it remind I that only crazy people talk to themselves , and then I think out my monologue , instead of speak it . I have think a long while , and a long while have contemplate the intelligence , the sweetness , and -- alas ! the sadness also of those fine , grey eye , the mental power of that forehead , and the rare sensibility of that serious mouth , when my
my glance , travel downward , fall on a narrow billet , stuck in the corner of the picture , between the frame and the canva . then I first ask , " who send this picture ? who think of I , save it out of the wreck of , and now commit it to the care of its natural keeper ? " I take the note from it be nico ; thus it speak :-- " there be a sort of stupid pleasure in give a child sweet , a fool he bell , a dog a bone . you be repay by see the child besmear he face with sugar ; by witnesse how the fool 's ecstasy make a greater fool of he than ever ; by watch the dog 's nature come out over he bone . in give he mother 's picture , I give he sweet , bell , and bone all in one ; what grieve I be , that I can not behold the result ; I would have add five shilling more to my bid if the auctioneer could only have promise I that pleasure . " h . . h . " p.s. -- you say last night you positively decline add another item to you account with I ; do not you think I have save you that trouble ? " I muff the picture in its green baize cover , restore it to the case , and have transport the whole concern to my bed - room , put it out of sight under my bed . my pleasure be now poisone by pungent pain ; I determine to look no more till I could look at my ease . if have come in at that moment , I should have say to he , " I owe you nothing , -- not a fraction of a farthing : you have pay yourself in taunt ! " too anxious to remain any longer quiescent , I have no sooner breakfasted , than I repair once more to 's , scarcely hope to find he at home ; for a week have barely elapse since my first call : but fancie I might be able to glean information as to the time when he return be expect . a better result await I than I have anticipate , for though the family be yet at , have come over to Brussels on business for the day . he receive I with the quiet kindness of a sincere though not excitable man . I have not sit five minute alone with he in he bureau , before I become aware of a sense of ease in he presence , such as I rarely experience with strangers . I be surprise at my own composure , for , after all , I have come on business to I exceedingly painful -- that of solicite a favour . I ask on what basis the calm rest -- I fear it might be deceptive . Ere long I catch a glimpse of the ground , and at once I feel assure of its solidity ; I know where it be . be rich , respecte , and influential ; I , poor , despised and powerless ; so we stand to the world at large as member of the world 's society ; but to each other , as a pair of human being , we position be reverse . the ( he be not Flamand , but pure Hollandais ) be slow , cool , of rather dense intelligence , though sound and accurate judgment ; the far more nervous , active , quicker both to plan and to practise , to conceive and to realize . the be benevolent , the susceptible ; in short we characters dovetail , but my mind have more fire and action than he , instinctively assume and keep the predominance . this point settle , and my position well ascertain , I address he on the subject of my affair with that genuine frankness which full confidence can alone inspire . it be a pleasure to he to be so appeal to ; he thank I for give he this opportunity of use a little exertion in my behalf . I go on to explain to he that my wish be not so much to be help , as to be put into the way of help myself ; of he I do not want exertion -- that be to be my part -- but only information and recommendation . after I rise to go . he hold out he hand at parting -- a action of greater significance with foreigner than with . as I exchange a smile with he , I think the benevolence of he truthful face be better than the intelligence of my own . characters of my order experience a balm - like solace in the contact of such soul as animate the honest breast of . the next fortnight be a period of many alternation ; my existence during it be lapse resemble a sky of one of those autumnal night which be specially haunt by meteor and fall star . hope and fear , expectation and disappointment , descend in glancing shower from zenith to ; but all be transient , and darkness follow swift each vanish apparition . aide I faithfully ; he set I on the track of several place , and himself make effort to secure they for I ; but for a long time solicitation and recommendation be vain -- the door either shut in my face when I be about to walk in , or another candidate , enter before I , render my further advance useless . Feverish and rouse , no disappointment arrest I ; defeat follow fast on defeat serve as stimulant to . I forget fastidiousness , conquer reserve
reserve , thrust pride from I : I ask , I persever , I remonstrate , I dun . it be so that opening be force into the guarded circle where sit deal favour round . my perseverance make I know ; my importunity make I remark . I be inquire about ; my former pupil ' parent , gather the report of they child , hear I speak of as talented , and they echo the word : the sound , bandy about at random , come at last to ear which , but for its universality , it might never have reach ; and at the very crisis when I have try my last effort and know not what to do , look in at I one morning , as I sit in drear and almost desperate deliberation on my bedstead , nod with the familiarity of a old acquaintance -- though know I have never meet she before -- and throw a prize into my lap . in the second week of , 18 --, I get the appointment of English professor to all the class of ---- , , with a salary of three thousand franc per annum ; and the certainty of be able , by dint of the reputation and publicity accompany the position , to make as much more by private means . the official notice , which communicate this information , mention also that it be the strong recommendation of , negociant , which have turn the scale of choice in my favour . no sooner have I read the announcement than I hurrie to 's , push the document under he nose , and when he have peruse it , take both he hand , and thanke he with unrestrained vivacity . my vivid word and emphatic gesture move he Dutch calm to unwonted sensation . he say he be happy -- glad to have serve I ; but he have do nothing merit such thanks . he have not lay out a centime -- only scratch a few word on a sheet of paper . again I repeat to he -- " you have make I quite happy , and in a way that suit I ; I do not feel a obligation irksome , confer by you kind hand ; I do not feel disposed to shin you because you have do I a favour ; from this day you must consent to admit I to you intimate acquaintance , for I shall hereafter recur again and again to the pleasure of you society . " " Ainsi soit - il , " be the reply , accompany by a smile of benignant content . I go away with its sunshine in my heart . it be two o'clock when I return to my lodging ; my dinner , just bring in from a neighbour hotel , smoke on the table ; I sit down think to eat -- have the plate be heape with potsherd and break glass , instead of boiled beef and haricot , I could not have make a more signal failure : appetite have forsake I . impatient of see food which I could not taste , I put it all aside into a cupboard , and then demand , " what shall I do till evening ? " for before six p.m. it would be vain to seek the aux Neige ; its inhabitant ( for I it have but one ) be detain by she vocation elsewhere . I walk in the street of , and I walk in my own room from two o'clock till six ; never once in that space of time do I sit down . I be in my chamber when the last - name hour struck ; I have just bath my face and feverish hand , and be stand near the glass ; my cheek be crimson , my eye be flame , still all my feature look quite settled and calm . Descend swiftly the stair and step out , I be glad to see draw on in cloud ; such shade be to I like a grateful screen , and the chill of latter , breath in a fitful wind from the north - west , meet I as a refresh coolness . still I see it be cold to other , for the woman I pass be wrap in shawl , and the man have they coat button close . when be we quite happy ? be I so then ? no ; a urgent and grow dread worried my nerve , and have worry they since the first moment good tiding have reach I . how be ? it be ten week since I have see she , six since I have hear from she , or of she . I have answer she letter by a brief note , friendly but calm , in which no mention of continue correspondence or further visit be make . at that hour my bark hang on the topmost curl of a wave of fate , and I know not on what shoal the onward rush of the billow might hurl it ; I would not then attach she destiny to mine by the slightest thread ; if doom to split on the rock , or run a aground on the sand - bank , I be resolve no other vessel should share my disaster : but six week be a long time ; and could it be that she be still well and do well ? be not all sage agree in declare that happiness find no climax on earth ? I think that but half a street now divide I from the full cup of contentment -- the dratch drawn from water say to flow only in heaven ? I be at the door ; I enter the quiet house ; I mount
mount the stair ; the lobby be void and still , all the door close ; I look for the neat green mat ; it lay duly in its place . " signal of hope ! " I say , and advanced . " but I will be a little calmer ; I be not go to rush in , and get up a scene directly . " Forcibly stay my eager step , I pause on the mat . " what a absolute hush ! be she in ? be anybody in ? " I demand to myself . a little tinkle , as of cinder fall from a grate , reply ; a movement -- a fire be gently stir ; and the slight rustle of life continue , a step pace equably backward and forward , backward and forwards , in the apartment . Fascinate , I stand , more fixedly fascinate when a voice reward the attention of my strained ear -- so low , so self - address , I never fancie the speaker otherwise than alone ; solitude might speak thus in a desert , or in the hall of a forsaken house . " ' and ne 'er but once , my son ,' he say , ' be yon dark cavern trod ; in persecution 's iron day , when the land be leave by . from 's bog , with slaughter red , a wanderer hither drew ; and oft he stopp' and turn would he head , as by fit the night - wind blew . for trampling round by - edge hear the trooper keen ; and frequent from the ridge the death - shot flash would between , ' " &c . &c . the old be partly recit , then dropt ; a pause ensue ; then another strain follow , in , of which the purport , translate , run as follow :-- I give , at first , attention close ; then interest warm ensue ; from interest , as improvement rise , succeed gratitude . obedience be no effort soon , and labou be no pain ; if tired , a word , a glance alone would give I strength again . from other of the studious band , Ere long he single I ; but only by more close demand , and sterner urgency . the task he from another take , From I he do reject ; he would no slight omission brook , and suffer no defect . if my companion go astray , he scarce they wandering blbe ' ; if I but falter ' in the way , he anger fiercely flbe ' . something stir in a adjoin chamber ; it would not do to be surprised eave - dropping ; I tap hastily , and as hastily enter . be just before I ; she have be walk slowly in she room , and she step be check by my advent : twilight only be with she , and tranquil , ruddy Firelight ; to these sister , the and the , she have be speak , ere I enter , in poetry . 's , to she a foreign , far - off sound , a mountain echo , have utter itself in the first stanza ; the second , I think , from the style and the substance , be the language of she own heart . she face be grave , its expression concentrate ; she bend on I a unsmiling eye -- a eye just return from abstraction , just awak from dream : well - arrange be she simple attire , smooth she dark hair , orderly she tranquil room ; but what -- with she thoughtful look , she serious self - reliance , she bend to meditation and haply inspiration -- what have she to do with love ? " nothing , " be the answer of she own sad , though gentle countenance ; it seem to say , " I must cultivate fortitude and cling to poetry ; one be to be my support and the other my solace through life . human affection do not bloom , nor do human passion glow for I . " other woman have such thought . France , have she be as desolate as she deem , would not have be worse off than thousand of she sex . look at the rigid and formal race of old maid -- the race whom all despise ; they have feed themselves , from youth upward , on maxim of resignation and endurance . many of they get ossified with the dry diet ; self - control be so continually they thought , so perpetually they object , that at last it absorb the softer and more agreeable quality of they nature ; and they die mere model of austerity , fashio out of a little parchment and much bone . Anatomist will tell you that there be a heart in the wither old maid 's carcase -- the same as in that of any cherish wife or proud mother in the land . can this be so ? I really do not know ; but feel inclined to doubt it . I come forward , bay Frances " good evening , " and take my seat . the chair I have choose be one she have probably just leave ; it stand by a little table where be she open desk and papers . I know not whether she have fully recognize I at first , but she do so now ; and in a voice , soft but quiet , she return my greeting . I have show no eagerness ; she take she cue from I , and evince no surprise . we meet as I have always meet , as master and pupil -- nothing more . I proceed to
to handle the papers ; France , observant and serviceable , step into a inner room , bring a candle , light it , place it by I ; then draw the curtain over the lattice , and have add a little fresh fuel to the already bright fire , she draw a second chair to the table and sit down at my right hand , a little removed . the paper on the top be a translation of some grave french author into , but underneath lay a sheet with stanza ; on this I lay hand . France half rise , make a movement to recover the capture spoil , say , that be nothing -- a mere copy of verse . I put by resistance with the decision I know she never long oppose ; but on this occasion she finger have fasten on the paper . I have quietly to unloose they ; they hold dissolve to my touch ; she hand shrunk away ; my own would fain have follow it , but for the present I forbade such impulse . the first page of the sheet be occupy with the line I have overheard ; the sequel be not exactly the writer 's own experience , but a composition by portion of that experience suggest . thus while egotism be avoid , the fancy be exercise , and the heart satisfied . I translate as before , and my translation be nearly literal ; it continue thus :-- when sickness stay have a while my course , he seem would impatient still , because he pupil 's flagging force could not obey he will . one day when summon to the bed where pain and I do strive , I hear he , as he bend he head , , " God , she must revive ! " I feel he hand , with gentle stress , a moment laid on mine , and wish to mark my consciousness by some responsive sign . but pow'rless then to speak or move , I only feel , within , the sense of , the strength of Love , they heal work begin . and as he from the room withdrew , my heart he step pursue ; I long have to prove , by effort new ; my speechless gratitude . when once again I take my place , long vacant , in the class , unfrequent smile across he face for one moment pass . the lesson do ; the signal make of glad release and play , he , as he pass , a instant stay ' , one kindly word to say . " , till to - morrow you be free from tedious task and rule ; this afternoon I must not see that yet pale face in school . " seek in the garden - shade a seat , far from the play - ground din ; the sun be warm , the air be sweet : stay till I call you in . " a long and pleasant afternoon I pass in those green bower ; all silent , tranquil , and alone with bird , and be , and flower . yet , when my master 's voice I hear call , from the window , " ! " I enter , joyful , at the word , the busy house again . he , in the hall , pace up and down ; he pause as I pass by ; he forehead stern relaxed its fry : he raise he deep - set eye . " not quite so pale , " he murmure low . " now , go rest awhile . " and as I smile , he smoothen brow return as glad a smile . my perfect health restore , he take he mien austere again ; and , as before , he would not brook the slightest fault from . the longest task , the hardest theme fall to my share as erst , and still I toil to place my name in every study first . he yet begrudge and stint praise , but I have learn to read the secret meaning of he face , and that be my best meed . even when he hasty temper spoke in tone that sorrow stir , my grief be lull as soon as woke by some relent word . and when he lent some precious book , or give some fragrant flower , I do not quail to 's look , Upheld by 's power . at last we school rank take they ground , the hard - fight field I win ; the prize , a laurel - wreath , be bound my throbbing forehead on . low at my master 's knee I bend , the offer crown to meet ; it be green leave through my temple send a thrill as wild as sweet . the strong pulse of Ambition struck in every vein I own ; at the same instant , bleed break a secret , inward wound . the hour of triumph be to I the hour of sorrow sore ; a day hence I must cross the sea , 'er to recross it more . a hour hence , in my master 's room I will he sit alone , and tell he what a dreary gloom of 'er joy have part thrown . he little say ; the time be brief , the ship be soon to sail , and while I sob in bitter grief , my master but look pale . they call in haste ; he bay I go , then snatch I back again ; he hold I fast and murmure low , " why will they part we , ? " " be you not happy in my care ? do I not faithful prove ? will other to my darling bear
bear as true , as deep a love ? " of , watch of 'er my foster child ! of guard she gentle head ! when minds be high and tempest wild Protection round she spread ! " they call again ; leave then my breast ; quit thy true shelter , ; but when deceive , repulse , opprest , come home to I again ! " I read -- then dreamily make mark on the margin with my pencil ; think all the while of other thing ; think that " " be now at my side ; no child , but a girl of nineteen ; and she might be mine , so my heart affir ; 's curse be take off I ; and be far away , and unapprized of this we quiet meeting ; the frost of the master 's manner might melt ; I feel the thaw come fast , whether I would or not ; no further need for the eye to practise a hard look , for the brow to compress its expense into a stern fold : it be now permit to suffer the outward revelation of the inward glow -- to seek , demand , elicin a answer ardour . while muse thus , I think that the grass on never drank the fresh dew of sunset more gratefully than my feeling drank the bliss of this hour . France rise , as if restless ; she pass before I to stir the fire , which do not want stirring ; she lift and put down the little ornament on the mantelpiece ; she dress wav within a yard of I ; slight , straight , and elegant , she stand erect on the hearth . there be impulse we can control ; but there be other which control we , because they attain we with a tiger - leap , and be we master ere we have see they . perhaps , though , such impulse be seldom altogether bad ; perhaps , by a process as brief as quiet , a process that be finish ere felt , have ascertain the sanity of the deed instinct meditate , and feel justified in remain passive while it be perform . I know I do not reason , I do not plan or intend , yet , whereas one moment I be sit solus on the chair near the table , the next , I hold Frances on my knee , place there with sharpness and decision , and retain with exceeding tenacity . " ! " cry , and be still : not another word escape she lip ; sorely confound she see during the lapse of the first few moment ; but the amazement soon subside ; terror do not succeed , nor fury : after all , she be only a little nearer than she have ever be before , to one she habitually respect and trust ; embarrassment might have impell she to contend , but self - respect check resistance where resistance be useless . " France , how much regard have you for I ? " be my demand . no answer ; the situation be yet too new and surprising to permit speech . on this consideration , I compelle myself for some seconds to tolerate she silence , though impatient of it : presently , I repeat the same question -- probably , not in the calmest of tone ; she look at I ; my face , doubtless , be no model of composure , my eye no still well of tranquillity . " do speak , " I urge ; and a very low , hurrie , yet still arch voice say -- " , vous I faite mal ; lachez un peu ma main droite . " in truth I become aware that I be hold the say " main droite " in a somewhat ruthless grasp : I do have desire ; and , for the third time , ask more gently -- " France , how much regard have you for I ? " " Mon maitre , 'en be beaucoup , " be the truthful rejoinder . " France , have you enough to give yourself to I as my wife ? -- to accept I as you husband ? " I feel the agitation of the heart , I see " the purple light of love " cast its glow reflection on cheek , temple , neck ; I desire to consult the eye , but shelter lash and lid forbade . " Monsieur , " say the soft voice at last ,-- " yoMonsieu desire savoir si je consens -- si--enfin , si je veux I mare avec lui ? " " Justement . " " yoMonsieu sera -t - il aussi bon mari qu'il a ete bon maitre ? " " I will try , . " a pause ; then with a new , yet still subdue inflexion of the voice -- a inflexion which provoke while it please I -- accompany , too , by a " sourire a la fois fin et timide " in perfect harmony with the tone :-- " C'est a dire , monsieur sera toujour un peu entete exigeant , volontaire --? " " have I be so , ? " " Mais oui ; vous le savez bien . " " have I be nothing else ? " " Mais oui ; vons avez ete mon meilleur ami . " " and what , , be you to I ? " " Votre devouee eleve , qui vous aime de tout son coeur . " " will my pupil consent to pass she life with I ? now , . " some moments be take for reflection ; the answer , pronounce slowly , run thus :-- " you have always make I happy ;
; I like to hear you speak ; I like to see you ; I like to be near you ; I believe you be very good , and very superior ; I know you be stern to those who be careless and idle , but you be kind , very kind to the attentive and industrious , even if they be not clever . master , I should be glad to live with you always ; " and she make a sort of movement , as if she would have cling to I , but restrain herself she only add with earnest emphasis -- " master , I consent to pass my life with you . " " very well , . " I draw she a little nearer to my heart ; I take a first kiss from she lip , thereby seal the compact , now fram between we ; afterwards she and I be silent , nor be we silence brief . France ' thought , during this interval , I know not , nor do I attempt to guess they ; I be not occupy in search she countenance , nor in otherwise trouble she composure . the peace I feel , I wish she to feel ; my arm , it be true , still detain she ; but with a restraint that be gentle enough , so long as no opposition tighten it . my gaze be on the re fire ; my heart be measure its own content ; it sound and sound , and find the depth fathomless . " Monsieur , " at last say my quiet companion , as stirless in she happiness as a mouse in it be terror . even now in speak she scarcely lift she head . " well , ? " I like unexaggerated intercourse ; it be not my way to overpower with amorous epithet , any more than to worry with selfishly importunate caress . " yoMonsieu est raisonnable , n'eut - ce pa ? " " yes ; especially when I be request to be so in : but why do you ask I ? you see nothing vehement or obtrusive in my manner ; be I not tranquil enough ? " " Ce n'est pa cela -- " begin Frances . " ! " I remind she . " well , monsieur , I wish merely to say , that I should like , of course , to retain my employment of teaching . you will teach still , I suppose , yomonsieu ? " " oh , yes ! it be all I have to depend on . " " !-- I mean good . thus we shall have both the same profession . I like that ; and my effort to get on will be as unrestrained as yours -- will they not , monsieur ? " " you be lay plan to be independent of I , " say I . " yes , monsieur ; I must be no incumbrance to you -- no burden in any way . " " but , , I have not yet tell you what my prospect be . I have leave 's ; and after nearly a month 's seek , I have get another place , with a salary of three thousand franc a year , which I can easily double by a little additional exertion . thus you see it would be useless for you to fag yourself by go out to give lesson ; on six thousand franc you and I can live , and live well . " France seem to consider . there be something flattering to man 's strength , something consonant to he honourable pride , in the idea of become the providence of what he love -- feed and clothe it , as do the lily of the field . so , to decide she resolution , I go on :-- " life have be painful and laborious enough to you so far , Frances ; you require complete rest ; you twelve hundred franc would not form a very important addition to we income , and what sacrifice of comfort to earn it ! Relinquish you labour : you must be weary , and let I have the happiness of give you rest . " I be not sure whether Frances have accord due attention to my harangue ; instead of answer I with she usual respectful promptitude , she only sigh and say ,-- " how rich you be , monsieur ! " and then she stir uneasy in my arm . " three thousand franc ! " she murmure , " while I get only twelve hundred ! " she go on faster . " however , it must be so for the present ; and , monsieur , be you not say something about my give up my place ? oh no ! I shall hold it fast ; " and she little finger emphatically tighten on mine . " think of my marry you to be keep by you , monsieur ! I could not do it ; and how dull my day would be ! you would be away teach in close , noisy school -room , from morning till evening , and I should be linger at home , unemployed and solitary ; I should get depressed and sullen , and you would soon tire of I . " " France , you could read and study -- two thing you like so well . " " Monsieur , I could not ; I like a contemplative life , but I like a active life better ; I must act in some way , and act with you . I have take notice , monsieur , that people who be only in each other 's company for amusement , never really like each other so
so well , or esteem each other so highly , as those who work together , and perhaps suffer together . " " you speak 's truth , " say I at last , " and you shall have you own way , for it be the best way . now , as a reward for such ready consent , give I a voluntary kiss . " after some hesitation , natural to a novice in the art of kissing , she bring she lip into very shy and gentle contact with my forehead ; I take the small gift as a loan , and repay it promptly , and with generous interest . I know not whether be really much altered since the time I first see she ; but , as I look at she now , I feel that she be singularly change for I ; the sad eye , the pale cheek , the dejected and joyless countenance I remember as she early attribute , be quite gone , and now I see a face dress in graces ; smile , dimple , and rosy tint , round its contour and brighten its hue . I have be accustom to nurse a flattering idea that my strong attachment to she prove some particular perspicacity in my nature ; she be not handsome , she be not rich , she be not even accomplish , yet be she my life 's treasure ; I must then be a man of peculiar discernment . to - night my eye open on the mistake I have make ; I begin to suspect that it be only my taste which be unique , not my power of discovering and apprecia the superiority of moral worth over physical charms . for I Frances have physical charms : in she there be no deformity to get over ; none of those prominent defect of eye , tooth , complexion , shape , which hold at bay the admiration of the boldest male champion of intellect ( for woman can love a downright ugly man if he be but talented ) ; have she be either " edantee , myope , rugueuse , out bossue , " my feeling towards she might still have be kindly , but they could never have be impassion ; I have affection for the poor little misshapen , but for she I could never have have love . it be true ' mental point have be the first to interest I , and they still retain the strongest hold on my preference ; but I like the graces of she person too . I derive a pleasure , purely material , from contemplate the clearness of she brown eye , the fairness of she fine skin , the purity of she well - set tooth , the proportion of she delicate form ; and that pleasure I could ill have dispense with . it appear , then , that I too be a sensualist , in my temperate and fastidious way . now , reader , during the last two page I have be give you honey fresh from flower , but you must not live entirely on food so luscious ; taste then a little gall -- just a drop , by way of change . at a somewhat late hour I return to my lodging : have temporarily forget that man have any such coarse care as those of eating and drinking , I go to be fasting . I have be excite and in action all day , and have taste no food since eight that morning ; besides , for a fortnight past , I have know no rest either of body or mind ; the last few hour have be a sweet delirium , it would not subside now , and till long after midnight , break with trouble ecstacy the rest I so much need . at last I doze , but not for long ; it be yet quite dark when I awoke , and my waking be like that of job when a spirit pass before he face , and like he , " the hair of my flesh stand up . " I might continue the parallel , for in truth , though I see nothing , yet " a thing be secretly bring unto I , and mine ear receive a little thereof ; there be silence , and I hear a voice , " say -- " in the midst of life we be in death . " that sound , and the sensation of chill anguish accompany it , many would have regard as supernatural ; but I recognize it at once as the effect of reaction . Man be ever clog with he mortality , and it be my mortal nature which now falter and plain ; my nerve , which jar and give a false sound , because the soul , of late rushe headlong to a aim , have overstrain the body 's comparative weakness . a horror of great darkness fall upon I ; I feel my chamber invade by one I have know formerly , but have think for ever depart . I be temporarily a prey to . she have be my acquaintance , nay , my guest , once before in boyhood ; I have entertain she at bed and board for a year ; for that space of time I have she to myself in secret ; she lay with I , she eat with I , she walk out with I , show I nook in wood , hollow in hills , where we could sit together , and where she could drop she drear veil over I , and so hide sky and sun , grass and green tree ; take I entirely to she death - cold bosom , and hold I with arm of
of bone . what tales she would tell I at such hour ! what songs she would recite in my ear ! how she would discourse to I of she own country -- the grave -- and again and again promise to conduct I there ere long ; and , draw I to the very brink of a black , sullen river , show I , on the other side , shore unequal with mound , monument , and tablet , stand up in a glimmer more hoary than moonlight . " ! " she would whisper , point to the pale pile , and add , " it contain a mansion prepare for you . " but my boyhood be lonely , parentless ; uncheered by brother or sister ; and there be no marvel that , just as I rise to , a sorceress , finde I lose in vague mental wandering , with many affections and few object , glow aspiration and gloomy prospects , strong desire and slender hope , should lift up she illusive lamp to I in the distance , and lure I to she vault home of horror . no wonder she spell then have power ; but now , when my course be widening , my prospect brighten ; when my affections have find a rest ; when my desire , fold wing , weary with long flight , have just alight on the very lap of fruition , and nestle there warm , content , under the caress of a soft hand -- why do accost I now ? I repulse she as one would a dread and ghastly concubine come to embitter a husband 's heart toward he young bride ; in vain ; she keep she sway over I for that night and the next day , and eight succeed day . afterwards , my spirit begin slowly to recover they tone ; my appetite return , and in a fortnight I be well . I have go about as usual all the time , and have say nothing to anybody of what I feel ; but I be glad when the evil spirit depart from I , and I could again seek France , and sit at she side , free from the dreadful tyranny of my demon . . one fine , frosty in , and I take a long walk ; we make the tour of the city by the ; and , afterwards , be a little tired , we sit down on one of those wayside seat place under the tree , at interval , for the accommodation of the weary . France be tell I about ; the subject animate she ; and I be just think that she eye speak full as eloquently as she tongue , when she stop and remark -- " Monsieur , there be a gentleman who know you . " I look up ; three fashionably dressed man be just then pass -- , I know by they air and gait as well as by they feature ; in the tallest of the trio I at once recognize ; he be in the act of lift he hat to Frances ; afterwards , he make a grimace at I , and pass on . " who be he ? " " a person I know in . " " why do he bow to I ? he do not know I . " " yes , he do know you , in he way . " " how , monsieur ? " ( she still call I " monsieur " ; I could not persuade she to adopt any more familiar term . ) " do you not read the expression of he eye ? " " of he eyes ? no . what do they say ? " " to you they say , ' how do you do , , ? ' to I , ' so you have find you counterpart at last ; there she sit , the female of you kind ! ' " " Monsieur , you could not read all that in he eye ; he be so soon go . " " I read that and more , Frances ; I read that he will probably call on I this evening , or on some future occasion shortly ; and I have no doubt he will insist on be introduce to you ; shall I bring he to you room ? " " if you please , monsieur -- I have no objection ; I think , indeed , I should rather like to see he nearer ; he look so original . " as I have anticipate , come that evening . the first thing he say be :-- " you need not begin boast , le Professeur ; I know about you appointment to ---- College , and all that ; have tell I . " then he intimate that he have return from but a day or two since ; afterwards , he abruptly demand whether that be - with whom he have see I on the Boulevard . I be go to utter a rather emphatic negative , but on second thought I check myself , and , seem to assent , ask what he think of she ? " as to she , I will come to that directly ; but first I have a word for you . I see you be a scoundrel ; you 've no business to be promenad about with another man 's wife . I think you have sounder sense than to get mix up in foreign hodge - podge of this sort . " " but the lady ? " " she be too good for you evidently ; she be like you , but something better than you -- no beauty , though ; yet when she
she rise ( for I look back to see you both walk away ) I think she figure and carriage good . these foreigners understand . what the have she do with ? she have not be marry to he three month -- he must be a spoon ! " I would not let the mistake go too far ; I do not like it much . " ? how you head run on Mons . and ! you be always talk about they . I wish to the gods you have we . Zoraide yourself ! " " be that young gentlewoman not Mdlle . ? " " no ; nor either . " " why do you tell a lie , then ? " " I tell no lie ; but you be be such a hurry . she be a pupil of mine -- a swiss girl . " " and of course you be go to be marry to she ? do not deny that . " " ! I think I shall -- if spare we both ten week longer . that be my little wild strawberry , , whose sweetness make I careless of you hothouse grape . " " stop ! no boasting -- no heroic ; I will not hear they . what be she ? to what caste do she belong ? " I smile . Hunsden unconsciously laid stress on the word caste , and , in fact , republican , lordhater as he be , be as proud of he old ---- shire blood , of he descent and family stand , respectable and respect through long generation back , as any peer in the realm of he and - dated title . would as little have thought of take a wife from a caste inferior to he own , as a would think of ma with a Cobden . I enjoy the surprise I should give ; I enjoy the triumph of my practice over he theory ; and lean over the table , and utter the word slowly but with repress glee , I say concisely -- " she be a lace - mender . " examine I . he do not say he be surprised , but surprise he be ; he have he own notion of good breeding . I see he suspect I be go to take some very rash step ; but repress declamation or remonstrance , he only answer -- " well , you be the best ; judge of you own affair . a lace - mender may make a good wife as well as a lady ; but of course you have take care to ascertain thoroughly that since she have not education , fortune or station , she be well furnished with such natural quality as you think most likely to conduce to you happiness . have she many relation ? " " none in . " " that be better . relation be often the real evil in such case . I can not but think that a train of inferior connection would have be a bore to you to you life 's end . " after sit in silence a little while longer , rose , and be quietly bid I good evening ; the polite , considerate manner in which he offer I he hand ( a thing he have never do before ) , convince I that he think I have make a terrible fool of myself ; and that , ruin and throw away as I be , it be no time for sarcasm or cynicism , or indeed for anything but indulgence and forbearance . " good night , , " he say , in a really soft voice , while he face look benevolently compassionate . " good night , lad . I wish you and you future wife much prosperity ; and I hope she will satisfy you fastidious soul . " I have much ado to refrain from laugh as I beheld the magnanimous pity of he mien ; maintain , however , a grave air , I say :-- " I think you would have like to have see . Henri ? " " oh , that be the name ! yes -- if it would be convenient , I should like to see she -- but ----. " he hesitate . " well ? " " I should on no account wish to intrude . " " come , then , " say I . we set out . Hunse no doubt regard I as a rash , imprudent man , thus to show my poor little grisette sweetheart , in she poor little unfurnished grenier ; but he prepare to act the real gentleman , have , in fact , the kernel of that character , under the harsh husk it please he to wear by way of mental mackintosh . he talk affably , and even gently , as we go along the street ; he have never be so civil to I in he life . we reach the house , enter , ascend the stair ; on gain the lobby , turn to mount a narrower stair which lead to a higher story ; I see he mind be bend on the attic . " Here , , " say I quietly , tap at 's door . he turn ; in he genuine politeness he be a little disconcert at have make the mistake ; he eye revert to the green mat , but he say nothing . we walk in , and rise from she seat near the table to receive we ; she mourn attire give she a recluse , rather conventual , but withal very distinguished look ; it be grave simplicity add nothing to beauty , but much to dignity ; the finish of the white collar and manchette suffice
suffice for a relief to the merino gown of solemn black ; ornament be forswear . France curtsy with sedate grace , look , as she always do , when one first accost she , more a woman to respect than to love ; I introduce , and she express she happiness at make he acquaintance in . the pure and polished accent , the low yet sweet and rather full voice , produce they effect immediately ; speak french in reply ; I have not hear he speak that language before ; he manage it very well . I retire to the window - seat ; , at he hostess 's invitation , occupy a chair near the hearth ; from my position I could see they both , and the room too , at a glance . the room be so clean and bright , it look like a little polished cabinet ; a glass fill with flower in the centre of the table , a fresh rose in each china cup on the mantelpiece give it a air of , be serious , and subdue , but both mutually polite ; they get on at the french swimmingly : ordinary topics be discuss with great state and decorum ; I think I have never see two such model of propriety , for ( thanks to the constraint of the foreign tongue ) be oblige to shape he phrase , and measure he sentence , with a care that forbade any eccentricity . at last be mention , and proceed to ask question . animate by degree , she begin to change , just as a grave night - sky change at the approach of sunrise : first it seem as if she forehead cleared , then she eye glitter , she feature relaxed , and become quite mobile ; she subdue complexion grow warm and transparent ; to I , she now look pretty ; before , she have only look ladylike . she have many thing to say to the just fresh from he island - country , and she urge he with a enthusiasm of curiosity , which ere long thaw 's reserve as fire thaw a congeal viper . I use this not very flattering comparison because he vividly remind I of a snake wake from torpor , as he erect he tall form , rear he head , before a little decline , and put back he hair from he , show unshad the gleam of almost savage satire which he interlocutor 's tone of eagerness and look of ardour have suffice at once to kindle in he soul and elicit from he eye : he be himself ; as Frances be herself , and in none but he own language would he now address she . " you understand ? " be the prefatory question . " a little . " " well , then , you shall have plenty of it ; and first , I see you have not much more sense than some other of my acquaintance " ( indicate I with he thumb ) , " or else you would never turn rabid about that dirty little country call ; for rabid , I see you be ; I read in you look , and hear it in you word . why , mademoiselle , be it possible that anybody with a grain of rationality should feel enthusiasm about a mere name , and that name ? I think you be a lady - abbess five minute ago , and respecte you accordingly ; and now I see you be a sort of swiss sibyl , with high Tory and high church principle ! " " be you country ? " ask . " yes . " " and you do not like it ? " " I would be sorry to like it ! a little corrupt , venal , lord - and - king - curse nation , full of mucky pride ( as they say in ---- shire ) , and helpless pauperism ; rote with abuse , worm -eaten with prejudice ! " " you might say so of almost every state ; there be abuse and prejudice everywhere , and I think fewer in than in other country . " " come to and see . come to and ; come to ' in , and get a practical notion of how we system work . examine the footprint of we august aristocracy ; see how they walk in blood , crush heart as they go . just put you head in at cottage door ; get a glimpse of Famine crouch torpid on black hearthstone ; of Disease lie bare on bed without coverlet , of wanton viciously with , though indeed be she favourite paramour , and princely hall be dearer to she than thatch hovel ---- " " I be not think of the wretchedness and vice in ; I be think of the good side -- of what be elevate in you character as a nation . " " there be no good side -- none at least on which you can have any knowledge ; for you can not appreciate the effort of industry , the achievement of enterprise , or the discoveries of science : narrowness of education and obscurity of position quite incapacitate you from understanding these point ; and as to historical and poetical associations , I will not insult you , mademoiselle , by supposing that you allude to such humbug . " " but I do partly . " laugh -- he laugh of unmitigated scorn . " I do , . be you of the number of those to whom such associations give no pleasure ? " " , what be a association ? I never see one . what be its length , breadth , weight , value -- ay , ?
? what price will it bring in the market ? " " you portrait , to any one who love you , would , for the sake of association , be without price . " that inscrutable hear this remark and feel it rather acutely , too , somewhere ; for he colour -- a thing not unusual with he , when hit unawar on a tender point . a sort of trouble momentarily darke he eye , and I believe he fill up the transient pause succeed he antagonist 's home - thrust , by a wish that some one do love he as he would like to be love -- some one whose love he could unreservedly return . the lady pursue she temporary advantage . " if you world be a world without associations , , I no longer wonder that you hate so . I do not clearly know what paradise be , and what angels be ; yet take it to be the most glorious region I can conceive , and angel the most elevate existence -- if one of they -- if the faithful himself " ( she be think of ) " be suddenly stripp of the faculty of association , I think he would soon rush forth from ' the ever - during gate , ' leave heaven , and seek what he have lose in hell . yes , in the very hell from which he turn ' with retort scorn . ' " Frances 's tone in say this be as mark as she language , and it be when the word " hell " twange off from she lip , with a somewhat startling emphasis , that deign to bestow one slight glance of admiration . he like something strong , whether in man or woman ; he like whatever dared to clear conventional limit . he have never before hear a lady say " hell " with that uncompromising sort of accent , and the sound pleas he from a lady 's lip ; he would fain have have Frances to strike the string again , but it be not in she way . the display of eccentric vigour never give she pleasure , and it only sound in she voice or flash in she countenance when extraordinary circumstance -- and those generally painful -- force it out of the depth where it burn latent . to I , once or twice , she have in intimate conversation , uttere venturous thought in nervous language ; but when the hour of such manifestation be past , I could not recall it ; it come of itself and of itself depart . 's excitation she put by soon with a smile , and recurr to the theme of disputation , say -- " since be nothing , why do the continental nation respect she so ? " " I should have think no child would have ask that question , " reply , who never at any time give information without reprove for stupidity those who ask it of he . " if you have be my pupil , as I suppose you once have the misfortune to be that of a deplorable character not a hundred mile off , I would have put you in the corner for such a confession of ignorance . why , mademoiselle , can not you see that it be we gold which buy we French politeness , german good - will , and swiss servility ? " and he sneer diabolically . " ? " say Frances , catch the word " servility . " " do you call my countryman servile ? " and she start up . I could not suppress a low laugh ; there be ire in she glance and defiance in she attitude . " do you abuse to I , ? do you think I have no associations ? do you calculate that I be prepare to dwell only on what vice and degradation may be find in villag , and to leave quite out of my heart the social greatness of my countryman , and we blood - earn freedom , and the natural glory of we mountain ? you be mistaken -- you be mistaken . " " social greatness ? call it what you will , you countryman be sensible fellow ; they make a marketable article of what to you be a abstract idea ; they have , ere this , sell they social greatness and also they blood - earn freedom to be the servants of foreign king . " " you never be in ? " " yes -- I have be there twice . " " you know nothing of it . " " I do . " " and you say the Swiss be mercenary , as a parrot say ' poor poll , ' or as the here say the be not brave , or as the french accuse they of be perfidious : there be no justice in you dictum . " " there be truth . " " I tell you , , you be a more unpractical man than I be a unpractical woman , for you do not acknowledge what really exist ; you want to annihilate individual patriotism and national greatness as a atheist would annihilate and he own soul , by deny they existence . " " where be you fly to ? you be off at a tangent -- I think we be talk about the mercenary nature of the Swiss . " " we be -- and if you prove to I that the Swiss be mercenary to - morrow ( which you can not do ) I should love still . " " you would be mad , then -- mad as a hare -- to indulge in a passion for million of shipload of soil , timber ,
, snow , and ice . " " not so mad as you who love nothing . " " there be a method in my madness ; there be none in yours . " " you method be to squeeze the sap out of creation and make manure of the refuse , by way of turn it to what you call use . " " you can not reason at all , " say ; " there be no logic in you . " " better to be without logic than without feeling , " retort , who be now pass backwards and forwards from she cupboard to the table , intent , if not on hospitable thought , at least on hospitable deed , for she be lay the cloth , and put plate , knife and fork thereon . " be that a hit at I , mademoiselle ? do you suppose I be without feel ? " " I suppose you be always interfere with you own feeling , and those of other people , and dogmatize about the irrationality of this , that , and the other sentiment , and then order it to be suppress because you imagine it to be inconsistent with logic . " " I do right . " France have step out of sight into a sort of little pantry ; she soon reappear . " you do right ? indeed , no ! you be much mistaken if you think so . just be so good as to let I get to the fire , Hunsden ; I have something to cook . " ( a interval occupy in settle a casserole on the fire ; then , while she stir its contents :) " right ! as if it be right to crush any pleasurable sentiment that have give to man , especially any sentiment that , like patriotism , spread man 's selfishness in wider circle " ( fire stir , dish put down before it ) . " be you bear in ? " " I should think so , or else why should I call it my country ? " " and where do you get you English feature and figure ? " " I be English , too ; half the blood in my vein be English ; thus I have a right to a double power of patriotism , possesse a interest in two noble , free , and fortunate country . " " you have a english mother ? " " yes , yes ; and you , I suppose , have a mother from the moon or from , since not a nation in have a claim on you interest ? " " on the contrary , I be a universal patriot , if you could understand I rightly : my country be the world . " " Sympathy so widly diffused must be very shallow : will you have the goodness to come to table . " ( to I who appear to be now absorb in read by moonlight ) -- " Monsieur , supper be serve . " this be say in quite a different voice to that in which she have be bandy phrase with -- not so short , graver and softer . " France , what do you mean by prepare , supper ? we have no intention of staying . " " ah , monsieur , but you have stay , and supper be prepare ; you have only the alternative of eat it . " the meal be a foreign one , of course ; it consist in two small but tasty dish of meat prepare with skill and serve with nicety ; a salad and " fromage francais , " complete it . the business of eating interpose a brief truce between the belligerent , but no sooner be supper dispose of than they be at it again . the fresh subject of dispute run on the spirit of religious intolerance which affirm to exist strongly in , notwithstand the professed attachment of the Swiss to freedom . here Frances have greatly the worst of it , not only because she be unskilled to argue , but because she own real opinion on the point in question happen to coincide pretty nearly with 's , and she only contradict he out of opposition . at last she give in , confess that she think as he think , but bid he take notice that she do not consider herself beat . " no more do the at , " say . " there be no comparison between the case , " rejoin ; " mine be a sham fight . " " or real , it be up with you . " " no ; though I have neither logic nor wealth of word , yet in a case where my opinion really differ from yours , I would adhere to it when I have not another word to say in it be defence ; you should be baffle by dumb determination . you speak of ; you ought to have be conquer there , accord to ; but he persever in spite of the law of war , and be victorious in defiance of military tactic . I would do as he do . " " I will be bound for it you would ; probably you have some of the same sort of stubborn stuff in you . " I should be sorry if I have not ; he and be brother , and I have scorn the Swiss , man or woman , who have none of the much -enduring nature of we heroic in he soul . " " if be like , he be a ass . " " do not ass mean ? " ask Frances , turn to I . " no , no , " reply
reply I , " it mean a - ; and now , " I continue , as I see that fresh occasion of strife be brew between these two , " it be high time to go . " rose . " good bye , " say he to ; " I shall be off for this glorious to - morrow , and it may be twelve month or more before I come to again ; whenever I do come I will seek you out , and you shall see if I do not find means to make you fiercer than a dragon . you have do pretty well this evening , but next interview you shall challenge I outright . meantime you be doom to become , I suppose ; poor young lady ? but you have a spark of spirit ; cherish it , and give the Professor the full benefit thereof . " " be you marry . ? " ask , suddenly . " no . I should have think you might have guess I be a benedict by my look . " " well , whenever you marry do not take a wife out of ; for if you begin blasphem , and curse the canton -- above all , if you mention the word ass in the same breath with the name ( for ass be baudet , I know ; though be pleased to translate it - ) you mountain maid will some night smother she - bretonnant , even as you own 's smother . " " I be warn , " say ; " and so be you , lad , " ( nodd to I ) . " I hope yet to hear of a travesty of the and he gentle lady , in which the part shall be reverse accord to the plan just sketch -- you , however , be in my nightcap . farewell , mademoiselle ! " he bow on she hand , absolutely like on that of ; add -- " death from such finger would not be without charms . " " ! " murmure France , open she large eye and lifte she distinctly arch brows ; " c'est qu'il fait des compliment ! je ne be 'y sui pa attendu . " she smile , half in ire , half in mirth , curtsy with foreign grace , and so they part . no sooner have we get into the street than collar I . " and that be you lace - mender ? " say he ; " and you reckon you have do a fine , magnanimous thing in offer to marry she ? you , a scion of , have prove you disdain of social distinction by take up with a ouvriere ! and I pitie the fellow , think he feeling have misl he , and that he have hurt himself by contract a low match ! " " just let go my collar , . " " on the contrary , he sway I to and fro ; so I grapple he round the waist . it be dark ; the street lonely and lampless . we have then a tug for it ; and after we have both roll on the pavement , and with difficulty pick ourselves up , we agree to walk on more soberly . " yes , that be my lace - mender , " say I ; " and she be to be mine for life -- will . " " be not willing -- you can not suppose it ; what business have you to be suit so well with a partner ? and she treat you with a sort of respect , too , and say , ' Monsieur ' and modulate she tone in address you , actually , as if you be something superior ! she could not evince more deference to such a one as I , be she favour by fortune to the supreme extent of be my choice instead of yours . " " , you be a puppy . but you have only see the title - page of my happiness ; you do not know the tale that follow ; you can not conceive the interest and sweet variety and thrill excitement of the narrative . " --speak low and deep , for we have now enter a busier street -- desire I to hold my peace , threaten to do something dreadful if I stimulate he wrath further by boasting . I laugh till my side ach . we soon reach he hotel ; before he enter it , he say -- " do not be vainglorious . you lace - mender be too good for you , but not good enough for I ; neither physically nor morally do she come up to my ideal of a woman . no ; I dream of something far beyond that pale - faced , excitable little Helvetian ( by - the - by she have infinitely more of the nervous , mobile in she than of the the robust ' jungfrau ' ) . you Mdlle . Henri be in person " chetive " , in mind " san caractere " , compare with the queen of my vision . you , indeed , may put up with that " minois chiffone " ; but when I marry I must have straighter and more harmonious feature , to say nothing of a nobler and better develop shape than that perverse , ill - thriven child can boast . " " Bribe a seraph to fetch you a coal of fire from heaven , if you will , " say I , " and with it kindle life in the tallest , fattest , most boneless , fullest - blood of 's paint woman -- leave I only my , and I will not
not envy you . " with a simultaneous movement , each turn he back on the other . neither say " bless you ; " yet on the morrow the sea be to roll between we . . in two month more France have fulfil the time of mourning for she aunt . one morning -- the first of the new year holiday -- I go in a fiacre , accompany only by , to the aux Neige , and have alight alone and walk upstairs , I find apparently wait for I , dress in a style scarcely appropriate to that cold , bright , frosty day . never till now have I see she attire in any other than black or sad - coloured stuff ; and there she stand by the window , clad all in white , and white of a most diaphanous texture ; she array be very simple , to be sure , but it look imposing and festal because it be so clear , full , and float ; a veil shadow she head , and hang below she knee ; a little wreath of pink flower fasten it to she thickly tress Grecian plait , and thence it fall softly on each side of she face . singular to state , she be , or have be cry ; when I ask she if she be ready , she say " yes , monsieur , " with something very like a check sob ; and when I take a shawl , which lay on the table , and fold it round she , not only do tear after tear course unbidden down she cheek , but she shook to my ministration like a reed . I say I be sorry to see she in such low spirit , and request to be allow a insight into the origin thereof . she only say , " it be impossible to help it , " and then voluntarily , though hurriedly , put she hand into mine , accompany I out of the room , and run downstairs with a quick , uncertain step , like one who be eager to get some formidable piece of business over . I put she into the fiacre . receive she , and seate she beside himself ; we drive all together to the chapel , go through a certain service in the , and she and I come out married . Vandenhuten have give the bride away . we take no bridal trip ; we modesty , screen by the peaceful obscurity of we station , and the pleasant isolation of we circumstance , do not exact that additional precaution . we repair at once to a small house I have take in the faubourg nearest to that part of the city where the scene of we avocation lay . three or four hour after the wedding ceremony , , divest of she bridal snow , and attire in a pretty lilac gown of warmer material , a piquant black silk apron , and a lace collar with some finish decoration of lilac ribbon , be knee on the carpet of a neatly furnished though not spacious parlour , arrange on the shelf of a chiffoniere some book , which I hand to she from the table . it be snow fast out of door ; the afternoon have turn out wild and cold ; the leaden sky seem full of drift , and the street be already ankle - deep in the white downfall . we fire burn bright , we new habitation look brilliantly clean and fresh , the furniture be all arrange , and there be but some article of glass , china , book , & c. , to put in order . France find in this business occupation till tea - time , and then , after I have distinctly instruct she how to make a cup of tea in rational style , and after she have get over the dismay occasion by see such a extravagant amount of material put into the pot , she administer to I a proper british repast , at which there want neither candy nor urn , fire - light nor comfort . we week 's holiday glide by , and we readdress ourselves to labour . both my wife and I begin in good earnest with the notion that we be work people , destin to earn we bread by exertion , and that of the most assiduous kind . we day be thoroughly occupy ; we use to part every morning at eight o'clock , and not meet again till five p.m. ; but into what sweet rest do the turmoil of each busy day decline ! look down the vista , of memory , I see the evening pass in that little parlour like a long string of ruby circle the dusk brow of the past . Unvary were they as each cut gem , and like each gem brilliant and bur . a year and a half pass . one morning ( it be a Fete , and we have the day to ourselves ) France say to I , with a suddenness peculiar to she when she have be think long on a subject , and at last , have come to a conclusion , wish to test its soundness by the touchstone of my judgment :-- " I do not work enough . " " what now ? " demand I , look up from my coffee , which i have be deliberately stirr while enjoy , in anticipation , a walk I propose to take with , that fine summer day ( it be ) , to a certain farmhouse in the country , where we be to dine . " what now ? " and I see at once , in the serious ardour of she face ,
, a project of vital importance . " I be not satisfie " return she : " you be now earn eight thousand franc a year " ( it be true ; my effort , punctuality , the fame of my pupil ' progress , the publicity of my station , have so far help I on ) , " while I be still at my miserable twelve hundred franc . I can do better , and I will . " " you work as long and as diligently as I do , . " " yes , monsieur , but I be not work in the right way , and I be convince of it . " " you wish to change -- you have a plan for progress in you mind ; go and put on you bonnet ; and , while we take we walk , you shall tell I of it . " " yes , monsieur . " she go -- as docile as a well - train child ; she be a curiious mixture of tractability and firmness : I sit think about she , and wonder what she plan could be , when she re-enter . " Monsieur , I have give " ( we bonne ) " leave to go out too , as it be so very fine ; so will you be kind enough to lock the door , and take the key with you ? " " kiss I , , " be my not very apposite reply ; but she look so engage in she light summer dress and little cottage bonnet , and she manner in speak to I be then , as always , so unaffectedly and suavely respectful , that my heart expand at the sight of she , and a kiss seem necessary to content its importunity . " there , monsieur . " " why do you always call I ' Monsieur ? ' , ' . ' " " I can not pronounce you with ; besides , ' Monsieur ' belong to you ; I like it best . " have depart in clean cap and smart shawl , we , too , set out , leave the house solitary and silent -- silent , at least , but for the ticking of the clock . we be soon clear of ; the field receive we , and then the lane , remote from carriage - resoun Chaussee . Ere long we come upon a nook , so rural , green , and seclude , it might have be a spot in some pastoral province ; a bank of short and mossy grass , under a hawthorn , offer a seat too temp to be decline ; we take it , and when we have admire and examine some - look wild - flower grow at we foot , I recal 's attention and my own to the touch on at breakfast . " what be she plan ? " a natural one -- the next step to be mount by we , or , at least , by she , if she want to rise in she profession . she propose to begin a school . we already have the means for commencing on a careful scale , have live greatly within we income . we possess , too , by this time , a extensive and eligible connection , in the sense advantageous to we business ; for , though we circle of visit acquaintance continue as limit as ever , we be now widely know in school and family as teacher . when Frances have develop she plan , she intimate , in some closing sentence , she hope for the future . if we only have good health and tolerable success , I might , she be sure , in time realize a independency ; and that , perhaps , before we be too old to enjoy it ; then both she and I would rest ; and what be to hinder we from go to live in ? be still she promise land . I put no obstacle in she way ; raise no objection ; I know she be not one who could live quiescent and inactive , or even comparatively inactive . duty she must have to fulfil , and important duty ; work to do -- and exciting , absorbing , profitable work ; strong faculty stir in she frame , and they demand full nourishment , free exercise : mine be not the hand ever to starve or cramp they ; no , I delight in offer they sustenance , and in clear they wider space for action . " you have conceive a plan , Frances , " say I , " and a good plan ; execute it ; you have my free consent , and wherever and whenever my assistance be want , ask and you shall have . " France ' eye thank I almost with tear ; just a sparkle or two , soon brush away ; she possess herself of my hand too , and hold it for some time very close clasp in both she own , but she say no more than " thank you , monsieur . " we pass a divine day , and come home late , light by a full summer moon . ten year rush now upon I with dusty , vibrat , unresting wing ; year of bustle , action , unslacked endeavour ; year in which I and my wife , have launch ourselves in the full career of progress , as progress whirl on in european capital , scarcely knew repose , be stranger to amusement , never think of indulgence , and yet , as we course ran side by side , as we march hand in hand , we neither murmure , repent , nor
nor falter . hope indeed cheer we ; health keep we up ; harmony of think and deed smooth many difficulty , and finally , success bestow every now and then encourage reward on diligence . we school become one of the most popular in , and as by degree we raise we term and elevate we system of education , we choice of pupil grow more select , and at length include the child of the best family in . we have too a excellent connection in , first open by the unsolicited recommendation of , who have be over , and have abuse I for my prosperity in set term , go back , and soon after send a leash of young ---- shire heiress -- he cousin ; as he say " to be polish off by . " as to this same , in one sense she be become another woman , though in another she remain unchanged . so different be she under different circumstance . I seem to possess two wife . the faculty of she nature , already disclose when I marry she , remain fresh and fair ; but other faculty shot up strong , branch out broad , and quite alte the external character of the plant . Firmness , activity , and enterprise , cover with grave foliage , poetic feeling and fervour ; but these flower be still there , preserve pure and dewy under the umbrage of later growth and hardier nature : perhaps I only in the world know the secret of they existence , but to I they be ever ready to yield a exquisite fragrance and present a beauty as chaste as radiant . in the daytime my house and establishament be conduct by the directress , a stately and elegant woman , bear much anxious thought on she large brow ; much calculate dignity in she serious mien : immediately after breakfast I use to part with this lady ; I go to my college , she to she schoolroom ; return for a hour in the course of the day , I find she always in class , intently occupy ; silence , industry , observance , attend on she presence . when not actually teache , she be overlook and guide by eye and gesture ; she then appear vigilant and solicitous . when communicate instruction , she aspect be more animated ; she seem to feel a certain enjoyment in the occupation . the language in which she address she pupil , though simple and unpretending , be never trite or dry ; she do not speak from routine formula -- she make she own phrasis as she go on , and very nervous and impressive phrasis they frequently be ; often , when elucidat favourite point of history , or geography , she would wax genuinely eloquent in she earnestness . she pupil , or at least the elder and more intelligent amongst they , recognize well the language of a superior mind ; they feel too , and some of they receive the impression of elevate sentiment ; there be little fondling between mistress and girl , but some of 's pupil in time learnt to love she sincerely , all of they beheld she with respect ; she general demeanour towards they be serious ; sometimes benignant when they please she with they progress and attention , always scrupulously refin and considerate . in case where reproof or punishment be call for she be usually forbear enough ; but if any take advantage of that forbearance , which sometimes happen , a sharp , sudden and light - like severity teach the culprit the extent of the mistake commit . sometimes a gleam of tenderness soften she eye and manner , but this be rare ; only when a pupil be sick , or when it pin after home , or in the case of some little motherless child , or of one much poorer than its companion , whose scanty wardrobe and mean appointment bring on it the contempt of the jewelled young countess and silk - clad miss . over such feeble fledgling the directress spread a wing of kindliest protection : it be to they bedside she come at night to tick they warmly in ; it be after they she look in winter to see that they always have a comfortable seat by the stove ; it be they who by turn be summon to the salon to receive some little dole of cake or fruit -- to sit on a footstool at the fireside -- to enjoy home comforts , and almost home liberty , for a evening together -- to be speak to gently and softly , comforte , encourage , cherish -- and when bedtime come , dismisse with a kiss of true tenderness . as to and ----, daughter of a english baronet , as to . ----, heiress of a belgian count , and sundry other child of patrician race , the directress be careful of they as of the other , anxious for they progress , as for that of the rest -- but it never seem to enter she head to distinguish they by a mark of preference ; one girl of noble blood she love dearly -- a young irish baroness -- lady Catherine ---- ; but it be for she enthusiastic heart and clever head , for she generosity and she genius , the title and rank go for nothing . my afternoon be spend also in college , with the exception of a hour that my wife daily exact of I for she establishment , and with which she would not dispense . she say that I must spend that time amongst she pupil to learn they character , to be not with everything that be pass in the house , to become interested in
in what interes she , to be able to give she my opinion on knotty point when she require it , and this she do constantly , never allow my interest in the pupil to fall asleep , and never make any change of importance without my cognizance and consent . she delighte to sit by I when I give my lesson ( lesson in literature ) , she hand fold on she knee , the most fixedly attentive of any present . she rarely address I in class ; when she do it be with a air of mark deference ; it be she pleasure , she joy to make I still the master in all thing . at six o'clock p.m. my daily labour cease . I then come home , for my home be my heaven ; ever at that hour , as I enter we private sitting - room , the lady - directress vanish from before my eye , and , my own little lace - mender , be magically restore to my arm ; much disappoint she would have be if she master have not be as constant to the tryste as herself , and if he truthfull kiss have not be prompt to answer she soft , " soir , monsieur . " talk French to I she would , and many a punishment she have have for she wilfulness . I fear the choice of chastisement must have be injudicious , for instead of correcte the fault , it seem to encourage its renewal . we evening be we own ; that recreation be necessary to refresh we strength for the due discharge of we duty ; sometimes we spend they all in conversation , and my young Genevese , now that she be thoroughly accustom to she English professor , now that she love he too absolutely to fear he much , repose in he a confidence so unlimited that topic of conversation could no more be wante with he than subject for communion with she own heart . in those moment , happy as a bird with its mate , she would show I what she have of vivacity , of mirth , of originality in she well - dower nature . she would show , too , some store of raillery , of " malice , " and would vex , tease , pique I sometimes about what she call my " bizarrery anglaise , " my " caprice insulaire , " with a wild and witty wickedness that make a perfect white demon of she while it last . this be rare , however , and the elfish freak be always short : sometimes when drive a little hard in the war of word -- for she tongue do ample justice to the pith , the point , the delicacy of she native french , in which language she always attack I -- I use to turn upon she with my old decision , and arrest bodily the sprite that tease I . vain idea ! no sooner have I grasp hand or arm than the elf be go ; the provocative smile quench in the expressive brown eye , and a ray of gentle homage shone under the lid in its place . I have seize a mere vexing fairy , and find a submissive and supplicat little mortal woman in my arm . then I make she get a book , and read to I for a hour by way of penance . I frequently dos she with in this way , and steady she soon ; she have a difficulty in comprehend he deep , serene , and sober mind ; he language , too , be not facile to she ; she have to ask question , to sue for explanations , to be like a child and a novice , and to acknowledge I as she senior and director . she instinct instantly penetrate and possess the meaning of more ardent and imaginative writer . excite she ; she love ; Wordsworth only she puzzl at , wonder over , and hesitate to pronounce a opinion upon . but whether she read to I , or talk with I ; whether she tease I in , or entreate I in ; whether she jest with wit , or inquire with deference ; narrate with interest , or listen with attention ; whether she smile at I or on I , always at nine o'clock I be leave abandoned . she would extricate herself from my arm , quit my side , take she lamp , and be gone . she mission be upstairs ; I have follow she sometimes and watch she . first she open the door of the dortoir ( the pupil 's chamber ) , noiselessly she glide up the long room between the two row of white bed , survey all the sleeper ; if any be wakeful , especially if any be sad , speak to they and soothe they ; stand some minute to ascertain that all be safe and tranquil ; trim the watch - light which burn in the apartment all night , then withdraw , close the door behind she without sound . Thence she glide to we own chamber ; it have a little cabinet within ; this she seek ; there , too , appear a bed , but one , and that a very small one ; she face ( the night I follow and observe she ) change as she approach this tiny couch ; from grave it warme to earnest ; she shade with one hand the lamp she hold in the other ; she bend above the pillow and hang over a child asleep ; its slumber ( that evene at least , and usually , I believe ) be sound and calm ; no tear wet it be
be dark eyelash ; no fever heat its round cheek ; no ill dream discompose its budding feature . France gaze , she do not smile , and yet the deepest delight fill , flush she face ; feel pleasurable , powerful , work in she whole frame , which still be motionless . I see , indeed , she heart heave , she lip be a little apart , she breathing grew somewhat hurrie ; the child smile ; then at last the mother smile too , and say in low soliloquy , " bless my little son ! " she stoop closer over he , breathe the softest of kiss on he brow , cover he minute hand with hers , and at last start up and come away . I regain the parlour before she . enter it two minute later she say quietly as she put down she extinguished lamp -- " Victor rest well : he smile in he sleep ; he have you smile , monsieur . " the say be of course she own boy , bear in the third year of we marriage : he name have be give he in honour of , who continue always we trusty and well - beloved friend . Frances be then a good and dear wife to I , because I be to she a good , just , and faithful husband . what she would have be have she marry a harsh , envious , careless man -- a profligate , a prodigal , a drunkard , or a tyrant -- be another question , and one which I once propound to she . she answer , give after some reflection , be -- " I should have try to endure the evil or cure it for awhile ; and when I find it intolerable and incurable , I should have leave my torturer suddenly and silently . " " and if law or might have force you back again ? " " what , to a drunkard , a profligate , a selfish spendthrift , a unjust fool ? " " yes . " " I would have go back ; again assure myself whether or not he vice and my misery be capable of remedy ; and if not , have leave he again . " " and if again force to return , and compelle to abide ? " " I do not know , " she say , hastily . " why do you ask I , monsieur ? " I would have a answer , because I see a strange kind of spirit in she eye , whose voice I determine to wake . " Monsieur , if a wife 's nature loath that of the man she be wed to , marriage must be slavery . against slavery all right thinker revolt , and though tortur be the price of resistance , torture must be da : though the only road to freedom lie through the gate of death , those gate must be pass ; for freedom be indispensable . then , monsieur , I would resist as far as my strength permit ; when that strength fail I should be sure of a refuge . death would certainly scree I both from bad law and they consequence . " " Voluntary death , ? " " no , monsieur . I would have courage to live out every throe of anguish fate assign I , and principle to contend for justice and liberty to the last . " " I see you would have make no patient . and now , suppose fate have merely assign you the lot of a old maid , what then ? how would you have like celibacy ? " " not much , certainly . a old maid 's life must doubtless be void and vapid -- she heart strained and empty . have I be a old maid I should have spend existence in effort to fill the void and ease the aching . I should have probably fail , and die weary and disappointed , despise and of no account , like other single woman . but I be not a old maid , " she add quickly . " I should have be , though , but for my master . I should never have suite any man but -- no other gentleman , french , English , or , would have think I amiable or handsome ; and I doubt whether I should have care for the approbation of many other , if I could have obtain it . now , I have be 's wife eight year , and what be he in my eyes ? be he honourable , belove ----? " she stop , she voice be cut off , she eye suddenly suffuse . she and I be stand side by side ; she throw she arm round I , and strain I to she heart with passionate earnestness : the energy of she whole be glow in she dark and then dilate eye , and crimson she animate cheek ; she look and movement be like inspiration ; in one there be such a flash , in the other such a power . half a hour afterwards , when she have become calm , I ask where all that wild vigour be go which have transform she ere-while and make she glance so thrilling and ardent -- she action so rapid and strong . she look down , smile softly and passively :-- " I can not tell where it be gone , monsieur , " say she , " but I know that , whenever it be want , it will come back again . " behold we now at the close of the ten year , and we have realize a independency . the rapidity with which we attain this
this end have its origin in three reason :-- firstly , we work so hard for it ; secondly , we have no incumbrance to delay success ; thirdly , as soon as we have capital to invest , two well - skill counsellor , one in , one in , viz . and , give we each a word of advice as to the sort of investment to be choose . the suggestion make be judicious ; and , be promptly act on , the result prove gainful -- I need not say how gainful ; I communicate detail to Messrs . and ; nobody else can be interested in hear they . account be wound up , and we professional connection dispose of , we both agree that , as mammon be not we master , nor he service that in which we desire to spend we life ; as we desire be temperate , and we habits unostentatious , we have now abundance to live on -- abundance to leave we boy ; and should beside always have a balance on hand , which , properly manage by right sympathy and unselfish activity , might help philanthropy in she enterprisis , and put solace into the hand of charity . to we now resolve to take wing ; we arrive there safely ; realize the dream of she lifetime . we spend a whole summer and autumn in travelling from end to end of the british island , and afterwards pass a winter in . then we think it high time to fix we residence . my heart year towards my native county of ---- shire ; and it be in ---- shire I now live ; it be in the library of my own home I be now write . that home lie amid a sequester and rather hilly region , thirty mile remove from ---- ; a region whose verdure the smoke of mill have not yet sully , whose water still run pure , whose swell of moorland preserve in some ferny glens that lie between they the very primal wildness of nature , she moss , she bracken , she blue - bell , she scent of reed and heather , she free and fresh breeze . my house be a picturesque and not too spacious dwelling , with low and long window , a trellise and leaf - veil porch over the front door , just now , on this summer evening , look like a arch of rose and ivy . the garden be chiefly lay out in lawn , form of the sod of the hill , with herbage short and soft as moss , full of its own peculiar flower , tiny and starlike , imbed in the minute embroidery of they fine foliage . at the bottom of the sloping garden there be a wicket , which open upon a lane as green as the lawn , very long , shady , and little frequented ; on the turf of this lane generally appear the first daisie of spring -- whence its name -- ; serve also as a distinction to the house . it terminate ( the lane I mean ) in a valley full of wood ; which wood -- chiefly oak and beech -- spread shadowy about the vicinage of a very old mansion , one of the structure , much larger , as well as more antique than , the property and residence of a individual familiar both to I and to the reader . yes , in -- for so be those glade and that grey building , with many gable and more chimney , name -- abides , still unmarried ; never , I suppose , have yet find he ideal , though I know at least a score of young lady within a circuit of forty mile , who would be willing to assist he in the search . the estate fall to he by the death of he father , five year since ; he have give up trade , after have make by it sufficient to pay off some incumbrance by which the family heritage be burden . I say he abides here , but I do not think he be resident above five month out of the twelve ; he wander from land to land , and spend some part of each winter in town : he frequently bring visitor with he when he come to ---- shire , and these visitor be often foreigner ; sometimes he have a german metaphysician , sometimes a french savant ; he have once a dissatisfied and savage - look italian , who neither sang nor play , and of whom Frances affir that he have " tout l'air d'un conspirateur . " what english guest , be all either man of or -- hard man , seemingly knit up in one thought , whose talk be of free trade . the foreign visitor , too , be politician ; they take a wider theme -- european progress -- the spread of liberal sentiment over the continent ; on they mental tablet , the name of , , and the Pope , be inscribe in red ink . I have hear some of they talk vigorous sense -- yea , I have be present at polyglot discussion in the old , oak - line dining - room at , where a singular insight be give of the sentiment entertaine by resolute mind respect old northern despotism , and old southern superstition : also , I have hear much twaddle , enounce chiefly in and , but let that pass . himself tolerat the drivell theorist ; with the practical man he seem leagu hand and heart . when be stay alone at the ( which seldom happen ) he generally find he way two or three time a week to . he
he have a philanthropic motive for come to smoke he cigar in we porch on summer evening ; he say he do it to kill the earwig amongst the rose , with which insect , but for he benevolent fumigation , he intimate we should certainly be overrun . on wet day , too , we be almost sure to see he ; accord to he , it get on time to work I into lunacy by treading on my mental corn , or to force from revelation of the dragon within she , by insult the memory of and . we also go frequently to , and both I and relish a visit there highly . if there be other guest , they character be a interesting study ; they conversation be exciting and strange ; the absence of all local narrowness both in the host and he chosen society give a metropolitan , almost a cosmopolitan freedom and largeness to the talk . Hunsden himself be a polite man in he own house : he have , when he choose to employ it , a inexhaustible power of entertaining guest ; he very mansion too be interesting , the room look story , the passage legendary , the low - ceil chamber , with they long row of diamond - pa lattice , have a old - world , haunt air : in he travels he have collect store of article of , which be well and tastefully dispose in he panel or tapestry room : I have see there one or two picture , and one or two piece of statuary which many a aristocratic connoisseur might have envy . when I and Frances have dine and spend a evening with , he often walk home with we . he wood be large , and some of the timber be old and of huge growth . there be win way in it which , pursue through glade and brake , make the walk back to a somewhat long one . many a time , when we have have the benefit of a full moon , and when the night have be mild and balmy , when , moreover , a certain nightingale have be singe , and a certain stream , hide in alder , have lent the song a soft accompaniment , the remote church - bell of the one hamlet in a district of ten mile , have toll midnight ere the lord of the wood leave we at we porch . Free-flow be he talk at such hour , and far more quiet and gentle than in the day - time and before number . he would then forget politics and discussion , and would dwell on the past time of he house , on he family history , on himself and he own feeling -- subject each and all invest with a peculiar zest , for they be each and all unique . one glorious night in , after I have be taunt he about he ideal bride and ask he when she would come and graft she foreign beauty on the old oak , he answer suddenly -- " you call she ideal ; but see , here be she shadow ; and there can not be a shadow without a substance . " he have lead we from the depth of the " win way " into a glade from whence the beech withdrew , leave it open to the sky ; a unclouded moon pour she light into this glade , and hold out under she beam a ivory miniature . France , with eagerness , examine it first ; then she give it to I -- still , however , push she little face close to mine , and seek in my eye what I think of the portrait . I think it represent a very handsome and very individual - look female face , with , as he have once say , " straight and harmonious featur . " it be dark ; the hair , raven - black , sweep not only from the brow , but from the temple -- see thrust away carelessly , as if such beauty dispense with , nay , despise arrangement . the italian eye look straight into you , and a independent , determined eye it be ; the mouth be as firm as fine ; the ching ditto . on the back of the miniature be gild " . " " that be a real head , " be my conclusion . smile . " I think so , " he reply . " all be real in . " " and she be somebody you would have like to marry -- but could not ? " " I should certainly have like to marry she , and that I have not do so be a proof that I could not . " he repossess himself of the miniature , now again in 's hand , and put it away . " what do you think of it ? " he ask of my wife , as he button he coat over it . " I be sure once wear chain and break they , " be the strange answer . " I do not mean matrimonial chain , " she add , correcte herself , as if she fear mis-interpretation , " but social chain of some sort . the face be that of one who have make a effort , and a successful and triumphant effort , to wrest some vigorous and value faculty from insupportable constraint ; and when 's faculty get free , I be certain it spread wide pinion and carry she higher than -- " she hesitate . " than what ? " demand . " than ' les convenance ' permit you to follow . " " I think you grow spiteful --
-- impertinent . " " have trode the stage , " continue Frances . " you never seriously think of marry she ; you admire she originality , she fearlessness , she energy of body and mind ; you delighte in she talent , whatever that be , whether song , dance , or dramatic representation ; you worship she beauty , which be of the sort after you own heart : but I be sure she fill a sphere from whence you would never have think of take a wife . " " Ingenious , " remark ; " whether true or not be another question . , do not you feel you little lamp of a spirit wax very pale , beside such a girandole as 's ? " " yes . " " , at least ; and the professor will soon be dissatisfied with the dim light you give ? " " will you , monsieur ? " " my sight be always too weak to endure a blaze , Frances , " and we have now reach the wicket . I say , a few page back , that this be a sweet summer evening ; it be -- there have be a series of lovely day , and this be the loveliest ; the hay be just carry from my field , it be perfume still linger in the air . France propose to I , a hour or two since , to take tea out on the lawn ; I see the round table , load with china , place under a certain beech ; be expect -- nay , I hear he be come -- there be he voice , lay down the law on some point with authority ; that of France replie ; she oppose he of course . they be dispute about , of whom Hunsden affirms that he mother be make a milksop . retaliate :-- " better a thousand time he should be a milksop than what he , , call 'a fine lad ;' and moreover she say that if be to become a fixture in the neighbourhood , and be not a mere comet , come and go , no one know how , when , where , or why , she should be quite uneasy till she have get away to a school at least a hundred mile off ; for that with he mutinous maxim and unpractical dogma , he would ruin a score of child . " I have a word to say of Victor ere I shut this manuscript in my desk -- but it must be a brief one , for I hear the tinkle of silver on porcelain . Victor be as litle of a pretty child as I be of a handsome man , or he mother of a fine woman ; he be pale and spare , with large eye , as dark as those of Frances , and as deeply set as mine . he shape be symmetrical enough , but slight ; he health be good . I never see a child smile less than he do , nor one who knit such a formidable brow when sit over a book that interest he , or while listen to tale of adventure , peril , or , narrate by he mother , , or myself . but though still , he be not unhappy -- though serious , not morose ; he have a susceptibility to pleasurable sensation almost too keen , for it amount to enthusiasm . he learn to read in the old - fashioned way out of a spelling - book at he mother 's knee , and as he get on without drive by that method , she think it unnecessary to buy he ivory letter , or to try any of the other inducement to learn now deem indispensable . when he could read , he become a glutton of book , and be so still . he toy have be few , and he have never want more . for those he possess , he seem to have contract a partiality amount to affection ; this feel , direct towards one or two living animal of the house , strengthen almost to a passion . give he a mastiff cub , which he call , after the donor ; it grow to a superb dog , whose fierceness , however , be much modify by the companionship and caress of its young master . he would go nowhere , do nothing without ; lay at he foot while he learn he lesson , play with he in the garden , walk with he in the lane and wood , sit near he chair at meal , be feed always by he own hand , be the first thing he seek in the morning , the last he leave at night . accompany one day to ----, and be bite in the street by a dog in a rabid state . as soon as have bring he home , and have inform I of the circumstance , I go into the yard and shoot he where he lay lick he wound : he be dead in a instant ; he have not see I level the gun ; I stand behind he . I have scarcely be ten minute in the house , when my ear be strike with sound of anguish : I repair to the yard once more , for they proceed thence . Victor be knee beside he dead mastiff , bend over it , embrace its bull - like neck , and lose in a passion of the wildest woe : he see I . " oh , papa , I will never forgive you ! I will never forgive you ! " be he exclamation . " you shot -- I see it from the window
window . I never believe you could be so cruel -- I can love you no more ! " I have much ado to explain to he , with a steady voice , the stern necessity of the deed ; he still , with that inconsolable and bitter accent which I can not render , but which pierce my heart , repeat -- " he might have be cure -- you should have try -- you should have bur not the wound with a hot iron , or cover it with caustic . you give no time ; and now it be too late -- he be dead ! " he sank fairly down on the senseless carcase ; I wait patiently a long while , till he grief have somewhat exhaust he ; and then I lift he in my arm and carry he to he mother , sure that she would comfort he best . she have witness the whole scene from a window ; she would not come out for fear of increase my difficulty by she emotion , but she be ready now to receive he . she take he to she kind heart , and on to she gentle lap ; consol he but with she lip , she eye , she soft embrace , for some time ; and then , when he sob diminish , tell he that have feel no pain in dying , and that if he have be leave to expire naturally , he end would have be most horrible ; above all , she tell he that I be not cruel ( for that idea seem to give exquisite pain to poor Victor ) , that it be my affection for and he which have make I act so , and that I be now almost heart - broken to see he weep thus bitterly . Victor would have be no true son of he father , have these consideration , these reason , breathe in so low , so sweet a tone -- marry to caress so benign , so tender -- to look so inspired with pitying sympathy -- produce no effect on he . they do produce a effect : he grow calmer , rest he face on she shoulder , and lay still in she arm . look up , shortly , he ask he mother to tell he over again what she have say about Yorke have suffer no pain , and my not be cruel ; the balmy word be repeat , he again pillow he cheek on she breast , and be again tranquil . some hour after , he come to I in my library , ask if I forgave he , and desire to be reconcile . I draw the lad to my side , and there I keep he a good while , and have much talk with he , in the course of which he disclose many point of feeling and think I approve of in my son . I find , it be true , few element of the " good fellow " or the " fine fellow " in he ; scant sparkle of the spirit which love to flash over the wine cup , or which kindle the passion to a destroy fire ; but I see in the soil of he heart healthy and swelling germ of compassion , affection , fidelity . I discover in the garden of he intellect a rich growth of wholesome principle -- reason , justice , moral courage , promise , if not blight , a fertile bearing . so I bestow on he large forehead , and on he cheek -- still pale with tear -- a proud and content kiss , and send he away comfort . yet I see he the next day laid on the mound under which have be bury , he face cover with he hand ; he be melancholy for some week , and more than a year elapse before he would listen to any proposal of have another dog . Victor learn fast . he must soon go to , where , I suspect , he first year or two will be utter wretchedness : to leave I , he mother , and he home , will give he heart a agonize wrench ; then , the fagging will not suit he -- but emulation , thirst after knowledge , the glory of success , will stir and reward he in time . meantime , I feel in myself a strong repugnance to fix the hour which will uproot my sole olive branch , and transplant it far from I ; and , when I speak to Frances on the subject , I be hear with a kind of patient pain , as though I allude to some fearful operation , at which she nature shudder , but from which she fortitude will not permit she to recoil . the step must , however , be take , and it shall be ; for , though Frances will not make a milksop of she son , she will accustom he to a style of treatment , a forbearance , a congenial tenderness , he will meet with from none else . she see , as I also see , a something in 's temper -- a kind of electrical ardour and power -- which emit , now and then , ominous spark ; call it he spirit , and say it should not be curb . I call it the leaven of the offending Adam , and consider that it should be , if not Whip out of he , at least soundly disciplin ; and that he will be cheap of any amount of either bodily or mental suffering which will ground he radically in the art of self - control . Frances give this something in she son 's
