. by . content chapter I . Bretton ii . PAULINA III . the Playmate iv . not . turn a New . . . . . . the Portress 's . the Casket xiii . a Sneeze out . the . the . Auld . . we . the . the . . the . . . the . a . the . the . be . . the . the . . . . the Apple of . . . old and New . the . . . chapter I . . my godmother live in a handsome house in the clean and ancient town of . she husband 's family have be resident there for generation , and bear , indeed , the name of they birthplace -- Bretton of : whether by coincidence , or because some remote ancestor have be a personage of sufficient importance to leave he name to he neighbourhood , I know not . when I be a girl I go to about twice a year , and well I like the visit . the house and its inmate specially suite I . the large peaceful room , the well - arrange furniture , the clear wide window , the balcony outside , look down on a fine antique street , where Sunday and holiday seem always to abide -- so quiet be its atmosphere , so clean its pavement -- these thing pleas I well . one child in a household of grown people be usually make very much of , and in a quiet way I be a good deal take notice of by , who have be leave a widow , with one son , before I know she ; she husband , a physician , have die while she be yet a young and handsome woman . she be not young , as I remember she , but she be still handsome , tall , well - make , and though dark for a , yet wear always the clearness of health in she brunette cheek , and its vivacity in a pair of fine , cheerful black eye . people esteem it a grievous pity that she have not confer she complexion on she son , whose eye be blue -- though , even in boyhood , very piercing -- and the colour of he long hair such as friend do not venture to specify , except as the sun shone on it , when they call it golden . he inherit the line of he mother 's feature , however ; also she good tooth , she stature ( or the promise of she stature , for he be not yet full - grow ) , and , what be better , she health without flaw , and she spirit of that tone and equality which be better than a fortune to the possessor . in the autumn of the year ---- I be stay at ; my godmother have come in person to claim I of the kinsfolk with whom be at that time fix my permanent residence . I believe she then plainly see event come , whose very shadow I scarce guess ; yet of which the faint suspicion suffice to impart unsettled sadness , and make I glad to change scene and society . time always flowed smoothly for I at my godmother 's side ; not with tumultuous swiftness , but blandly , like the gliding of a full river through a plain . my visit to she resemble the sojourn of and beside a certain pleasant stream , with " green tree on each bank , and meadow beautify with lily all the year round . " the charm of variety there be not , nor the excitement of incident ; but I like peace so well , and seek stimulus so little , that when the latter come I almost feel it a disturbance , and wish rather it have still hold aloon . one day a letter be receive of which the contents evidently cause surprise and some concern . I think at first it be from home , and tremble , expect I know not what disastrous communication : to I , however , no reference be make , and the cloud seem to pass . the next day , on my return from a long walk , I find , as I enter my bedroom , a unexpected change . in , addition to my own french bed in its shady recess , appear in a corner a small crib , drape with white ; and in addition to my mahogany chest of drawer , I see a tiny rosewood chest . I stand still , gaze , and consider . " of what be these thing the sign and token ? " I ask . the answer be obvious . " a second guest be come : expect other visitor . " on descending to dinner , explanation ensue . a little girl , I be tell , would shortly be my companion : the daughter of a friend and distant relation of the late 's . this little girl , it be add , have recently lose she mother ; though , indeed , ere long subjoin , the loss be not so great as might at first appear . ( it seem be the name ) have be a very pretty , but a giddy , careless woman , who have neglect she child , and disappoint and dishearten she husband . so far from congenial have the union prove , that separation at last ensue -- separation by mutual consent , not after any legal process . after this event , the lady have over -exert herself at a ball , catch cold , take a fever , and die after a very brief illness . she husband , naturally a man of
of very sensitive feeling , and shocke inexpressibly by too sudden communication of the news , could hardly , it seem , now be persuade but that some over-severity on he part -- some deficiency in patience and indulgence -- have contribute to hasten she end . he have brood over this idea till he spirit be seriously affect ; the medical man insiste on travelling be try as a remedy , and meanwhile have offer to take charge of he little girl . " and I hope , " add my godmother in conclusion , " the child will not be like she mamma ; as silly and frivolous a little flirt as ever sensible man be weak enough to marry . for , " say she , " a sensible man in he way , though not very practical : he be fond of science , and live half he life in a laboratory try experiment -- a thing he butterfly wife could neither comprehend nor endure ; and indeed " confess my godmother , " I should not have like it myself . " in answer to a question of mine , she further inform I that she late husband use to say , have derive this scientific turn from a maternal uncle , a french savant ; for he come , it seem ; of mixed french and scottish origin , and have connection now live in , of whom more than one wrote _de_ before he name , and call himself noble . that same evening at nine o'clock , a servant be despatch to meet the coach by which we little visitor be expect . and I sit alone in the drawing - room wait she come ; be absent on a visit to one of he schoolfellow who live in the country . my godmother read the evening paper while she wait ; I sew . it be a wet night ; the rain lash the pane , and the wind sound angry and restless . " poor child ! " say from time to time . " what weather for she journey ! I wish she be safe here . " a little before ten the door - bell announce 's return . no sooner be the door open than I run down into the hall ; there lay a trunk and some band - box , beside they stand a person like a nurse - girl , and at the foot of the staircase be with a shawled bundle in he arm . " be that the child ? " I ask . " yes , miss . " I would have open the shawl , and try to get a peep at the face , but it be hastily turn from I to 's shoulder . " put I down , please , " say a small voice when open the drawing - room door , " and take off this shawl , " continue the speaker , extracte with its minute hand the pin , and with a sort of fastidious haste doff the clumsy wrapping . the creature which now appear make a deft attempt to fold the shawl ; but the drapery be much too heavy and large to be sustain or wield by those hand and arm . " give it to , please , " be then the direction , " and she can put it away . " this say , it turn and fix it be eye on . " come here , little dear , " say that lady . " come and let I see if you be cold and damp : come and let I warm you at the fire . " the child advance promptly . relieve of she wrapping , she appear exceedingly tiny ; but be a neat , completely - fashio little figure , light , slight , and straight . seat on my godmother 's ample lap , she look a mere doll ; she neck , delicate as wax , she head of silky curl , increase , I think , the resemblance . talk in little fond phrasis as she chaf the child 's hand , arm , and foot ; first she be consider with a wistful gaze , but soon a smile answer she . be not generally a caressing woman : even with she deeply - cherish son , she manner be rarely sentimental , often the reverse ; but when the small stranger smile at she , she kiss it , ask , " what be my little one 's name ? " " . " " but besides ? " " Polly , papa call she . " " will Polly be content to live with I ? " " not _always ; but till papa come home . be go away . " she shook she head expressively . " he will return to , or send for she . " " will he , ma 'am ? do you know he will ? " " I think so . " " but think not : at least not for a long while . he be ill . " she eye fill . she draw she hand from 's and make a movement to leave she lap ; it be at first resist , but she say -- " please , I wish to go : I can sit on a stool . " she be allow to slip down from the knee , and take a footstool , she carry it to a corner where the shade be deep , and there seat herself . , though a commanding , and in grave matter even a peremptory woman , be often passive in trifle : she allow the child she way . she say to I , " take no notice at present . " but I
I do take notice : I watch rest she small elbow on she small knee , she head on she hand ; I observe she draw a square inch or two of pocket - handkerchief from the doll - pocket of she doll - skirt , and then I hear she weep . other child in grief or pain cry aloud , without shame or restraint ; but this be weep : the tiniest occasional sniff testify to she emotion . do not hear it : which be quite as well . Ere long , a voice , issue from the corner , demand -- " may the bell be ring for ! " I ring ; the nurse be summon and come . " Harriet , I must be put to bed , " say she little mistress . " you must ask where my bed be . " signify that she have already make that inquiry . " ask if you sleep with I , . " " no , , " say the nurse : " you be to share this young lady 's room , " designate I . do not leave she seat , but I see she eye seek I . after some minute ' silent scrutiny , she emerge from she corner . " I wish you , ma 'am , good night , " say she to ; but she pass I mute . " good - night , , " I say . " no need to say good - night , since we sleep in the same chamber , " be the reply , with which she vanish from the drawing - room . we hear propose to carry she up - stair . " no need , " be again she answer --" no need , no need : " and she small step toil wearily up the staircase . on go to be a hour afterwards , I find she still wide awake . she have arrange she pillow so as to support she little person in a sitting posture : she hand , place one within the other , rest quietly on the sheet , with a old - fashioned calm most unchildlike . I abstain from speak to she for some time , but just before extinguish the light , I recommend she to lie down . " by and by , " be the answer . " but you will take cold , . " she take some tiny article of raiment from the chair at she crib side , and with it cover she shoulders . I suffer she to do as she please . listen awhile in the darkness , I be aware that she still weep , -- weep under restraint , quietly and cautiously . on awaking with daylight , a trickling of water catch my ear . behold ! there she be risen and mount on a stool near the washstand , with pain and difficulty inclin the ewer ( which she could not lift ) so as to pour its contents into the basin . it be curious to watch she as she wash and dress , so small , busy , and noiseless . evidently she be little accustom to perform she own toilet ; and the button , string , hook and eye , offer difficulty which she encounter with a perseverance good to witness . she fold she night - dress , she smoothe the drapery of she couch quite neatly ; withdraw into a corner , where the sweep of the white curtain conceal she , she become still . I half rise , and advance my , head to see how she be occupi . on she knee , with she forehead bend on she hand , I perceive that she be pray . she nurse tap at the door . she start up . " I be dress , , " say she ; " I have dress myself , but I do not feel neat . make I neat ! " " why do you dress yourself , ? " " Hush ! speak low , , for fear of wake _to girl " ( mean I , who now lay with my eye shut ) . " I dress myself to learn , against the time you leave I . " " do you want I to go ? " " when you be cross , I have many a time want you to go , but not now . tie my sash straight ; make my hair smooth , please . " " you sash be straight enough . what a particular little body you be ! " " it must be tie again . please to tie it . " " there , then . when I be go you must get that young lady to dress you . " " on no account . " " why ? she be a very nice young lady . I hope you mean to behave prettily to she , , and not show you air . " " she shall dress I on no account . " " Comical little thing ! " " you be not pass the comb straight through my hair , ; the line will be crook . " " ay , you be ill to please . do that suit ? " " pretty well . where should I go now that I be dress ? " " I will take you into the breakfast - room . " " come , then . " they proceed to the door . she stop . " oh ! , I wish this be 's house ! I do not know these people . " " be a good child , . " " I be good , but I aco here ; " put she hand to she
she heart , and moan while she reiterate , " Papa! papa ! " I rouse myself and start up , to check this scene while it be yet within bounds . " say good - morning to the young lady , " dictate . she say , " good - morning , " and then follow she nurse from the room . temporarily leave that same day , to go to she own friend , who live in the neighbourhood . on descending , I find ( the child call herself Polly , but she full name be ) seat at the breakfast - table , by 's side ; a mug of milk stood before she , a morsel of bread fill she hand , which lay passive on the table - cloth : she be not eat . " how we shall conciliate this little creature , " say to I , " I do not know : she taste nothing , and by she look , she have not sleep . " I express my confidence in the effect of time and kindness . " if she be to take a fancy to anybody in the house , she would soon setle ; but not till then , " reply . chapter ii . Paulina . some day elapse , and it appear she be not likely to take much of a fancy to anybody in the house . she be not exactly naughty or wilful : she be far from disobedient ; but a object less conducive to comfort -- to tranquillity even -- than she present , it be scarcely possible to have before one 's eye . she mo : no grow person could have perform that uncheering business better ; no furrowed face of adult exile , longe for at 's antipode , ever bear more legibly the sign of home sickness than do she infant visage . she seem grow old and unearthly . I , , plead guiltless of that curse , a overheated and discursive imagination ; but whenever , open a room - door , I find she seat in a corner alone , she head in she pigmy hand , that room seem to I not inhabit , but haunt . and again , when of moonlight night , on waking , I beheld she figure , white and conspicuous in its night - dress , knee upright in bed , and pray like some or enthusiast -- some precocious fanatic or untimely saint -- I scarcely know what thought I have ; but they run risk of be hardly more rational and healthy than that child 's mind must have be . I seldom catch a word of she prayer , for they be whisper low : sometimes , indeed , they be not whisper at all , but put up unuttered ; such rare sentence as reach my ear still bear the burden , " ; my dear papa ! " this , I perceive , be a one - idea would nature ; betraie that monomaniac tendency I have ever think the most unfortunate with which man or woman can be curse . what might have be the end of this fretting , have it continue unchecked , can only be conjecture : it receive , however , a sudden turn . one afternoon , , coax she from she usual station in a corner , have lift she into the window - seat , and , by way of occupy she attention , tell she to watch the passenger and count how many lady should go down the street in a give time . she have sit listlessly , hardly look , and not count , when -- my eye be fix on hers -- I witness in its iris and pupil a startling transfiguration . these sudden , dangerous nature --_sensitive as they be call -- offer many a curiious spectacle to those whom a cooler temperament have secure from participation in they angular vagary . the fix and heavy gaze swum , tremble , then glitter in fire ; the small , overcast brow clear ; the trivial and deject feature light up ; the sad countenance vanish , and in its place appear a sudden eagerness , a intense expectancy . " it _i _! " be she word . like a bird or a shaft , or any other swift thing , she be go from the room , how she get the house - door open I can not tell ; probably it might be ajar ; perhaps be in the way and obey she behest , which would be impetuous enough . I -- watch calmly from the window -- see she , in she black frock and tiny braide apron ( to pinafore she have a antipathy ) , dart half the length of the street ; and , as I be on the point of turning , and quietly announce to that the child be run out mad , and ought instantly to be pursue , I see she catch up , and rapt at once from my cool observation , and from the wonder stare of the passenger . a gentleman have do this good turn , and now , cover she with he cloak , advance to restore she to the house whence he have see she issue . I conclude he would leave she in a servant 's charge and withdraw ; but he enter : have tarry a little while below , he come up - stair . he reception immediately explain that he be know to . she recognise he ; she greet he , and yet she be flutter , surprise , take unawar . she look and manner be even expostulatory ; and in reply to these , rather than she word , he say , -- " I
I could not help it , madam : I find it impossible to leave the country without see with my own eye how she settle . " " but you will unsettle she . " " I hope not . and how be 's little ? " this question he address to , as he sit down and place she gently on the ground before he . " how be 's papa ? " be the reply , as she lean on he knee , and gaze up into he face . it be not a noisy , not a wordy scene : for that I be thankful ; but it be a scene of feel too brimful , and which , because the cup do not foam up high or furiously overflow , only oppress one the more . on all occasion of vehement , unrestrained expansion , a sense of disdain or ridicule come to the weary spectator 's relief ; whereas I have ever feel most burdensome that sort of sensibility which bend of its own will , a giant slave under the sway of good sense . be a stern - featured -- perhaps I should rather say , a hard - featured man : he forehead be knotty , and he cheekbone be mark and prominent . the character of he face be quite Scotch ; but there be feeling in he eye , and emotion in he now agitate countenance . he northern accent in speak harmonise with he physiognomy . he be at once proud -looking and homely - look . he lay he hand on the child 's uplift head . she say -- " . " he kiss she . I wish she would utter some hysterical cry , so that I might get relief and be at ease . she make wonderfully little noise : she seem to have get what she want -- _all she want , and to be in a trance of content . neither in mien nor in feature be this creature like she sire , and yet she be of he strain : she mind have be fill from he , as the cup from the flagon . Indisputably , own manly self - control , however he might secretly feel on some matters . " Polly , " he say , look down on he little girl , " go into the hall ; you will see 's great - coat lie on a chair ; put you hand into the pocket , you will find a pocket - handkerchief there ; bring it to I . " she obey ; go and return deftly and nimbly . he be talk to when she come back , and she wait with the handkerchief in she hand . it be a picture , in its way , to see she , with she tiny stature , and trim , neat shape , stand at he knee . see that he continue to talk , apparently unconscious of she return , she take he hand , open the unresisting finger , insinuate into they the handkerchief , and close they upon it one by one . he still seem not to see or to feel she ; but by - and - by , he lift she to he knee ; she nestle against he , and though neither look at nor spoke to the other for a hour follow , I suppose both be satisfied . during tea , the minute thing 's movement and behaviour give , as usual , full occupation to the eye . first she direct , as he place the chair . " put papa 's chair here , and mine near it , between papa and : must hand he tea . " she take she own seat , and beckon with she hand to she father . " be near I , as if we be at home , papa . " and again , as she intercept he cup in passing , and would stir the sugar , and put in the cream herself , " I always do it for you at home ; papa : nobody could do it as well , not even you own self . " throughout the meal she continue she attention : rather absurd they be . the sugar - tong be too wide for one of she hand , and she have to use both in wield they ; the weight of the silver cream - ewer , the bread - and - butter plate , the very cup and saucer , taske she insufficient strength and dexterity ; but she would lift this , hand that , and luckily contrive through it all to break nothing . Candidly speak , I think she a little busy - body ; but she father , blind like other parent , see perfectly content to let she wait on he , and even wonderfully soothe by she office . " she be my comfort ! " he could not help say to . that lady have she own " comfort " and nonpareil on a much larger scale , and , for the moment , absent ; so she sympathise with he foible . this second " comfort " come on the stage in the course of the evening . I know this day have be fix for he return , and be aware that have be expect he through all its hour . we be seat round the fire , after tea , when join we circle : I should rather say , break it up -- for , of course , he arrival make a bustle ; and then , as be fasting , there be refreshment to be provide . he and meet as old acquaintance ; of the little girl he take no notice for a time .
. he meal over , and numerous question from he mother answer , he turn from the table to the hearth . opposite where he have place himself be seat , and at he elbow , the child . when I say _child I use a inappropriate and undescriptive term -- a term suggest any picture rather than that of the demure little person in a mourning frock and white chemisette , that might just have fit a good - size doll -- perch now on a high chair beside a stand , whereon be she toy work - box of white varnished wood , and hold in she hand a shred of a handkerchief , which she be professe to hey , and at which she bore perseveringly with a needle , that in she finger see almost a skewer , prick herself ever and anon , mark the cambric with a track of minute red dot ; occasionally start when the perverse weapon -- swerve from she control --inflict a deeper stab than usual ; but still silent , diligent , absorb , womanly . be at that time a handsome , faithless - look youth of sixteen . I say faithless - look , not because he be really of a very perfidious disposition , but because the epithet strike I as proper to describe the fair , Celtic ( not ) character of he good look ; he wave light auburn hair , he supple symmetry , he smile frequent , and destitute neither of fascination nor of subtlety ( in no bad sense ) . a spoiled , whimsical boy he be in those day . " mother , " he say , after eye the little figure before he in silence for some time , and when the temporary absence of from the room relieve he from the half - laugh bashfulness , which be all he know of timidity --- " mother , I see a young lady in the present society to whom I have not be introduce . " " 's little girl , I suppose you mean , " say he mother . " indeed , ma 'am , " reply she son , " I consider you expression of the least ceremonious : _i_ should certainly have say , in venturing to speak of the gentlewoman to whom I allude . " " now , , I will not have that child tease . do not flatter yourself that I shall suffer you to make she you butt . " " , " pursue , undeter by he mother 's remonstrance , " might I have the honour to introduce myself , since no one else seem willing to render you and I that service ? you slave , . " she look at he ; he rise and bow quite gravely . she deliberately put down thimble , scissors , work ; descende with precaution from she perch , and curtsy with unspeakable seriousness , say , " how do you do ? " " I have the honour to be in fair health , only in some measure fatigue with a hurried journey . I hope , ma 'am , I see you well ? " " -rer -ably well , " be the ambitious reply of the little woman and she now essay to regain she former elevation , but find this could not be do without some climbing and strain -- a sacrifice of decorum not to be think of -- and be utterly disdainful of aid in the presence of a strange young gentleman , she relinquish the high chair for a low stool : towards that low stool draw in he chair . " I hope , ma 'am , the present residence , my mother 's house , appear to you a convenient place of abode ? " " not par-tic - - - ly ; I want to go home . " " a natural and laudable desire , ma 'am ; but one which , notwithstand , I shall do my best to oppose . I reckon on be able to get out of you a little of that precious commodity call amusement , which and there fail to yield I . " " I shall have to go with papa soon : I shall not stay long at you mother 's . " " yes , yes ; you will stay with I , I be sure . I have a pony on which you shall ride , and no end of book with picture to show you . " " be _you_ go to live here now ? " " I be . do that please you ? do you like I ? " " no . " " why ? " " I think you queer . " " my face , ma 'am ? " " you face and all about you : you have long red hair . " " Auburn hair , if you please : mamma , call it auburn , or golden , and so do all she friend . but even with my ' long red hair ' " ( and he wave he mane with a sort of triumph -- tawny he himself well know that it be , and he be proud of the leonine hue ) , " I can not possibly be queerer than be you ladyship . " " you call I queer ? " " certainly . " ( after a pause ) , " I think I shall go to bed . " " a little thing like you ought to have be in bed many hour since ; but you probably sit up in the expectation of see I ? " " no , indeed . " " you certainly wish to enjoy the pleasure of my society . you know I be come
come home , and would wait to have a look at I . " " I sit up for papa , and not for you . " " very good , . I be go to be a favourite : prefer before papa soon , I daresay . " she wish and myself good - night ; she seem hesitat whether 's desert entitle he to the same attention , when he catch she up with one hand , and with that one hand hold she poise aloft above he head . she see herself thus lift up on high , in the glass over the fireplace . the suddenness , the freedom , the disrespect of the action be too much . " for shame , ! " be she indignant cry , " put I down ! " -- and when again on she foot , " I wonder what you would think of I if I be to treat you in that way , lifte you with my hand " ( raise that mighty member ) " as Warren lift the little cat . " so say , she depart . chapter III . the Playmate . stay two day . during he visit he could not be prevail on to go out : he sit all day long by the fireside , sometimes silent , sometimes receive and answer 's chat , which be just of the proper sort for a man in he morbid mood -- not over -sympathetic , yet not too uncongenial , sensible ; and even with a touch of the motherly -- she be sufficiently he senior to be permit this touch . as to , the child be at once happy and mute , busy and watchful . she father frequently lifte she to he knee ; she would sit there till she feel or fancie he grow restless ; then it be -- " , put I down ; I shall tire you with my weight . " and the mighty burden slid to the rug , and establish itself on carpet or stool just at " papa 's " foot , the white work - box and the scarlet- speckle handkerchief come into play . this handkerchief , it seem , be intend as a keepake for " papa , " and must be finish before he departure ; consequently the demand on the sempstress 's industry ( she accomplish about a score of stitch in half - a - hour ) be stringent . the evening , by restore to the maternal roof ( he day be pass at school ) , bring we a accession of animation -- a quality not diminish by the nature of the scene pretty sure to be enact between he and . a distant and haughty demeanou have be the result of the indignity put upon she the first evening of he arrival : she usual answer , when he address she , be --" I can not attend to you ; I have other thing to think about . " be implored to state _what thing : " . " would endeaavor to seduce she attention by open he desk and display its multifarious contents : seal , bright stick of wax , pen-knive , with a miscellany of engraving -- some of they gaily colou -- which he have amass from time to time . be this powerful temptation wholly unavail : she eye , furtively raise from she work , cast many a peep towards the writing - table , rich in scattered picture . a etching of a child play with a spaniel happen to flutter to the floor . " pretty little dog ! " say she , delight . prudently take no notice . Ere long , steal from she corner , she approached to examine the treasure more closely . the dog 's great eye and long ears , and the child 's hat and feather , be irresistible . " nice picture ! " be she favourable criticism . " well -- you may have it , " say . she seem to hesitate . the wish to possess be strong , but to accept would be a compromise of dignity . no . she put it down and turn away . " you will not have it , then , ? " " I would rather not , thank you . " " shall I tell you what I will do with the picture if you refuse it ? " she half turn to listen . " cut it into strips for light the taper . " " no ! " " but I shall . " " please -- do not . " wax inexorable on hear the pleading tone ; he take the scissors from he mother 's work - basket . " here go ! " say he , make a menacing flourish . " right through 's head , and split little 's nose . " " no ! _no !_ no ! " " then come to I . come quickly , or it be done . " she hesitate , linger , but comply . " now , will you have it ? " he ask , as she stand before he . " please . " " but I shall want payment . " " how much ? " " a kiss . " " give the picture first into my hand . " Polly , as she say this , look rather faithless in she turn . give it . she abscond a debtor , dart to she father , and take refuge on he knee . rise in mimic wrath and follow . she bury she face in 's waistcoat . " Papa -- papa -- send he away ! " " I will not be send away , " say . with face
face still avert , she hold out she hand to keep he off " then , I shall kiss the hand , " say he ; but that moment it become a miniature fist , and deal he payment in a small coin that be not kiss . -- not fail in he way to be as wily as he little playmate -- retreate apparently quite discomfit ; he fling himself on a sofa , and rest he head against the cushion , lay like one in pain . Polly , find he silent , presently pee at he . he eye and face be cover with he hand . she turn on she father 's knee , and gaze at she foe anxiously and long . groane . " , what be the matter ? " she whisper . " you have better ask he , Polly . " " be he hurt ? " ( groan second . ) " he make a noise as if he be , " say . " mother , " suggest , feebly , " I think you have better send for the doctor . oh my eye ! " ( renew silence , break only by sigh from . ) " if i be to become blind ---- ? " suggest this last . he chastiser could not bear the suggestion . she be beside he directly . " let I see you eye : I do not mean to touch it , only you mouth ; and I do not think I hit so _very hard . " Silence answer she . she feature work , -- " I be sorry ; I be sorry ! " then succeed emotion , falter ; weepe . " have do try that child , , " say . " it be all nonsense , my pet , " cry . and once more snatch she aloft , and she again punish he ; and while she pull he lion 's lock , terme he -- " the naughtiest , rudest , worst , untruest person that ever be . " * * * * * on the morning of 's departure , he and he daughter have some conversation in a window - recess by themselves ; I hear part of it . " could not I pack my box and go with you , papa ? " she whisper earnestly . he shook he head . " should I be a trouble to you ? " " yes , . " " because I be litle ? " " because you be little and tender . it be only great , strong people that should travel . but do not look sad , my little girl ; it break my heart . , will soon come back to he Polly . " " indeed , indeed , I be not sad , scarcely at all . " " Polly would be sorry to give papa pain ; would she not ? " " Sorrier than sorry . " " then Polly must be cheerful : not cry at parting ; not fret afterwards . she must look forward to meet again , and try to be happy meanwhile . can she do this ? " " she will try . " " I see she will . farewell , then . it be time to go . " " _Now _?-- just _now ? " just now . " she hold up quivering lip . she father sob , but she , I remark , do not . have put she down , he shook hand with the rest present , and depart . when the street - door close , she drop on she knee at a chair with a cry -- " ! " it be low and long ; a sort of " why hast thou forsake I ? " during a ensue space of some minute , I perceive she endure agony . she go through , in that brief interval of she infant life , emotion such as some never feel ; it be in she constitution : she would have more of such instant if she liv . nobody speak . , be a mother , shed a tear or two . , who be write , lift up he eye and gaze at she . I , , be calm . the little creature , thus leave unharassed , do for herself what none other could do -- contende with a intolerable feeling ; and , ere long , in some degree , repress it . that day she would accept solace from none ; nor the next day : she grow more passive afterwards . on the third evening , as she sit on the floor , worn and quiet , , come in , take she up gently , without a word . she do not resist : she rather nestle in he arm , as if weary . when he sit down , she lay she head against he ; in a few minute she sleep ; he carry she upstairs to bed . I be not surprise that , the next morning , the first thing she demand be , " where be ? " it happen that be not come to the breakfast - table ; he have some exercise to write for that morning 's class , and have request he mother to send a cup of tea into the study . volunteere to carry it : she must be busy about something , look after somebody . the cup be entrust to she ; for , if restless , she be also careful . as the study be opposite the breakfast - room , the door face across the passage , my eye follow she . " what be you do ? " she ask , pause on
on the threshold . " write , " say . " why do not you come to take breakfast with you mamma ? " " too busy . " " do you want any breakfast ? " " of course . " " there , then . " and she deposit the cup on the carpet , like a jailor put a prisoner 's pitcher of water through he cell - door , and retreate . presently she return . " what will you have besides tea -- what to eat ? " " anything good . bring I something particularly nice ; that be a kind little woman . " she come back to . " please , ma 'am , send you boy something good . " " you shall choose for he , Polly ; what shall my boy have ? " she select a portion of whatever be best on the table ; and , ere long , come back with a whispered request for some marmalade , which be not there . have get it , however , ( for refuse the pair nothing ) , be shortly after hear laud she to the sky ; promise that , when he have a house of he own , she should be he housekeeper , and perhaps -- if she show any culinary genius -- he cook ; and , as she do not return , and I go to look after she , I find and she breakfast _tete - a - tete _-- she stand at he elbow , and share he fare : except the marmalade , which she delicately refuse to touch , lest , I suppose , it should appear that she have procure it as much on she own account as he . she constantly evince these nice perception and delicate instinct . the league of acquaintanceship thus strike up be not hastily dissolve ; on the contrary , it appear that time and circumstance serve rather to cement than loosen it . -assimilate as the two be in age , sex , pursuit , & c. , they somehow find a great deal to say to each other . as to , I observ that she little character never properly come out , except with young . as she get settled , and accustom to the house , she prove tractable enough with ; but she would sit on a stool at that lady 's foot all day long , learn she task , or sew , or draw figure with a pencil on a slate , and never kind once to originality , or show a single gleam of the peculiarity of she nature . I cease to watch she under such circumstance : she be not interesting . but the moment 's knock sound of a evening , a change occur ; she be instantly at the head of the staircase . usually she welcome be a reprimand or a threat . " you have not wip you shoe properly on the mat . I shall tell you mamma . " " little busybody ! be you there ? " " yes -- and you can not reach I : I be higher up than you " ( pee between the rail of the banister ; she could not look over they ) . " Polly ! " " my dear boy ! " ( such be one of she term for he , adopt in imitation of he mother . ) " I be fit to faint with fatigue , " declare , lean against the passage - wall in seem exhaustion . " " ( the headmaster ) " have quite knock I up with overwork . just come down and help I to carry up my book . " " ah ! you be cunn ! " " not at all , -- it be positive fact . I be as weak as a rush . come down . " " you eye be quiet like the cat 's , but you will spre . " " spring ? nothing of the kind : it be not in I . come down . " " perhaps I may -- if you will promise not to touch -- not to snatch I up , and not to whirl I round . " " I ? I could not do it ! " ( sinke into a chair . ) " then put the book down on the first step , and go three yard off " this be do , she descende warily , and not take she eye from the feeble . of course she approach always galvanize he to new and spasmodic life : the game of romp be sure to be exact . sometimes she would be angry ; sometimes the matter be allow to pass smoothly , and we could hear she say as she lead he up - stair : " now , my dear boy , come and take you tea -- I be sure you must want something . " it be sufficientely comical to observe she as she sit beside , while he take that meal . in he absence she be a still personage , but with he the most officious , fidgety little body possible . I often wish she would mind herself and be tranquil ; but no --herself be forget in he : he could not be sufficiently well wait on , nor carefully enough look after ; he be more than the in she estimation . she would gradually assemble the various plate before he , and , when one would suppose all he could possibly desire be within he reach , she would find out something else : " ma 'am , " she would whisper to , -- " perhaps you son would like a little cake -- sweet cake ,
, you know -- there be some in there " ( point to the sideboard cupboard ) . , as a rule , disapprove of sweet cake at tea , but still the request be urge , -- " one little piece -- only for he -- as he go to school : girl --such as I and -- do not need treat , but _he_ would like it . " do like it very well , and almost always get it . to do he justice , he would have share he prize with she to whom he owed it ; but that be never allow : to insist , be to ruffle she for the evening . to stand by he knee , and monopolize he talk and notice , be the reward she want -- not a share of the cake . with curious readiness do she adapt herself to such theme as interest he . one would have think the child have no mind or life of she own , but must necessarily live , move , and have she be in another : now that she father be take from she , she nestle to , and seem to feel by he feeling : to exist in he existence . she learn the name of all he schoolfellow in a trice : she get by heart they character as give from he lip : a single description of a individual seem to suffice . she never forget , or confuse identity : she would talk with he the whole evening about people she have never see , and appear completely to realise they aspect , manners , and disposition . some she learn to : a under - master , who be a aversion of young 's , have , it seem , some peculiarity , which she catch up in a moment from 's representation , and rehearse for he amusement ; this , however , disapprove and forbade . the pair seldom quarrell ; yet once a rupture occur , in which she feeling receive a severe shock . one day , on the occasion of he birthday , have some friend -- lad of he own age -- to dine with he . take much interest in the coming of these friend ; she have frequently hear of they ; they be amongst those of whom oftenest spoke . after dinner , the young gentleman be leave by themselves in the dining - room , where they soon become very merry and make a good deal of noise . Chance to pass through the hall , I find sit alone on the lowest step of the staircase , she eye fix on the glossy panel of the dining - room door , where the reflection of the hall - lamp be shining ; she little brow knit in anxious , meditation . " what be you think about , ? " " nothing particular ; only I wish that door be clear glass -- that I might see through it . the boy seem very cheerful , and I want to go to they : I want to be with , and watch he friend . " " what hinder you from go ? " " I feel afraid : but may I try , do you think ? may I knock at the door , and ask to be let in ? " I think perhaps they might not object to have she as a playmate , and therefore encourage the attempt . she knock -- too faintly at first to be hear , but on a second essay the door unclose ; 's head appear ; he look in high spirit , but impatient . " what do you want , you little monkey ? " " to come to you . " " do you indeed ? as if I would be troublead with you ! away to and , and tell they to put you to bed . " the auburn head and bright flush face vanish , -- the door shut peremptorily . she be stun . " why do he speak so ? he never speak so before , " she say in consternation . " what have I do ? " " nothing , Polly ; but be busy with he school - friend . " " and he like they better than I ! he turn I away now they be here ! " I have some thought of consoling she , and of improve the occasion by inculcat some of those maxim of philosophy whereor I have ever a tolerable stock ready for application . she stop I , however , by put she finger in she ear at the first word I uttere , and then lie down on the mat with she face against the flag ; nor could either or the cook root she from that position : she be allow to lie , therefore , till she choose to rise of she own accord . forget he impatience the same evening , and would have accost she as usual when he friend be gone , but she wrench herself from he hand ; she eye quite flash ; she would not bid he good - night ; she would not look in he face . the next day he treat she with indifference , and she grow like a bit of marble . the day after , he tease she to know what be the matter ; she lip would not unclose . of course he could not feel real anger on he side : the match be too unequal in every way ; he try soothing and coax . " why be she so angry ? what have he do ? " by - and - by tear answer he ; he pet she , and they be friend
friend . but she be one on whom such incidents be not lose : I remark that never after this rebuff do she seek he , or follow he , or in any way solicit he notice . I tell she once to carry a book or some other article to when he be shut up in he study . " I shall wait till he come out , " say she , proudly ; " I do not choose to give he the trouble of rising to open the door . " yong have a favourite pony on which he often ride out ; from the window she always watch he departure and return . it be she ambition to be permit to have a ride round the courtyard on this pony ; but far be it from she to ask such a favour . one day she descend to the yard to watch he dismount ; as she lean against the gate , the longing wish for the indulgence of a ride glitter in she eye . " come , Polly , will you have a canter ? " ask , half carelessly . I suppose she think he be _too_ careless . " no , thank you , " say she , turn away with the utmost coolness . " you have better , " pursue he . " you will like it , I be sure . " " do not think I should care a fig about it , " be the response . " that be not true . you tell you longe to have a ride . " " be a _tatter_- box , " I hear she say ( she imperfect articulation be the least precocious thing she have about she ) ; and with this ; she walk into the house . , come in soon after , observe to he mother ,-- " , I believe that creature be a changeling : she be a perfect cabinet of oddity ; but I should be dull without she : she amuse I a great deal more than you or . " * * * * * " , " say to I ( she have now get into the habit of occasionally chat with I when we be alone in we room at night ) , " do you know on what day in the week I like best ? " " how can I possibly know anything so strange ? be there one day out of the seven when he be otherwise than on the other six ? " " to be sure ! can not you see ? do not you know ? I find he the most excellent on a ; then we have he the whole day , and he be quiet , and , in the evening , _so_ kind . " this observation be not altogether groundless : go to church , & c. , keep quiet on the , and the evening he generally dedicate to a serene , though rather indolent sort of enjoyment by the parlour fireside . he would take possession of the couch , and then he would call Polly . be a boy not quite as other boy be ; all he delight do not lie in action : he be capable of some interval of contemplation ; he could take a pleasure too in reading , nor be he selection of book wholly indiscriminate : there be glimmering of characteristic preference , and even of instinctive taste in the choice . he rarely , it be true , remark on what he read , but I have see he sit and think of it . Polly , be near he , knee on a little cushion or the carpet , a conversation would begin in murmur , not inaudible , though subdue . I catch a snatch of they tenor now and then ; and , in truth , some influence better and finer than that of every day , seem to soothe at such time into no ungentle mood . " have you learn any hymn this week , ? " " I have learn a very pretty one , four verse long . shall I say it ? " " speak nicely , then : do not be in a hurry . " the hymn be rehearse , or rather half - chant , in a little singing voice , would take exception at the manner , and proceed to give a lesson in recitation . she be quick in learn , apt in imitating ; and , besides , she pleasure be to please : she prove a ready scholar . to the hymn would succeed some reading -- perhaps a chapter in the Bible ; correction be seldom require here , for the child could read any simple narrative chapter very well ; and , when the subject be such as she could understand and take a interest in , she expression and emphasis be something remarkable . cast into the pit ; the calling of ; in the lions ' den ;-- these be favourite passage : of the first especially she seem perfectly to feel the patho . " poor ! " she would sometimes say , with quiver lip . " how he love he son ! as much , " she once add -- " as much , , as I love you : if you be to die " ( and she re-open the book , seek the verse , and read ) , " I should refuse to be comforte , and go down into the grave to you mourn . " with these word she gather in she little arm , draw he long - tress head towards she . the action , I remember , strike I as strangely rash ; excite the feeling one might experience
experience on see a animal dangerous by nature , and but half - tame by art , too heedlessly fond . not that I fear would hurt , or very roughly check she ; but I think she run risk of incurr such a careless , impatient repulse , as would be worse almost to she than a blow . on : the whole , however , these demonstration be borne passively : sometimes even a sort of complacent wonder at she earnest partiality would smile not unkindly in he eye . once he say :-- " you like I almost as well as if you be my little sister , Polly . " " oh ! I _do_ like you , " say she ; " I _do_ like you very much . " I be not long allow the amusement of this study of character . she have scarcely be at two month , when a letter come from , signify that he be now settle amongst he maternal kinsfolk on the continent ; that , as be become wholly distasteful to he , he have no thought of returning hither , perhaps , for year ; and that he wish he little girl to join he immediately . " I wonder how she will take this news ? " say , when she have read the letter . _I_ wonder , too , and I take upon myself to communicate it . Repaire to the drawing - room -- in which calm and decorate apartment she be fond of be alone , and where she could be implicitly trust , for she finger nothing , or rather soil nothing she finger -- I find she seat , like a little , on a couch , half shade by the droop drapery of the window near . she seem happy ; all she appliance for occupation be about she ; the white wood workbox , a shred or two of muslin , a end or two of ribbon collect for conversion into doll - millinery . the doll , duly night - cap and night - gowne , lay in it be cradle ; she be rock it to sleep , with a air of the most perfect faith in its possession of sentient and somnolent faculty ; she eye , at the same time , be engage with a picture - book , which lay open on she lap . " , " say she in a whisper , " this be a wonderful book . " ( the doll , christen by ; for , indeed , its begrim complexion give it much of a Ethiopian aspect ) -- " be asleep now , and I may tell you about it ; only we must both speak low , lest she should wake . this book be give I by ; it tell about distant country , a long , long way from , which no traveller can reach without sai thousand of mile over the sea . wild man live in these country , , who wear clothes different from ours : indeed , some of they wear scarcely any clothes , for the sake of be cool , you know ; for they have very hot weather . here be a picture of thousand gather in a desolate place -- a plain , spread with sand -- round a man in black , -- a good , _good_ -- a missionary , who be preach to they under a palm - tree . " ( she show a little coloured cut to that effect . ) " and here be picture " ( she go on ) " more stranger " ( grammar be occasionally forget ) " than that . there be the wonderful great wall of ; here be a chinese lady , with a foot littler than mine . there be a wild horse of ; and here , most strange of all -- be a land of ice and snow , without green field , wood , or garden . in this land , they find some mammoth bone : there be no mammoth now . you do not know what it be ; but I can tell you , because tell I . a mighty , goblin creature , as high as this room , and as long as the hall ; but not a fierce , flesh - eat thing , think . he believe , if I meet one in a forest , it would not kill I , unless I come quite in its way ; when it would trample I down amongst the bushes , as I might tread on a grasshopper in a hayfield without know it . " thus she ramble on . " Polly , " I interrupt , " should you like to travel ? " " not just yet , " be the prudent answer ; " but perhaps in twenty year , when I be grow a woman , as tall as , I may travel with . we intend go to , and climb ; and some day we shall sail over to , and walk to the top of - kim - borazo . " " but how would you like to travel now , if you papa be with you ? " she reply -- not give till after a pause -- evince one of those unexpected turn of temper peculiar to she . " where be the good of talk in that silly way ? " say she . " why do you mention papa ? what be papa to you ? I be just begin to be happy , and not think about he so much ; and there it will be all to do over again ! " she lip tremble . I hasten to disclose the fact of a letter have be receive
receive , and to mention the direction give that she and should immediately rejoin this dear papa . " now , , be you not glad ? " I add . she make no answer . she drop she book and cease to rock she doll ; she gaze at I with gravity and earnestness . " shall not you like to go to papa ? " " of course , " she say at last in that trenchant manner she usually employ in speak to I ; and which be quite different from that she use with , and different again from the one dedicate to . I wish to ascertain more of what she think but no : she would converse no more . Hasten to , she question she , and receive the confirmation of my news . the weight and importance of these tiding keep she perfectly serious the whole day . in the evening , at the moment 's entrance be hear below , I find she at my side . she begin to arrange a locket - ribbon about my neck , she displace and replace the comb in my hair ; while thus busy , enter . " tell he by - and - by , " she whisper ; " tell he I be go . " in the course of tea - time I make the desire communication . , it chance , be at that time greatly preoccupy about some school -prize , for which he be compete . the news have to be tell twice before it take proper hold of he attention , and even then he dwelt on it but momently . " Polly go ? what a pity ! dear little , I shall be sorry to lose she : she must come to we again , mamma . " and hastily swallow he tea , he take a candle and a small table to himself and he book , and be soon bury in study . " " crept to he side , and lay down on the carpet at he foot , she face to the floor ; mute and motionless she keep that post and position till bed - time . once I see -- wholly unconscious of she proximity -- push she with he restless foot . she reced a inch or two . a minute after one little hand stole out from beneath she face , to which it have be press , and softly caress the heedless foot . when summon by she nurse she rise and depart very obediently , have bid we all a subdue good - night . I will not say that I dread go to be , a hour later ; yet I certainly go with a unquiet anticipation that I should find that child in no peaceful sleep . the forewarning of my instinct be but fulfil , when I discover she , all cold and vigilant , perch like a white bird on the outside of the bed . I scarcely know how to accost she ; she be not to be manage like another child . she , however , accost I . as I close the door , and put the light on the dressing - table , she turn tome with these word :--" I cannot --_cannot_ sleep ; and in this way I cannot --_cannot_ live ! " I ask what ail she . " Dedful miz -er - y ! " say she , with she piteous lisp . " shall I call ? " " that be downright silly , " be she impatient reply ; and , indeed , I well know that if she have hear 's foot approach , she would have nestle quiet as a mouse under the bedclothes . whilst lavish she eccentricity regardlessly before I -- for whom she profess scarcely the semblance of affection -- she never show my godmother one glimpse of she inner self : for she , she be nothing but a docile , somewhat quaint little maiden . I examine she ; she cheek be crimson ; she dilate eye be both trouble and glow , and painfully restless : in this state it be obvious she must not be leave till morning . I guess how the case stood . " would you like to bid good - night again ? " I ask . " he be not go to he room yet . " she at once stretch out she little arm to be lift . Fold a shawl round she , I carry she back to the drawing - room . be just come out . " she can not sleep without see and speak to you once more , " I say . " she do not like the thought of leave you . " " I have spoild she , " say he , take she from I with good humour , and kiss she little hot face and burn lip . " Polly , you care for I more than for papa , now -- " " I _do_ care for you , but you care nothing for I , " be she whisper . she be assure to the contrary , again kiss , restore to I , and I carry she away ; but , alas ! not soothe . when I think she could listen to I , I say -- " , you should not grieve that do not care for you so much as you care for he . it must be so . " she lift and question eye ask why . " because he be a boy and you be a girl ; he be sixteen and you be only six ; he nature be strong and gay , and yours be otherwise . " " but I love he so much ;
; he _should love I a little . " " he do . he be fond of you . you be he favourite . " " be I 's favourite ? " " yes , more than any little child I know . " the assurance soothe she ; she smile in she anguish . " but , " I continue , " do not fret , and do not expect too much of he , or else he will feel you to be troublesome , and then it be all over . " " all over ! " she echo softly ; " then I will be good . I will try to be good , . " I put she to bed . " will he forgive I this one time ? " she ask , as I undress myself . I assure she that he would ; that as yet he be by no means alienate ; that she have only to be careful for the future . " there be no future , " say she : " I be go . shall I ever -- ever -- see he again , after I leave ? " I return a encouraging response . the candle be extinguish , a still half - hour elapse . I think she asleep , when the little white shape once more lift itself in the crib , and the small voice ask -- " do you like , ? " " like he ! yes , a little . " " only a little ! do you like he as I do ? " " I think not . no : not as you do . " " do you like he much ? " " I tell you I like he a little . where be the use of caring for he so very much : he be full of fault . " " be he ? " " all boy be . " " more than girl ? " " very likely . wise people say it be folly to think anybody perfect ; and as to like and dislike , we should be friendly to all , and worship none . " " be you a wise person ? " " I mean to try to be so . go to sleep . " " I _cannot go to sleep . have you no pain just here " ( lay she elfish hand on she elfish breast , ) " when you think _you_ shall have to leave ; for _you home be not here ? " " surely , , " say I , " you should not feel so much pain when you be very soon go to rejoin you father . have you forget he ? do you no longer wish to be he little companion ? " dead silence succeed this question . " child , lie down and sleep , " I ur . " my bed be cold , " say she . " I can not warm it . " I see the little thing shiver . " come to I , " I say , wish , yet scarcely hope , that she would comply : for she be a most strange , capricious , little creature , and especially whimsical with I . she come , however , instantly , like a small ghost glid over the carpet . I take she in . she be chill : I warm she in my arm . she tremble nervously ; I soothe she . thus tranquillize and cherish she at last slumbered . " a very unique child , " think I , as I view she sleep countenance by the fitful moonlight , and cautiously and softly wip she glitter eyelid and she wet cheek with my handkerchief . " how will she get through this world , or battle with this life ? how will she bear the shocks and repulse , the humiliation and desolation , which book , and my own reason , tell I be prepare for all flesh ? " she depart the next day ; trembl like a leaf when she take leave , but exercise self - command . . . on quit , which I do a few week after 's departure -- little think then I be never again to visit it ; never more to tread its calm old street -- I betake myself home , have be absent six month . it will be conjecture that I be of course glad to return to the bosom of my kindred . well ! the amiable conjecture do no harm , and may therefore be safely leave uncontradicted . far from say nay , indeed , I will permit the reader to picture I , for the next eight year , as a bark slumber through halcyon weather , in a harbour still as glass -- the steersman stretch on the little deck , he face up to heaven , he eye close : bury , if you will , in a long prayer . a great many woman and girl be suppose to pass they life something in that fashion ; why not I with the rest ? picture I then idle , bask , plump , and happy , stretch on a cushioned deck , warm with constant sunshine , rock by breeze indolently soft . however , it can not be conceal that , in that case , I must somehow have fall overboard , or that there must have be wreck at last . I too well remember a time -- a long time -- of cold , of danger , of contention . to this hour , when I have the nightmare , it repeat the rush and saltness of briny wave in my throat , and they icy pressure on my lung . I
I even know there be a storm , and that not of one hour nor one day . for many day and night neither sun nor star appear ; we cast with we own hand the tackling out of the ship ; a heavy tempest lay on we ; all hope that we should be save be take away . in fine , the ship be lose , the crew perish . as far as I recollect , I complain to no one about these trouble . indeed , to whom could I complain ? of I have long lost sight . Impediment , raise by other , have , year ago , come in the way of we intercourse , and cut it off . besides , time have bring change for she , too : the handsome property of which she be leave guardian for she son , and which have be chiefly invest in some joint - stock undertaking , have melte , it be say , to a fraction of its original amount . , I learn from incidental rumour , have adopt a profession ; both he and he mother be go from , and be understand to be now in . thus , there remain no possibility of dependence on other ; to myself alone could I look . I know not that I be of a self - reliant or active nature ; but self - reliance and exertion be force upon I by circumstance , as they be upon thousand besides ; and when , a maiden lady of we neighbourhood , send for I , I obey she behest , in the hope that she might assign I some task I could undertake . not be a woman of fortune , and live in a handsome residence ; but she be a rheumatic cripple , impotent , foot and hand , and have be so for twenty year . she always sit upstairs : she draw - room adjoin she bed - room . I have often heard of , and of she peculiarity ( she have the character of be very eccentric ) , but till now have never see she . I find she a furrowed , grey - haired woman , grave with solitude , stern with long affliction , irritable also , and perhaps exact . it seem that a maid , or rather companion , who have wait on she for some year , be about to be marry ; and she , hearing of my bereaved lot , have send for I , with the idea that I might supply this person 's place . she make the proposal to I after tea , as she and I sit alone by she fireside . " it will not be a easy life ; " say she candidly , " for I require a good deal of attention , and you will be much confin ; yet , perhaps , contrast with the existence you have lately lead , it may appear tolerable . " I reflect . of course it ought to appear tolerable , I argue inwardly ; but somehow , by some strange fatality , it would not . to live here , in this close room , the watcher of suffering -- sometimes , perhaps , the butt of temper -- through all that be to come of my youth ; while all that be gone have pass , to say the least , not blissfully ! my heart sink one moment , then it revive ; for though I force myself to _realise_ evils , I think I be too prosaic to _idealise , and consequently to exaggerate they . " my doubt be whether I should have strength for the undertaking , " I observe . " that be my own scruple , " say she ; " for you look a worn - out creature . " so I do . I see myself in the glass , in my mourning - dress , a faded , hollow - eyed vision . yet I think little of the wan spectacle . the blight , I believe , be chiefly external : I still feel life at life 's source . " what else have you in view -- anything ? " " nothing clear as yet : but I may find something . " " so you imagine : perhaps you be right . try you own method , then ; and if it do not succeed , test mine . the chance I have offer shall be leave open to you for three month . " this be kind . I tell she so , and express my gratitude . while I be speak , a paroxysm of pain come on . I ministere to she ; make the necessary application , accord to she direction , and , by the time she be relieve , a sort of intimacy be already form between we . I , for my part , have learn from the manner in which she bear this attack , that she be a firm , patient woman ( patient under physical pain , though sometimes perhaps excitable under long mental canker ) ; and she , from the good - will with which I succoure she , discover that she could influence my sympathy ( such as they be ) . she send for I the next day ; for five or six successive day she claim my company . closer acquaintance , while it develop both fault and eccentricity , open , at the same time , a view of a character I could respect . and even morise as she sometimes be , I could wait on she and sit beside she with that calm which always bless we when we be sensible that we manners , presence , contact , please
please and soothe the person we serve . even when she scolde I -- which she do , now and then , very tartly -- it be in such a way as do not humiliate , and leave no sting ; it be rather like a irascible mother rate she daughter , than a harsh mistress lectur a dependant : lecture , indeed , she could not , though she could occasionally storm . moreover , a vein of reason ever run through she passion : she be logical even when fierce . Ere long a grow sense of attachment begin to present the thought of stay with she as companion in quite a new light ; in another week I have agree to remain . two hot , close room thus become my world ; and a crippled old woman , my mistress , my friend , my all . she service be my duty -- she pain , my suffer -- she relief , my hope -- she anger , my punishment -- she regard , my reward . I forget that there be field , wood , rivers , seas , a ever - change sky outside the steam -dim lattice of this sick chamber ; I be almost content to forget it . all within I become narrowed to my lot . and still by habit , disciplin by destiny , I demand no walk in the fresh air ; my appetite need no more than the tiny mess serve for the invalid . in addition , she give I the originality of she character to study : the steadiness of she virtue , I will add , the power of she passion , to admire ; the truth of she feeling to trust . all these thing she have , and for these thing I cling to she . for these thing I would have crawl on with she for twenty year , if for twenty year longer she life of endurance have be protract . but another decree be write . it seem I must be stimulate into action . I must be goad , drive , sting , force to energy . my little morsel of human affection , which I prize as if it be a solid pearl , must melt in my finger and slip thence like a dissolve hailstone . my small adopt duty must be snatch from my easily contente conscience . I have want to compromise with Fate : to escape occasional great agony by submit to a whole life of privation and small pain . Fate would not so be pacify ; nor would sanction this shrink sloth and cowardly indolence . one night -- I remember it well -- there come a voice near 's house , hear by every inmate , but translate , perhaps , only by one . after a calm winter , storms be usher in the spring . I have put not to be ; I sit at the fireside sew . the wind be wail at the window ; it have wail all day ; but , as night deepen , it take a new tone -- a accent keen , piercing , almost articulate to the ear ; a plaint , piteous and disconsolate to the nerve , trill in every gust . " oh , hush ! hush ! " I say in my disturbed mind , drop my work , and make a vain effort to stop my ear against that subtle , search cry . I have hear that very voice ere this , and compulsory observation have force on I a theory as to what it bod . three time in the course of my life , event have teach I that these strange accent in the storm -- this restless , hopeless cry -- denote a come state of the atmosphere unpropitious to life . Epidemic disease , I believe , be often herald by a gasping , sobb , torment , long - lament east wind . hence , I infer , arise the legend of the . I fancie , too , I have notice -- but be not philosopher enough to know whether there be any connection between the circumstance -- that we often at the same time hear of disturbed volcanic action in distant part of the world ; of rivers suddenly rush above they bank ; and of strange high tide flow furiously in on low sea-coast . " we globe , " I have say to myself , " seem at such period tear and disorder ; the feeble amongst we wither in she distempered breath , rush hot from steam volcanoe . " I listen and tremble ; not sleep . about midnight , the storm in one half - hour fall to a dead calm . the fire , which have be burn dead , glow up vividly . I feel the air change , and become keen . raise blind and curtain , I look out , and see in the star the keen sparkle of a sharp frost . turn away , the object that meet my eye be not awake , lift she head from the pillow , and regard I with unusual earnestness . " be it a fine night ? " she ask . I reply in the affirmative . " I think so , " she say ; " for I feel so strong , so well . raise I . I feel young to - night , " she continue : " young , light - hear , and happy . what if my complaint be about to take a turn , and I be yet destin to enjoy health ? it would be a miracle ! " " and these be not the day of miracle , " I think to myself , and wonder to hear she talk
talk so . she go on direct she conversation to the past , and seem to recall its incident , scene , and personage , with singular vividness . " " I love to - night , " she say : " I prize she as my best friend . she be just now give I a deep delight : she be bring back to my heart , in warm and beautiful life , reality -- not mere empty idea , but what be once reality , and that I long have think decay , dissolve , mix in with grave-mould . I possess just now the hour , the thought , the hope of my youth . I renew the love of my life -- its only love -- almost it be only affection ; for I be not a particularly good woman : I be not amiable . yet I have have my feeling , strong and concentrate ; and these feeling have they object ; which , in its single self , be dear to I , as to the majority of man and woman , be all the unnumbered point on which they dissipate they regard . while I love , and while I be love , what a existence I enjoy ! what a glorious year I can recall -- how bright it come back to I ! what a live spring -- what a warm , glad summer -- what soft moonlight , silver the autumn evening -- what strength of hope under the ice - bound water and frost - hoar field of that year 's winter ! through that year my heart live with 's heart . of my noble -- my faithful -- my _good ! so much better than myself -- he standard in all thing so much higher ! this I can now see and say : if few woman have suffer as I do in he loss , few have enjoy what I do in he love . it be a far better kind of love than common ; I have no doubt about it or he : it be such a love as honoured , protect , and elevate , no less than it gladden she to whom it be give . let I now ask , just at this moment , when my mind be so strangely clear , -- let I reflect why it be take from I ? for what crime be I condemne , after twelve month of bliss , to undergo thirty year of sorrow ? " I do not know , " she continue after a pause : " I cannot --_cannot_ see the reason ; yet at this hour I can say with sincerity , what I never try to say before , , will be do ! and at this moment I can believe that death will restore I to Frank . I never believe it till now . " " he be dead , then ? " I inquire in a low voice . " my dear girl , " she say , " one happy I dress and decorate myself , expect my lover , very soon to be my husband , would come that night to visit I . I sit down to wait . once more I see that moment -- I see the snow twilight steal through the window over which the curtain be not drop , for I design to watch he ride up the white walk ; I see and feel the soft firelight warm I , play on my silk dress , and fitfully show I my own young figure in a glass . I see the moon of a calm winter night , float full , clear , and cold , over the inky mass of shrubbery , and the silvere turf of my grounds . I wait , with some impatience in my pulse , but no doubt in my breast . the flame have die in the fire , but it be a bright mass yet ; the moon be mount high , but she be still visible from the lattice ; the clock neare ten ; he rarely tarry later than this , but once or twice he have be delay so long . " would he for once fail I ? no -- not even for once ; and now he be come -- and come fast - to ato for lost time . ' ! you furious rider ,' I say inwardly , listen gladly , yet anxiously , to he approaching gallop , ' you shall be rebuk for this : I will tell you it be _my neck you be put in peril ; for whatever be yours be , in a dearer and tenderer sense , mine . ' there he be : I see he ; but I think tears be in my eye , my sight be so confused . I see the horse ; I hear it stamp -- I see at least a mass ; I hear a clamour . Was_ it a horse ? or what heavy , drag thing be it , cross , strangely dark , the lawn . how could I name that thing in the moonlight before I ? or how could I utter the feeling which rise in my soul ? " I could only run out . a great animal -- truly , 's black horse -- stood trembl , pante , snort before the door ; a man hold it , as I think . " ' what be the matter ? ' I demand . , my own servant , answer by say sharply , 'Go into the house , madam . ' and then call to another servant , who come hurrie from the kitchen as if summon by some instinct , ' , take missis into the house
house directly . ' but I be knee down in the snow , beside something that lay there -- something that I have see drag along the ground -- something that sigh , that groan on my breast , as I lift and draw it to m . he be not dead ; he be not quite unconscious . I have he carry in ; I refuse to be order about and thrust from he . I be quite collect enough , not only to be my own mistress but the mistress of other . they have begin by try to treat I like a child , as they always do with people strike by 's hand ; but I give place to no except the surgeon ; and when he have do what he could , I take my die to myself . he have strength to fold I in he arm ; he have power to speak my name ; he hear I as I pray over he very softly ; he feel I as I tenderly and fondly comfort he . " ' ,' he say , 'I be die in paradise . ' he spend he last breath in faithful word for I . when the dawn of morning break , my be with . " and that , " she go on , " happen thirty year ago . I have suffer since . I doubt if I have make the best use of all my calamity . , amiable nature they would have refin to saintliness ; of strong , evil spirit they would have make demon ; as for I , I have only be a woe - struck and selfish woman . " " you have do much good , " I say ; for she be note for she liberal almsgiving . " I have not withheld money , you mean , where it could assuage affliction . what of that ? it cost I no effort or pang to give . but I think from this day I be about to enter a better frame of mind , to prepare myself for reunion with . you see I still think of more than of ; and unless it be count that in thus love the creature so much , so long , and so exclusively , I have not at least blasphem the Creator , small be my chance of salvation . what do you think , , of these thing ? be my chaplain , and tell I . " this question I could not answer : I have no word . it seem as if she think I _had_ answer it . " very right , my child . we should acknowledge merciful , but not always for we comprehensible . we should accept we own lot , whatever it be , and try to render happy that of other . should we not ? well , to - morrow I will begin by try to make you happy . I will endeaavor to do something for you , Lucy : something that will benefit you when I be dead . my head ach now with talk too much ; still I be happy . go to bed . the clock strikes two . how late you sit up ; or rather how late I , in my selfishness , keep you up . but go now ; have no more anxiety for I ; I feel I shall rest well . " she compose herself as if to slumber . I , too , retir to my crib in a closet within she room . the night pass in quietness ; quietly she doom must at last have come : peacefully and painlessly : in the morning she be find without life , nearly cold , but all calm and undisturbed . she previous excitement of spirit and change of mood have be the prelude of a fit ; one stroke suffice to sever the thread of a existence so long fret by affliction . . turn a New . my mistress be dead , and I once more alone , I have to look out for a new place . about this time I might be a little -- a very little -- shaken in nerf . I grant I be not look well , but , on the contrary , thing , haggard , and hollow - ey ; like a sitter - up at night , like a overwrotch servant , or a placeless person in debt . in debt , however , I be not ; nor quite poor ; for though not have not have time to benefit I , as , on that last night , she say she intend , yet , after the funeral , my wage be duly pay by she second cousin , the heir , a avaricious - look man , with pinch nose and narrow temple , who , indeed , I hear long afterwards , turn out a thorough miser : a direct contrast to he generous kinswoman , and a foil to she memory , bless to this day by the poor and needy . the possessor , then , of fifteen pound ; of health , though worn , not break , and of a spirit in similar condition ; I might still ; in comparison with many people , be regard as occupy a enviable position . a embarrassing one it be , however , at the same time ; as I feel with some acuteness on a certain day , of which the correspond one in the next week be to see my departure from my present abode , while with another I be not provide . in this dilemma I go , as a last and sole resource , to see and consult a old servant of we family ;
; once my nurse , now housekeeper at a grand mansion not far from 's . I spend some hour with she ; she comforte , but know not how to advise I . still all inward darkness , I leave she about twilight ; a walk of two mile lay before I ; it be a clear , frosty night . in spite of my solitude , my poverty , and my perplexity , my heart , nourished and nerve with the vigour of a youth that have not yet count twenty - three summers , beat light and not feebly . not feebly , I be sure , or I should have tremble in that lonely walk , which lay through still field , and pass neither village nor farmhouse , nor cottage : I should have quail in the absence of moonlight , for it be by the leading of star only I trace the dim path ; I should have quail still more in the unwonted presence of that which to - night shone in the north , a move mystery -- the . but this solemn stranger influence I otherwise than through my fear . some new power it seem to bring . I draw in energy with the keen , low breeze that blow on its path . a bold thought be send to my mind ; my mind be make strong to receive it . " leave this wilderness , " it be say to I , " and go out hence . " " where ? " be the query . I have not very far to look ; gaze from this country parish in that flat , rich middle of -- I mentally see within reach what I have never yet beheld with my bodily eye : I see . the next day i return to the hall , and ask once more to see the housekeeper , I communicate to she my plan . be a grave , judicious woman , though she know little more of the world than myself ; but grave and judicious as she be , she do not charge I with be out of my sense ; and , indeed , I have a staid manner of my own which ere now have be as good to I as cloak and hood of hodden grey , since under its favour I have be enable to achieve with impunity , and even approbation , deed that , if attempt with a excited and unsettled air , would in some minds have stamp I as a dreamer and zealot . the housekeeper be slowly propound some difficulty , while she prepare orange - rind for marmalade , when a child run past the window and come bounding into the room . it be a pretty child , and as it dance , laugh , up to I -- for we be not stranger ( nor , indeed , be its mother -- a young married daughter of the house -- a stranger ) -- I take it on my knee . different as be we social position now , this child 's mother and I have be schoolfellow , when I be a girl of ten and she a young lady of sixteen ; and I remember she , good - look , but dull , in a lower class than mine . I be admir the boy 's handsome dark eye , when the mother , young , enter . what a beautiful and kind - look woman be the good - natured and comely , but unintellectual , girl become ! Wifehood and maternity have change she thus , as I have since see they change other even less promising than she . I she have forget . I be change too , though not , I fear , for the better . I make no attempt to recall myself to she memory ; why should I ? she come for she son to accompany she in a walk , and behind she follow a nurse , carry a infant . I only mention the incident because , in address the nurse , speak french ( very bad french , by the way , and with a incorrigibly bad accent , again forcibly remind I of we school - day ) : and I find the woman be a foreigner . the little boy chatter volubly in too . when the whole party be withdrawn , remark that she young lady have bring that foreign nurse home with she two year ago , on she return from a excursion ; that she be treat almost as well as a governess , and have nothing to do but walk out with the baby and chatter french with master charle ; " and , " add , " she say there be many in foreign family as well place as she . " I store up this piece of casual information , as careful housewive store seemingly worthless shred and fragment for which they prescient mind anticipate a possible use some day . before I leave my old friend , she give I the address of a respectable old - fashioned inn in the City , which , she say , my uncle use to frequent in former day . in go to , I run less risk and evince less enterprise than the reader may think . in fact , the distance be only fifty mile . my mean would suffice both to take I there , to keep I a few day , and also to bring I back if I find no inducement to stay . I regard it as a brief holiday , permit for once to work - weary faculty , rather than as a adventure of life and death . there be nothing like take all you do at a moderate estimate
estimate : it keep mind and body tranquil ; whereas grandiloquent notion be apt to hurry both into fever . fifty miles be then a day 's journey ( for I speak of a time go by : my hair , which , till a late period , withstand the frost of time , lie now , at last white , under a white cap , like snow beneath snow ) . about nine o'clock of a wet night I reach . my reader , I know , be one who would not thank I for a elaborate reproduction of poetic first impressions ; and it be well , inasmuch as I have neither time nor mood to cherish such ; arrive as I do late , on a dark , raw , and rainy evening , in a and a wilderness , of which the vastness and the strangeness try to the utmost any power of clear thought and steady self - possession with which , in the absence of more brilliant faculty , might have gift I . when I leave the coach , the strange speech of the cabman and other wait round , seem to I odd as a foreign tongue . I have never before hear the english language chop up in that way . however , I manage to understand and to be understood , so far as to get myself and trink safely convey to the old inn whereor I have the address . how difficult , how oppressive , how puzzl seem my flight ! in for the first time ; at a inn for the first time ; tired with travel ; confuse with darkness ; palsy with cold ; unfurnished with either experience or advice to tell I how to act , and yet -- to act oblige . into the hand of common sense I confide the matter . common sense , however , be as chill and bewilder as all my other faculty , and it be only under the spur of a inexorable necessity that she spasmodically execute she trust . thus urge , she pay the porter : consider the crisis , I do not blame she too much that she be hugely cheat ; she ask the waiter for a room ; she timorously call for the chambermaid ; what be far more , she bear , without be wholly overcome , a highly supercilious style of demeanour from that young lady , when she appear . I recollect this same chambermaid be a pattern of town prettiness and smartness . so trim she waist , she cap , she dress -- I wonder how they have all be manufactur . she speech have a accent which in its mincing glibness seem to rebuke mine as by authority ; she spruce attire flaunt a easy scorn to my plain country garb . " well , it can not be help , " I think , " and then the scene be new , and the circumstance ; I shall gain good . " maintain a very quiet manner towards this arrogant little maid , and subsequently observe the same towards the parsonic - look , black - coated , white - neckclothed waiter , I get civility from they ere long . I believe at first they think I be a servant ; but in a little while they change they mind , and hover in a doubtful state between patronage and politeness . I keep up well till I have partaken of some refreshment , warm myself by a fire , and be fairly shut into my own room ; but , as I sit down by the bed and rest my head and arm on the pillow , a terrible oppression overcame I . all at once my position rise on I like a ghost . Anomalous , desolate , almost blank of hope it stand . what be I do here alone in great ? what should I do on the morrow ? what prospect have I in life ? what friend have I on , ? Whence do I come ? Whither should I go ? what should I do ? I wet the pillow , my arm , and my hair , with rushe tear . a dark interval of most bitter thought follow this burst ; but I do not regret the step take , nor wish to retract it a strong , vague persuasion that it be better to go forward than backward , and that I _could go forward -- that a way , however narrow and difficult , would in time open -- predominate over other feeling : it be influence hush they so far , that at last I become sufficiently tranquil to be able to say my prayer and seek my couch . I have just extinguish my candle and lain down , when a deep , low , mighty tone swing through the night . at first I know it not ; but it be utter twelve time , and at the twelfth colossal hum and trembl knell , I say : " I lie in the shadow of 's . " . London . the next day be the first of , and when I awoke , rise , and open my curtain , I see the risen sun struggle through fog . above my head , above the house - top , co-elevate almost with the cloud , I see a solemn , or mass , dark blue and dim -- the Dome . while I look , my inner self move ; my spirit shook its always - fetter wing half loose ; I have a sudden feeling as if I , who never yet truly liv , be at last about to taste life . in that morning my soul grow as fast as 's gourd . " I do
do well to come , " I say , proceed to dress with speed and care . " I like the spirit of this great which I feel around I . who but a coward would pass he whole life in hamlet ; and for ever abandon he faculty to the eat rust of obscurity ? " be dress , I go down ; not travel - worn and exhaust , but tidy and refresh . when the waiter come in with my breakfast , I manage to accost he sedately , yet cheerfully ; we have ten minute ' discourse , in the course of which we become usefully known to each other . he be a grey - haire , elderly man ; and , it seem , have live in he present place twenty year . have ascertaine this , I be sure he must remember my two uncle , Charles and , who , fifteen , year ago , be frequent visitor here . I mention they name ; he recal they perfectly , and with respect . have intimate my connection , my position in he eye be henceforth clear , and on a right footing . he say I be like my uncle charle : I suppose he speak truth , because be accustom to say the same thing . a ready and oblige courtesy now replace he former uncomfortably doubtful manner ; henceforth I need no longer be at a loss for a civil answer to a sensible question . the street on which my little sitting - room window look be narrow , perfectly quiet , and not dirty : the few passenger be just such as one see in provincial town : here be nothing formidable ; I feel sure I might venture out alone . have breakfaste , out I go . Elation and pleasure be in my heart : to walk alone in see of itself a adventure . presently I find myself in -- classic ground this . I enter a bookseller 's shop , keep by one : I buy a little book -- a piece of extravagance I could ill afford ; but I think I would one day give or send it to . , a dry - in man of business , stand behind he desk : he seem one of the greatest , and I one of the happiest of being . Prodigious be the amount of life I live that morning . find myself before 's , I go in ; I mount to the dome : I see thence , with its river , and its bridge , and its church ; I see antique , and the green Temple garden , with sun upon they , and a glad , blue sky , of early spring above ; and between they and it , not too dense , a cloud of haze . Descending , I go wander whither chance might lead , in a still ecstasy of freedom and enjoyment ; and I get -- I know not how -- I get into the heart of city life . I see and feel at last : I get into the Strand ; I go up ; I mix with the life pass along ; I da the perils of crossing . to do this , and to do it utterly alone , give I , perhaps a irrational , but a real pleasure . since those day , I have see the , the park , the fine square ; but I love the city far better . the city seem so much more in earnest : it be business , its rush , its roar , be such serious thing , sight , and sound . the city be get its living -- the West end but enjoy its pleasure . at the you may be amused , but in the city you be deeply excited . Faint , at last , and hungry ( it be year since I have feel such healthy hunger ) , I return , about two o'clock , to my dark , old , and quiet inn . I dine on two dish -- a plain joint and vegetable ; both seem excellent : how much better than the small , dainty mess 's cook use to send up to my kind , dead mistress and I , and to the discussion of which we could not bring half a appetite between we ! Delightfully tired , I lay down , on three chair for a hour ( the room do not boast a sofa ) . I sleep , then I wake and think for two hour . my state of mind , and all accompany circumstance , be just now such as most to favour the adoption of a new , resolute , and da -- perhaps desperate -- line of action . I have nothing to lose . Unutterable loathing of a desolate existence past , forbade return . if I fail in what I now design to undertake , who , save myself , would suffer ? if I die far away from -- home , I be go to say , but I have no home -- from , then , who would weep ? I might suffer ; I be inure to suffe : death itself have not , I think , those terror for I which it have for the softly reared . I have , ere this , look on the thought of death with a quiet eye . prepare , then , for any consequence , I form a project . that same evening I obtain from my friend , the waiter , information respect , the sailing of vessel for a certain continental port , - . no time , I find , be to be lose : that very night I must
must take my berth . I might , indeed , have wait till the morning before go on board , but would not run the risk of be too late . " better take you berth at once , ma 'am , " counsel the waiter . I agree with he , and have discharge my bill , and acknowledge my friend 's service at a rate which I now know be princely , and which in he eye must have seem absurd -- and indeed , while pocket the cash , he smile a faint smile which intimate he opinion of the donor 's _savoir - faire _-- he proceed to call a coach . to the driver he also recommend I , give at the same time a injunction about take I , I think , to the wharf , and not leave I to the waterman ; which that functionary promise to observe , but fail in keep he promise : on the contrary , he offer I up as a oblation , serve I as a dripping roast , make I alight in the midst of a throng of waterman . this be a uncomfortable crisis . it be a dark night . the coachman instantly drive off as soon as he have get he fare : the waterman commence a struggle for I and my trunk . they oath I hear at this moment : they shook my philosophy more than do the night , or the isolation , or the strangeness of the scene . one laid hands on my trunk . I look on and wait quietly ; but when another laid hand on I , I speak up , shake off he touch , step at once into a boat , desire austerely that the trunk should be place beside I --" just there , " -- which be instantly do ; for the owner of the boat I have choose become now a ally : I be row off . black be the river as a torrent of ink ; lights glance on it from the pile of building round , ship rock on its bosom . they row I up to several vessel ; I read by lantern - light they name pain in great white letter on a dark ground . " the , " " the , " " the , " " the , " be pass in turn ; but " the " be my ship , and it seem she lay further down . down the sable flood we glide , I think of the , and of row some solitary soul to the Land of . Amidst the strange scene , with a chilly wind blow in my face and midnight clouds drop rain above my head ; with two rude rower for companion , whose insane oath still torture my ear , I ask myself if I be wretch or terrify . I be neither . often in my life have I be far more so under comparatively safe circumstance . " how be this ? " say I . " Methink I be animate and alert , instead of be depressed and apprehensive ? " I could not tell how it be . " the " start out , white and glar , from the black night at last .-- " here you be ! " say the waterman , and instantly demand six shilling . " you ask too much , " I say . he draw off from the vessel and swore he would not embark I till I pay it . a young man , the steward as I find afterwards , be look over the ship 's side ; he grin a smile in anticipation of the come contest ; to disappoint he , I pay the money . three time that afternoon I have give crown where I should have give shilling ; but I consol myself with the reflection , " it be the price of experience . " " they have cheat you ! " say the steward exultingly when I get on board . I answer phlegmatically that " I know it , " and go below . a stout , handsome , and showy woman be in the ladie 's cabin . I ask to be show my berth ; she look hard at I , mutter something about its be unusual for passenger to come on board at that hour , and seem dispose to be less than civil . what a face she have -- so comely -- so insolent and so selfish ! " now that I be on board , I shall certainly stay here , " be my answer . " I will trouble you to show I my berth . " she comply , but sullenly . I take off my bonnet , arrange my thing , and lay down . some difficulty have be pass through ; a sort of victory be win : my homeless , anchorless , unsupported mind have again leisure for a brief repose . till the " " arrive in harbour , no further action would be require of I ; but then .... oh ! I could not look forward . Harass , exhaust , I lay in a half - trance . the stewardess talk all night ; not to I but to the young steward , she son and she very picture . he pass in and out of the cabin continually : they dispute , they quarrell , they make it up again twenty time in the course of the night . she profess to be write a letter home -- she say to she father ; she read passage of it aloud , heed I no more than a stock -- perhaps she believe I asleep . of these passage appear to comprise family secret , and
and bear special reference to one " Charlotte , " a younger sister who , from the bearing of the epistle , seem to be on the brink of perpetrat a romantic and imprudent match ; loud be the protest of this elder lady against the distasteful union . the dutiful son laugh he mother 's correspondence to scorn . she defend it , and rave at he . they be a strange pair . she might be thirty - nine or forty , and be buxom and bloom as a girl of twenty . hard , loud , vain and vulgar , she mind and body alike seem brazen and imperishable . I should think , from she childhood , she must have live in public stations ; and in she youth might very likely have be a barmaid . towards mor she discourse run on a new theme : " the , " a certain expect family - party of passengers , know to she , it appear , and by she much esteem on account of the handsome profit realize in they fee . she say , " it be as good as a little fortune to she whenever this family cross . " at dawn all be astir , and by sunrise the passenger come on board . boisterous be the welcome give by the stewardess to the " Watson , " and great be the bustle make in they honour . they be four in number , two male and two female . besides they , there be but one other passenger -- a young lady , whom a gentlemanly , though languid - look man escort . the two group offer a mark contrast . the Watson be doubtless rich people , for they have the confidence of conscious wealth in they bearing ; the woman -- youthful both of they , and one perfectly handsome , as far as physical beauty go -- be dress richly , gaily , and absurdly out of character for the circumstance . they bonnet with bright flowers , they velvet cloak and silk dress , seem better suit for park or promenade than for a damp packet deck . the man be of low stature , plain , fat , and vulgar ; the oldest , plainest , greasiest , broadest , I soon find be the husband -- the bridegroom I suppose , for she be very young -- of the beautiful girl . deep be my amazement at this discovery ; and deeper still when I perceive that , instead of be desperately wretch in such a union , she be gay even to giddiness . " she laughter , " I reflect , " must be the mere frenzy of despair . " and even while this thought be cross my mind , as I stand lean quiet and solitary against the ship 's side , she come trippe up to I , a utter stranger , with a camp - stool in she hand , and smile a smile of which the levity puzzl and start I , though it show a perfect set of perfect tooth , she offer I the accommodation of this piece of furniture . I decline it of course , with all the courtesy I could put into my manner ; she dance off heedless and lightsome . she must have be good - natured ; but what have make she marry that individual , who be at least as much like a oil - barrel as a man ? the other lady passenger , with the gentleman - companion , be quite a girl , pretty and fair : she simple print dress , untrimmed straw - bonnet and large shawl , gracefully wear , form a costume plain to quakerism : yet , for she , become enough . before the gentleman quit she , I observe he throw a glance of scrutiny over all the passenger , as if to ascertain in what company he charge would be leave . with a most dissatisfied air do he eye turn from the ladie with the gay flower ; he look at I , and then he speak to he daughter , niece , or whatever she be : she also glance in my direction , and slightly curl she short , pretty lip . it might be myself , or it might be my homely mourn habit , that elicit this mark of contempt ; more likely , both . a bell ring ; she father ( I afterwards know that it be she father ) kiss she , and return to land . the packet sai . foreigner say that it be only English girl who can thus be trust to travel alone , and deep be they wonder at the daring confidence of English parent and guardian . as for the " , " by some they intrepidity be pronounce masculine and " inconvenant , " other regard they as the passive victim of a educational and theological system which wantonly dispense with proper " surveillance . " whether this particular young lady be of the sort that can the most safely be leave unwatched , I do not know : or , rather do not _then_ know ; but it soon appear that the dignity of solitude be not to she taste . she pace the deck once or twice backwards and forwards ; she look with a little sour air of disdain at the flaunting silks and velvet , and the bear which thereon danced attendance , and eventually she approach I and spoke . " be you fond of a sea -voyage ? " be she question . I explain that my _fondness for a sea -voyage have yet to undergo the test of experience ; I have never make one . " oh , how charme ! " cry she .
. " I quite envy you the novelty : first impressions , you know , be so pleasant . now I have make so many , I quite forget the first : I be quite _blasee_ about the sea and all that . " I could not help smile . " why do you laugh at I ? " she inquire , with a frank testiness that please I better than she other talk . " because you be so young to be _blasee_ about anything . " " I be seventeen " ( a little piqued ) . " you hardly look sixteen . do you like travel alone ? " " Bah ! I care nothing about it . I have cross the ten time , alone ; but then I take care never to be long alone : I always make friend . " " you will scarcely make many friend this voyage , I think " ( glance at the - group , who be now laugh and make a great deal of noise on deck ) . " not of those odious man and woman , " say she : " such people should be steerage passenger . be you go to school ? " " no . " " where be you go ? " " I have not the least idea -- beyond , at least , the port of - . " she star , then carelessly run on : " I be go to school . oh , the number of foreign school I have be at in my life ! and yet I be quite a ignoramus . I know nothing -- nothing in the world -- I assure you ; except that I play and dance beautifully , -- and french and german of course I know , to speak ; but I can not read or write they very well . do you know they want I to translate a page of a easy german book into the other day , and I could not do it . be so mortified : he say it look as if -- my godpapa , who pay all my school - bill -- have throw away all he money . and then , in matter of information -- in history , geography , arithmetic , and so on , I be quite a baby ; and I write so badly -- such spelling and grammar , they tell I . into the bargain I have quite forget my religion ; they call I a protestant , you know , but really I be not sure whether I be one or not : I do not well know the difference between and . however , I do not in the least care for that . I be a once at -- dear !--charm !-- where there be so many handsome student . every nice girl in we school have a admirer ; they know we hour for walk out , and almost always pass we on the promenade : ' , ' we use to hear they say . I be excessively happy at ! " " and where be you now ? " I inquire . " oh ! at --_chose_ , " say she . now , ( such be this young person 's name ) only substitute this word " _chose " in temporary oblivion of the real name . it be a habit she have : " _chose " come in at every turn in she conversation -- the convenient substitute for any missing word in any language she might chance at the time to be speak . french girl often do the like ; from they she have catch the custom . " _Chose , " however , I find in this instance , stood for -- the great capital of the great kingdom of . " do you like ? " I ask . " pretty well . the native , you know , be intensely stupid and vulgar ; but there be some nice family . " " be you in a school ? " " yes . " " a good one ? " " oh , no ! horrid : but I go out every , and care nothing about the _maitress or the _professeur , or the _eleve , and send lesson _au diable ( one dare not say that in , you know , but it sound quite right in french ) ; and thus I get on charmingly .... you be laugh at I again ? " " no -- I be only smile at my own thought . " " what be they ? " ( without wait for a answer ) -- " now , _do_ tell I where you be go . " " where Fate may lead I . my business be to earn a living where I can find it . " " to earn ! " ( in consternation ) " be you poor , then ? " " as poor as . " ( after a pause ) -- " ! how unpleasant ! but _I_ know what it be to be poor : they be poor enough at home -- papa and mamma , and all of they . be call ; he be a officer on half - pay , but well - descende , and some of we connection be great enough ; but my uncle and , who live in , be the only one that help we : he educate we girl . I have five sister and three brother . by - and - by we be to marry -- rather elderly gentleman , I suppose , with cash : papa and mamma manage that . my sister be marry now to a man much older - look than papa . be very beautiful -- not in my
my style -- but dark ; she husband , , have the yellow fever in , and he be still the colour of a guinea ; but then he be rich , and have she carriage and establishment , and we all think she have do perfectly well . now , this be better than ' earn a living , ' as you say . by the way , be you clever ? " " no -- not at all . " " you can play , s , speak three or four language ? " " by no means . " " still I think you be clever " ( a pause and a yawn ) . " shall you be sea -sick ? " " shall you ? " " oh , immensely ! as soon as ever we get in sight of the sea : I begin , indeed , to feel it already . I shall go below ; and will not I order about that fat odious stewardess ! Heureusement je sai faire aller mon monde . " down she go . it be not long before the other passenger follow she : throughout the afternoon I remain on deck alone . when I recall the tranquil , and even happy mood in which I pass those hour , and remember , at the same time , the position in which I be place ; its hazardous -- some would have say it be hopeless -- character ; I feel that , as -- wall do not a prison make , iron bar -- a cage , so peril , loneliness , a uncertain future , be not oppressive evils , so long as the frame be healthy and the faculty be employ ; so long , especially , as lend we she wing , and guide we by she star . I be not sick till long after we pass , and deep be the pleasure I drank in with the sea -breeze ; divine the delight I draw from the heaive channel wafe , from the sea - bird on they ridge , from the white sail on they dark distance , from the quiet yet becloude sky , overhange all . in my reverie , methotch I see the continent of , like a wide dream - land , far away . lay on it , make the long coast one line of gold ; tiniest tracery of clustered town and snow - gleam tower , of wood deep mass , of height serrate , of smooth pasturage and veiny stream , emboss the metal - bright prospect . for background , spread a sky , solemn and dark blue , and -- grand with imperial promise , soave with tints of enchantment -- strode from north to south a - bent bow , a arch of hope . cancel the whole of that , if you please , reader -- or rather let it stand , and draw thence a moral -- a alliterative , text - hand copy -- day - dream be delusion of the demon . become excessively sick , I falter down into the cabin . 's berth chance to be next mine ; and , I be sorry to say , she torment I with a unsparing selfishness during the whole time of we mutual distress . nothing could exceed she impatience and fretfulness . the Watsons , who be very sick too , and on whom the stewardess attend with shameless partiality , be stoic compare with she . many a time since have I notice , in person of 's light , careless temperament , and fair , fragile style of beauty , a entire incapacity to endure : they seem to sour in adversity , like small beer in thunder . the man who take such a woman for he wife , ought to be prepare to guarantee she a existence all sunshine . Indignant at last with she teasing peevishness , I curtly request she " to hold she tongue . " the rebuff do she good , and it be observable that she like I no worse for it . as dark night draw on , the sea roughen : larger wave sway strong against the vessel 's side . it be strange to reflect that blackness and water be round we , and to feel the ship plough straight on she pathless way , despite noise , billow , and rise gale . article of furniture begin to fall about , and it become needful to lash they to they place ; the passenger grow sicker than ever ; Fanshawe declare , with groan , that she must die . " not just yet , honey , " say the stewardess . " we be just in port . " accordingly , in another quarter of a hour , a calm fell upon we all ; and about midnight the voyage end . I be sorry : yes , I be sorry . my resting - time be past ; my difficulty -- my stringent difficulty -- recommence . when I go on deck , the cold air and black scowl of the night seem to rebuke I for my presumption in be where I be : the light of the foreign sea -port town , glimmer round the foreign harbour , meet I like unnumbered threatening eye . Friends come on board to welcome the ; a whole family of friend surround and bear away miss ; I -- but I da not for one moment dwell on a comparison of position . yet where should I go ? I must go somewhere . necessity dare not be nice . as I give the stewardess she fee -- and she seem surprised at receive a coin of more value than , from such a quarter , she coarse calculation have
have probably reckon on -- I say , " be kind enough to direct I to some quiet , respectable inn , where I can go for the night . " she not only give I the require direction , but call a commissionaire , and bid he take charge of I , and -- not my trunk , for that be go to the custom - house . I follow this man along a rudely - pave street , light now by a fitful gleam of moonlight ; he bring I to the inn . I offer he sixpence , which he refuse to take ; suppose it not enough , I change it for a shilling ; but this also he decline , speak rather sharply , in a language to I unknown . a waiter , come forward into the lamp - lit inn - passage , remind I , in broken , that my money be foreign money , not current here . I give he a sovereign to change . this little matter settle , I ask for a bedroom ; supper I could not take : I be still sea -sick and unnerved , and trembl all over . how deeply glad I be when the door of a very small chamber at length close on I and my exhaustion . again I might rest : though the cloud of doubt would be as thick to - morrow as ever ; the necessity for exertion more urgent , the peril ( of destitution ) nearer , the conflict ( for existence ) more severe . . . I awoke next morning with courage revive and spirits refresh : physical debility no longer enervate my judgment ; my mind feel prompt and clear . just as I finish dress , a tap come to the door : I say , " come in , " expect the chambermaid , whereas a rough man walk in and say ,-- " Gif I you key , . " " why ? " I ask . " ! " say he impatiently ; and as he half - snatch they from my hand , he add , " all right ! haf you tronc soon . " fortunately it do turn out all right : he be from the custom - house . where to go to get some breakfast I could not tell ; but I proceed , not without hesitation , to descmend . I now observ , what I have not notice in my extreme weariness last night , viz . that this inn be , in fact , a large hotel ; and as I slowly descende the broad staircase , halt on each step ( for I be in wonderfully little haste to get down ) , I gaze at the high ceiling above I , at the painted wall around , at the wide window which fill the house with light , at the veined marble I trod ( for the step be all of marble , though uncarpeted and not very clean ) , and contrast all this with the dimension of the closet assign to I as a chamber , with the extreme modesty of its appointment , I fall into a philosophizing mood . much I marvell at the sagacity evince by waiter and chamber - maid in proportion the accommodation to the guest . how could inn - servants and ship - stewardess everywhere tell at a glance that I , for instance , be a individual of no social significance , and little burdene by cash ? they _did_ know it evidently : I see quite well that they all , in a moment 's calculation , estimate I at about the same fractional value . the fact seem to I curiious and pregnant : I would not disguise from myself what it indicate , yet manage to keep up my spirits pretty well under its pressure . have at last landed in a great hall , full of skylight glare , I make my way somehow to what prove to be the coffee - room . it can not be deny that on enter this room I tremble somewhat ; feel uncertain , solitary , wretch ; wish to I know whether I be do right or wrong ; feel convinced that it be the last , but could not help myself . act in the spirit and with the calm of a fatalist , I sit down at a small table , to which a waiter presently bring I some breakfast ; and I partake of that meal in a frame of mind not greatly calculate to favour digestion . there be many other people breakfast at other table in the room ; I should have feel rather more happy if amongst they all I could have see any woman ; however , there be not one -- all present be man . but nobody seem to think I be do anything strange ; one or two gentleman glance at I occasionally , but none stare obtrusively : I suppose if there be anything eccentric in the business , they account for it by this word " Anglaise ! " Breakfast over , I must again move -- in what direction ? " go to , " say a inward voice ; prompt doubtless by the recollection of this slight sentence utter carelessly and at random by , as she bid I good - by : " I wish you would come to 's ; she have some marmot whom you might look after ; she want a english gouvernante , or be want one two month ago . " who be , where she live , I know not ; I have ask , but the question pass unheard : , hurry away by she friend , leave it unanswer . I presume to be
be she residence -- to I would go . the distance be forty miles . I know I be catch at straw ; but in the wide and welter deep where I find myself , I would have catch at cobweb . have inquire about the means of travelling to , and secure a seat in the diligence , I depart on the strength of this outline -- this shadow of a project . before you pronounce on the rashness of the proceeding , reader , look back to the point whence I start ; consider the desert I have leave , note how little I peril : mine be the game where the player can not lose and may win . of a artistic temperament , I deny that I be ; yet I must possess something of the artist 's faculty of make the most of present pleasure : that be to say , when it be of the kind to my taste . I enjoy that day , though we travel slowly , though it be cold , though it rain . somewhat bare , flat , and treeless be the route along which we journey lay ; and slimy canals crept , like half - torpid green snake , beside the road ; and formal pollard willows ed level field , till like kitchen - garden bed . the sky , too , be monotonously gray ; the atmosphere be stagnant and humid ; yet amidst all these deaden influences , my fancy bud fresh and my heart bask in sunshine . these feeling , however , be well keep in check by the secret but ceaseless consciousness of anxiety lie in wait on enjoyment , like a tiger crouch in a jungle . the breathing of that beast of prey be in my ear always ; he fierce heart pan close against mine ; he never stir in he lair but I feel he : I know he wait only for sun -down to bound ravenous from he ambush . I have hope we might reach night set in , and that thus I might escape the deeper embarrassment which obscurity seem to throw round a first arrival at a unknown bourne ; but , what with we slow progress and long stoppage -- what with a thick fog and small , dense rain -- darkness , that might almost be feel , have settle on the city by the time we gain it be suburb . I know we pass through a gate where soldier be statione -- so much I could see by lamplight ; then , have leave behind we the miry , we rattle over a pavement of strangely rough and flinty surface . at a bureau , the diligence stop , and the passenger alight . my first business be to get my trunk ; a small matter enough , but important to I . understand that it be best not to be importunate or over -eager about luggage , but to wait and watch quietly the delivery of other boxe till I see my own , and then promptly claim and secure it , I stand apart ; my eye fix on that part of the vehicle in which i have see my little portmanteau safely stow , and upon which pile of additional bag and box be now heape . one by one , I see these removed , lower , and seize on . I be sure mine ought to be by this time visible : it be not . I have tie on the direction - card with a piece of green ribbon , that I might know it at a glance : not a fringe or fragment of green be perceptible . every package be remove ; every tin - case and brown - paper parcel ; the oilcloth cover be lift ; I see with distinct vision that not a umbrella , cloak , cane , hat - box or band - box remain . and my portmanteau , with my few clothes and little pocket - book enclasp the remnant of my fifteen pound , where be they ? I ask this question now , but I could not ask it then . I could say nothing whatever ; not possesse a phrase of _speaking_ french : and it be french , and french only , the whole world seem now gabbl around I . what should I do ? Approach the conductor , I just lay my hand on he arm , point to a trunk , thence to the diligence - roof , and try to express a question with my eye . he misunderstand I , seize the trunk indicate , and be about to hoist it on the vehicle . " let that alone -- will you ? " say a voice in good ; then , in correction , " Qu'est - ce que vous faite donc ? Cette malle est a moi . " but I have hear the accent ; they rejoice my heart ; I turn : " , " say I , appeal to the stranger , without , in my distress , notice what he be like , " I can not speak French . may I entreat you to ask this man what he have do with my trunk ? " without discriminating , for the moment , what sort of face it be to which my eye be raise and on which they be fix , I feel in its expression half - surprise at my appeal and half - doubt of the wisdom of interference . " _Do_ ask he ; I would do as much for you , " say I . I do not know whether he smile , but he say in a gentlemanly tone -- that be to say , a tone not hard nor terrifying ,
, -- " what sort of trunk be yours ? " I describe it , include in my description the green ribbon . and forthwith he take the conductor under hand , and I feel , through all the storm of which follow , that he rak he fore and aft . presently he return to I . " the fellow avers he be overload , and confess that he remove you trunk after you see it put on , and have leave it behind at - with other parcel ; he have promise , however , to forward it to - morrow ; the day after , therefore , you will find it safe at this bureau . " " thank you , " say I : but my heart sank . meantime what should I do ? perhaps this english gentleman see the failure of courage in my face ; he inquire kindly , " Have you any friend in this city ? " " no , and I do not know where to go . " there be a little pause , in the course of which , as he turn more fully to the light of a lamp above he , I see that he be a young , distinguished , and handsome man ; he might be a lord , for anything I know : nature have make he good enough for a prince , I think . he face be very pleasant ; he look high but not arrogant , manly but not overbear . I be turn away , in the deep consciousness of all absence of claim to look for further help from such a one as he . " be all you money in you trunk ? " he ask , stop I . how thankful be I to be able to answer with truth -- " no . I have enough in my purse " ( for I have near twenty franc ) " to keep I at a quiet inn till the day after to - morrow ; but I be quite a stranger in , and do not know the street and the inns . " " I can give you the address of such a inn as you want , " say he ; " and it be not far off : with my direction you will easily find it . " he tore a leaf from he pocket - book , write a few word and give it to I . I _did_ think he kind ; and as to distrust he , or he advice , or he address , I should almost as soon have think of distrust the . there be goodness in he countenance , and honou in he bright eye . " you shortest way will be to follow the and cross the park , " he continue ; " but it be too late and too dark for a woman to go through the park alone ; I will step with you thus far . " he move on , and I follow he , through the darkness and the small soaking rain . the be all desert , its path miry , the water dripp from its trees ; the park be black as midnight . in the double gloom of tree and fog , I could not see my guide ; I could only follow he tread . not the least fear have I : I believe I would have follow that frank tread , through continual night , to the world 's end . " now , " say he , when the park be traverse , " you will go along this broad street till you come to step ; two lamps will show you where they be : these step you will descend : a narrower street lie below ; follow that , at the bottom you will find you inn . they speak there , so you difficulty be now pretty well over . good -night . " " good - night , sir , " say I : " accept my sincerest thanks . " and we parte . the remembrance of he countenance , which I be sure wear a light not unbenignant to the friendless -- the sound in my ear of he voice , which speak a nature chivalric to the needy and feeble , as well as the youthful and fair -- be a sort of cordial to I long after . he be a true young English gentleman . on I go , hurrie fast through a magnificent street and square , with the grandest house round , and amidst they the huge outline of more than one overbearing pile ; which might be palace or church -- I could not tell . just as I pass a portico , two mustachioed man come suddenly from behind the pillars ; they be smoke cigar : they dress imply pretension to the rank of gentleman , but , poor thing ! they be very plebeian in soul . they speak with insolence , and , fast as I walk , they keep pace with I a long way . at last I meet a sort of patrol , and my dread hunter be turn from the pursuit ; but they have drive I beyond my reckoning : when I could collect my faculty , I no longer know where I be ; the staircase I must long since have pass . Puzzl , out of breath , all my pulse throbb in inevitable agitation , I know not where to turn . it be terrible to think of again encounter those beard , sneer simpleton ; yet the ground must be retrace , and the step sink out . I come at last to a old and worn flight , and , take it for grant that this must be
be the one indicate , I descende they . the street into which they lead be indeed narrow , but it contain no inn . on I wander . in a very quiet and comparatively clean and well - pave street , I see a light burn over the door of a rather large house , lofte by a story than those round it . _This_ might be the inn at last . I hasten on : my knee now tremble under I : I be get quite exhausted . no inn be this . a brass - plate embellish the great porte -cochere : " " be the inscription ; and beneath , a name , " . " I start . about a hundred thought volley through my mind in a moment . yet I plan nothing , and consider nothing : I have not time . Providence say , " stop here ; this be _you inn . " Fate take I in she strong hand ; master my will ; direct my action : I ring the door - bell . while I wait , I would not reflect . I fixedly look at the street - stone , where the door - lamp shone , and count they and not they shape , and the glitter of wet on they angles . I ring again . they open at last . a bonne in a smart cap stand before I . " may I see ? " I inquire . I believe if I have speak french she would not have admit I ; but , as I speak , she conclude I be a foreign teacher come on business connect with the pensionnat , and , even at that late hour , she let I in , without a word of reluctance , or a moment of hesitation . the next moment I sit in a cold , glitter salon , with porcelain stove , unlit , and gild ornament , and polish floor . a pendule on the mantel - piece struck nine o'clock . a quarter of a hour pass . how fast beat every pulse in my frame ! how I turn cold and hot by turn ! I sit with my eye fix on the door -- a great white folding - door , with gilt moulding : I watch to see a leaf move and open . all have be quiet : not a mouse have stir ; the white door be closed and motionless . " you ayre ? " say a voice at my elbow . I almost bound , so unexpected be the sound ; so certain have I be of solitude . no ghost stand beside I , nor anything of spectral aspect ; merely a motherly , dumpy little woman , in a large shawl , a wrapping - gown , and a clean , trim nightcap . I say I be English , and immediately , without further prelude , we fall to a most remarkable conversation . ( for Beck it be -- she have enter by a little door behind I , and , be shod with the shoe of silence , I have hear neither she entrance nor approach ) -- have exhaust she command of insular speech when she say , " you ayre , " and she now proceed to work away volubly in she own tongue . I answer in mine . she partly understand I , but as I do not at all understand she -- though we make together a awful clamour ( anything like 's gift of utterance I have not hithertoo hear or imagin ) -- we achieve little progress . she ring , ere long , for aid ; which arrive in the shape of a " maitresse , " who have be partly educate in a irish convent , and be esteem a perfect adept in the english language . a bluff little personage this maitresse be -- Labassecourienne from top to toe : and how she do slaughter the speech of ! however , I tell she a plain tale , which she translate . I tell she how I have leave my own country , intent on extend my knowledge , and gain my bread ; how I be ready to turn my hand to any useful thing , provide it be not wrong or degrading ; how I would be a child 's - nurse , or a lady 's - maid , and would not refuse even housework adapt to my strength . hear this ; and , question she countenance , I almost think the tale win she ear : " n'y a que les Anglaise pour ce sorte d'entreprise , " say she : " sont - elle donc intrepides ce femme la ! " she ask my name , my age ; she sit and look at I -- not pityingly , not with interest : never a gleam of sympathy , or a shade of compassion , cross she countenance during the interview . I feel she be not one to be lead a inch by she feeling : grave and considerate , she gaze , consult she judgment and study my narrative . a bell ring . " Voila pour la priere do soy ! " say she , and rise . through she interpreter , she desire I to depart now , and come back on the morrow ; but this do not suit I : I could not bear to return to the peril of darkness and the street . with energy , yet with a collect and control manner , I say , address herself personally , and not the maitresse : " be assure , madame , that by instantly secure my service , you interest will be serve and not injure : you will find I one who
who will wish to give , in she labour , a full equivalent for she wage ; and if you hire I , it will be better that I should stay here this night : have no acquaintance in , and not possesse the language of the country , how can I secure a lodging ? " " it be true , " say she ; " but at least you can give a reference ? " " none . " she inquire after my luggage : I tell she when it would arrive . she muse . at that moment a man 's step be hear in the vestibule , hastily proceed to the outer door . ( I shall go on with this part of my tale as if I have understand all that pass ; for though it be then scarce intelligible to I , I hear it translate afterwards ) . " who go out now ? " demand , listen to the tread . " , " reply the teacher . " he come this evening to give a reading to the first class . " " the very man I should at this moment must wish to see . call he . " the teacher run to the salon door . m . be summon . he enter : a small , dark and spare man , in spectacle . " Mon cousin , " begin , " I want you opinion . we know you skill in physiognomy ; use it now . read that countenance . " the little man fix on I he spectacle : a resolute compression of the lip , and gather of the brow , seem to say that he mean to see through I , and that a veil would be no veil for he . " I read it , " he pronounce . " qu'en dite vous ? " " Mais -- bien des chos , " be the oracular answer . " bad or good ? " " of each kind , without doubt , " pursue the diviner . " one trust she word ? " " be you negotiate a matter of importance ? " " she wish I to engage she as bonne or gouvernante ; tell a tale full of integrity , but give no reference . " " she be a stranger ? " " a , as one may see . " " she speak french ? " " not a word . " " she understand it ? " " no . " " one may then speak plainly in she presence ? " " doubtless . " he gaze steadily . " do you need she service ? " " I could do with they . you know I be disgust with . " still he scrutinize . the judgament , when it at last come , be as indefinite as what have go before it . " engage she . if good predominate in that nature , the action will bring its own reward ; if evil -- eh bien ! ma cousine , ce sera toujour une bonne oeuvre . " and with a bow and a " bon soir , " this vague arbiter of my destiny vanish . and do engage I that very night -- by 's blessing I be spare the necessity of pass forth again into the lonesome , dreary , hostile street . . . be deliver into the charge of the maitresse , I be lead through a long narrow passage into a foreign kitchen , very clean but very strange . it seem to contain no means of cooking -- neither fireplace nor oven ; I do not understand that the great black furnace which fill one corner , be a efficient substitute for these . surely pride be not already begin its whisper in my heart ; yet I feel a sense of relief when , instead of be leave in the kitchen , as I half anticipate , I be lead forward to a small inner room term a " cabinet . " a cook in a jacket , a short petticoat and sabot , bring my supper : to wit -- some meat , nature unknown , serve in a odd and acid , but pleasant sauce ; some chop potatoe , make savoury with , I know not what : vinegar and sugar , I think : a tartine , or slice of bread and butter , and a baked pear . be hungry , I eat and be grateful . after the " priere do soir , " herself come to have another look at I . she desire I to follow she up - stair . through a series of the queerest little dormitory -- which , I hear afterwards , have once be nun ' cell : for the premise be in part of ancient date -- and through the oratory -- a long , low , gloomy room , where a crucifix hung , pale , against the wall , and two taper keep dim vigil -- she conduct I to a apartment where three child be asleep in three tiny bed . a heat stove make the air of this room oppressive ; and , to mmend matter , it be scent with a odour rather strong than delicate : a perfume , indeed , altogether surprising and unexpect under the circumstance , be like the combination of smoke with some spirituous essence -- a smell , in short , of whisky . beside a table , on which flar the remnant of a candle gutter to waste in the socket , a coarse woman , heterogeneously clad in a broad stripe showy silk dress , and a stuff apron , sit in a chair fast asleep . to complete the picture , and leave no doubt as
as to the state of matter , a bottle and a empty glass stand at the sleeping beauty 's elbow . contemplate this remarkable tableau with great calm ; she neither smile nor scowl ; no impress of anger , disgust , or surprise , ruffle the equality of she grave aspect ; she do not even wake the woman ! serenely point to a fourth bed , she intimate that it be to be mine ; then , have extinguish the candle and substitute for it a night - lamp , she glide through a inner door , which she leave ajar -- the entrance to she own chamber , a large , well - furnish apartment ; as be discernible through the aperture . my devotion that night be all thanksgive . Strangely have I be lead since morning --unexpectedly have I be provide for . Scarcely could I believe that not forty - eight hour have elapse since I leave , under no other guardianship than that which protect the passenger - bird -- with no prospect but the dubious cloud - tracery of hope . I be a light sleeper ; in the dead of night I suddenly awoke . all be hush , but a white figure stand in the room -- in she night - dress . move without perceptible sound , she visit the three child in the three bed ; she approach I : I feign sleep , and she study I long . a small pantomime ensue , curiious enough . I daresay she sit a quarter of a hour on the edge of my bed , gaze at my face . she then draw nearer , bend close over I ; slightly raise my cap , and turn back the border so as to expose my hair ; she look at my hand lie on the bedclothes . this do , she turn to the chair where my clothes lay : it be at the foot of the bed . hear she touch and lift they , I open my eye with precaution , for I own I feel curiious to see how far she taste for research would lead she . it lead she a good way : every article do she inspect . I divine she motive for this proceeding , viz . the wish to form from the garment a judgment respect the wearer , she station , mean , neatness , &c . the end be not bad , but the means be hardly fair or justifiable . in my dress be a pocket ; she fairly turn it inside out : she count the money in my purse ; she open a little memorandum - book , coolly peruse its contents , and take from between the leave a small plait lock of 's grey hair . to a bunch of three key , be those of my trunk , desk , and work - box , she accord special attention : with these , indeed , she withdraw a moment to she own room . I softly rise in my bed and follow she with my eye : these key , reader , be not bring back till they have leave on the toilet of the adjoining room the impress of they wards in wax . all be thus do decently and in order , my property be return to its place , my clothes be carefully refold . of what nature be the conclusion deduce from this scrutiny ? be they favourable or otherwise ? vain question . 's face of stone ( for of stone in it be present night aspect it look : it have be human , and , as I say before , motherly , in the salon ) betraye no response . she duty do -- I feel that in she eye this business be a duty -- she rise , noiseless as a shadow : she move towards she own chamber ; at the door , she turn , fix she eye on the heroine of the bottle , who still sleep and loudly snor . ( I presume this be . , or , ) -- . 's doom be in 's eye -- a immutable purpose that eye speak : 's visitation for shortcoming might be slow , but they be sure . all this be very un - English : truly I be in a foreign land . the morrow make I further acquaint with . it seem she have introduce herself to she present employer as a lady in reduce circumstance : a native , indeed , of , professe to speak the English tongue with the purest metropolitan accent . Madame -- reliant on she own infallible expedient for find out the truth in time -- have a singular intrepidity in hire service off - hand ( as indeed see abundantly prove in my own case ) . she receive as nursery - governess to she three child . I need hardly explain to the reader that this lady be in effect a native of ; she station I do not pretend to fix : she boldly declare that she have " have the bringing - up of the son and daughter of a marquis . " I think myself , she might possibly have be a hanger - on , nurse , fosterer , or washerwoman , in some irish family : she speak a smothered tongue , curiously overlaid with mincing cockney inflection . by some means or other she have acquire , and now hold in possession , a wardrobe of rather suspicious splendour -- gowns of stiff and costly silk , fit she indifferently , and apparently make for other proportion than those they now adorn ; cap with real lace border , and -- the chief item in the inventory , the spell by which she strike a
a certain awe through the household , quell the otherwise scornfully dispose teacher and servants , and , so long as she broad shoulders _wore_ the fold of that majestic drapery , even influence herself -- _a real indian shawl _-- " un veritable cachemire , " as say , with unmixed reverence and amaze . I feel quite sure that without this " cachemire " she would not have keep she foot in the pensionnat for two day : by virtue of it , and it only , she maintain the same a month . but when . know that I be come to fill she shoe , then it be that she declare herself -- then do she rise on in she full power -- then come down on I with she concentrate weight . Madame bear this revelation and visitation so well , so stoically , that I for very shame could not support it otherwise than with composure . for one little moment absent herself from the room ; ten minute after , a agent of the police stand in the midst of we . and she effect be remove . 's brow have not be ruffle during the scene -- she lip have not drop one sharply - accented word . this brisk little affair of the dismissal be all settled before breakfast : order to march give , policeman call , mutineer expel ; " chambre d'enfan " fumigate and cleanse , window thrown open , and every trace of the accomplished Mrs . Sweeny -- even to the fine essence and spiritual fragrance which give token so subtle and so fatal of the head and front of she offending -- be annihilate from the : all this , I say , be do between the moment of 's issue like from she chamber , and that in which she coolly sit down to pour out she first cup of coffee . about noon , I be summon to dress . ( it appear my place be to be a hybrid between gouvernante and lady 's - maid . ) noon , she haunt the house in she wrapping - gown , shawl , and soundless slipper . how would the lady - chief of a english school approve this custom ? the dressing of she hair puzzl I ; she have plenty of it : auburn , unmixed with grey : though she be forty year old . see my embarrassment , she say , " you have not be a femme - de - chambre in you own country ? " and take the brush from my hand , and set I aside , not ungently or disrespectfully , she arrange it herself . in perform other office of the toilet , she half -direct , half - aid I , without the least display of temper or impatience . N.B. -- that be the first and last time I be require to dress she . Henceforth , on , the portress , devolve that duty . when attired , appear a personage of a figure rather short and stout , yet still graceful in its own peculiar way ; that be , with the grace result from proportion of part . she complexion be fresh and sanguine , not too rubicund ; she eye , blue and serene ; she dark silk dress fitte she as a french sempstress alone can make a dress fit ; she look well , though a little bourgeoise ; as bourgeoise , indeed , she be . I know not what of harmony pervad she whole person ; and yet she face offer contrast , too : it be feature be by no means such as be usually see in conjunction with a complexion of such blend freshness and repose : they outline be stern : she forehead be high but narrow ; it express capacity and some benevolence , but no expanse ; nor do she peaceful yet watchful eye ever know the fire which be kind in the heart or the softness which flow thence . she mouth be hard : it could be a little grim ; she lip be thin . for sensibility and genius , with all they tenderness and temerity , I feel somehow that would be the right sort of in petticoat . in the long run , I find she be something else in petticoat too . she name be , : it ought to have be . she be a charitable woman , and do a great deal of good . there never be a mistress whose rule be milder . I be tell that she never once remonstrate with the intolerable , despite she tipsiness , disorder , and general neglect ; yet . have to go the moment she departure become convenient . I be tell , too , that neither master nor teacher be find fault with in that establishment ; yet both master and teacher be often change : they vanish and other fill they place , none could well explain how . the establishment be both a pensionnat and a externat : the externe or day - pupil exceed one hundr in number ; the boarder be about a score . Madame must have possess high administrative power : she rule all these , together with four teacher , eight masters , six servants , and three child , manage at the same time to perfection the pupil 's parent and friend ; and that without apparent effort ; without bustle , fatigue , fever , or any symptom of undue , excitement : occupy she always be -- busy , rarely . it be true that have she own system for managing and regulate this mass of machinery ; and a very pretty system it be : the reader have see a specimen of it , in that small affair of
of turn my pocket inside out , and read my private memoranda . " surveillance , " " espionage , " -- these be she watchword . , know what honesty be , and like it -- that be , when it do not obtrude its clumsy scruple in the way of she will and interest . she have a respect for " ; " and as to " les Anglaise , " she would have the woman of no other country about she own child , if she could help it . often in the evening , after she have be plott and counter - plotting , spy and receive the report of spy all day , she would come up to my room -- a trace of real weariness on she brow -- and she would sit down and listen while the child say they little prayer to I in : the 's , and the hymn begin " , " these little Catholics be permit to repeat at my knee ; and , when I have put they to bed , she would talk to I ( I soon gain enough French to be able to understand , and even answer she ) about and , and the reason for what she be pleased to term they superior intelligence , and more real and reliable probity . very good sense she often show ; very sound opinion she often broach : she seem to know that keep girl in distrustful restraint , in blind ignorance , and under a surveillance that leave they no moment and no corner for retirement , be not the best way to make they grow up honest and modest woman ; but she averr that ruinous consequence would ensue if any other method be try with continental child : they be so accustom to restraint , that relaxation , however guard , would be misunderstood and fatally presume on . she be sick , she would declare , of the means she have to use , but use they she must ; and after discoursing , often with dignity and delicacy , to I , she would move away on she " soulier de silence , " and glide ghost - like through the house , watch and spy everywhere , pee through every keyhole , listen behind every door . after all , 's system be not bad -- let I do she justice . nothing could be better than all she arrangement for the physical well - being of she scholar . no minds be overtask : the lesson be well distribute and make incomparably easy to the learner ; there be a liberty of amusement , and a provision for exercise which keep the girl healthy ; the food be abundant and good : neither pale nor puny face be anywhere to be see in the . she never grudge a holiday ; she allow plenty of time for sleeping , dress , wash , eat ; she method in all these matters be easy , liberal , salutary , and rational : many a austere English school -mistress would do vastly well to imitate she -- and I believe many would be glad to do so , if exact English parent would let they . as rule by espionage , she of course have she staff of spy : she perfectly know the quality of the tool she use , and while she would not scruple to handle the dirtiest for a dirty occasion -- flinge this sort from she like refuse rind , after the orange have be duly squeeze -- I have know she fastidious in seek pure metal for clean use ; and when once a bloodless and rustless instrument be find , she be careful of the prize , keep it in silk and cotton - wool . yet , woe be to that man or woman who rely on she one inch beyond the point where it be she interest to be trustworthy : interest be the master - key of 's nature -- the mainspring of she motive -- the alpha and omega of she life . I have see she _feeling appeal to , and I have smile in half - pity , half - scorn at the appellant . none ever gain she ear through that channel , or sway she purpose by that mean . on the contrary , to attempt to touch she heart be the surest way to rouse she antipathy , and to make of she a secret foe . it prove to she that she have no heart to be touch : it remind she where she be impotent and dead . never be the distinction between charity and mercy better exemplify than in she . while devoid of sympathy , she have a sufficiency of rational benevolence : she would give in the readiest manner to people she have never see -- rather , however , to class than to individual . " pour les pauvre , " she open she purse freely -- against _they poor man , as a rule , she keep it close . in philanthropic scheme for the benefit of society at large she take a cheerful part ; no private sorrow touch she : no force or mass of suffering concentrate in one heart have power to pierce hers . not the agony in , not the death on , could have wring from she eye one tear . I say again , be a very great and a very capable woman . that school offer she for she power too limit a sphere ; she ought to have sway a nation : she should have be the leader of a turbulent legislative assembly . nobody could have browbeat she , none irritate she nerve , exhaust she patience , or over -reach she astuteness . in she own
own single person , she could have comprise the duty of a first minister and a superintendent of police . wise , firm , faithless ; secret , crafty , passionless ; watchful and inscrutable ; acute and insensate -- withal perfectly decorous -- what more could be desire ? the sensible reader will not suppose that I gain all the knowledge here condense for he benefit in one month , or in one half - year . no ! what I see at first be the thriving outside of a large and flourish educational establishment . here be a great house , full of healthy , lively girl , all well - dress and many of they handsome , gain knowledge by a marvellously easy method , without painful exertion or useless waste of spirit ; not , perhaps , make very rapid progress in anything ; take it easy , but still always employ , and never oppress . here be a corps of teacher and master , more stringently taske , as all the real head - labour be to be do by they , in order to save the pupil , yet have they duty so arran that they relieve each other in quick succession whenever the work be severe : here , in short , be a foreign school ; of which the life , movement , and variety make it a complete and most charme contrast to many English institution of the same kind . behind the house be a large garden , and , in summer , the pupil almost live out of door amongst the rose - bushes and the fruit - tree . under the vast and vine - drape berceau , would take she seat on summer afternoons , and send for the class , in turn , to sit round she and sow and read . meantime , master come and go , deliver short and lively lecture , rather than lesson , and the pupil make note of they instruction , or do _not make they -- just as inclination prompt ; secure that , in case of neglect , they could copy the note of they companion . besides the regular monthly _jour de sortie_ , the fete - day bring a succession of holiday all the year round ; and sometimes on a bright summer morning , or soft summer evening ; the boarder be take out for a long walk into the country , regal with _gaufre and _vin blanc , or new milk and _pain bis , or _pistolet au beurre_ ( roll ) and coffee . all this seem very pleasant , and appear goodness itself ; and the teacher not so bad but they might be worse ; and the pupil , perhaps , a little noisy and rough , but type of health and glee . thus do the view appear , see through the enchantment of distance ; but there come a time when distance be to melt for I -- when I be to be call down from my watch - tower of the nursery , whence I have hithertoo make my observation , and be to be compelle into closer intercourse with this little world of the . I be one day sit up - stair , as usual , hear the child they English lesson , and at the same time turn a silk dress for , when she come saunter into the room with that absorb air and brow of hard think she sometimes wore , and which make she look so little genial . drop into a seat opposite mine , she remain some minute silent . , the eldest girl , be read to I some little essay of 's , and I be make she translate currently from to as she proceed , by way of ascertaining that she comprehend what she read : listen . presently , without preface or prelude , she say , almost in the tone of one make a accusation , " , in you be a governess ? " " no , , " say I smile , " you be mistaken . " " be this you first essay at teaching -- this attempt with my child ? " I assure she it be . again she become silent ; but look up , as I take a pin from the cushion , I find myself a object of study : she hold I under she eye ; she seem turn I round in she thought -- measure my fitness for a purpose , weigh my value in a plan . Madame have , ere this , scrutinize all I have , and I believe she esteem herself cognizant of much that I be ; but from that day , for the space of about a fortnight , she try I by new test . she listen at the nursery door when I be shut in with the child ; she follow I at a cautious distance when I walk out with they , steal within ear - shot whenever the tree of park or boulevard afforde a sufficient screen : a strict preliminary process have thus be observe , she make a move forward . one morning , come on I abruptly , and with the semblance of hurry , she say she find herself place in a little dilemma . , the english master , have fail to come at he hour , she fear he be ill ; the pupil be wait in classe ; there be no one to give a lesson ; should I , for once , object to give a short dictation exercise , just that the pupil might not have it to say they have miss they English lesson ? " in classe , ? " I ask . " yes , in classe : in the second division
division . " " where there be sixty pupil , " say I ; for I know the number , and with my usual base habit of cowardice , I shrank into my sloth like a snail into its shell , and allege incapacity and impracticability as a pretext to escape action . if leave to myself , I should infallibly have let this chance slip . Inadventurous , unstirred by impulse of practical ambition , I be capable of sit twenty year teaching infant the hornbook , turn silk dress and make child 's frock . not that true contentment dignify this infatuate resignation : my work have neither charm for my taste , nor hold on my interest ; but it seem to I a great thing to be without heavy anxiety , and relieve from intimate trial : the negation of severe suffering be the nearest approach to happiness I expect to know . besides , I seem to hold two life -- the life of thought , and that of reality ; and , provide the former be nourished with a sufficiency of the strange necromantic joy of fancy , the privileges of the latter might remain limit to daily bread , hourly work , and a roof of shelter . " come , " say , as I stoop more busily than ever over the cutting - out of a child 's pinafore , " leave that work . " " but want it , . " " Fifine must want it , then , for I want _you_. " and as do really want and be resolve to have I -- as she have long be dissatisfied with the english master , with he shortcoming in punctuality , and he careless method of tuition -- as , too , _she_ do not lack resolution and practical activity , whether _I_ lack they or not -- she , without more ado , make I relinquish thimble and needle ; my hand be take into hers , and I be conduct down - stair . when we reach the carre , a large square hall between the dwelling - house and the pensionnat , she pause , drop my hand , face , and scrutinize I . I be flush , and tremulous from head to foot : tell it not in , I believe I be cry . in fact , the difficulty before I be far from be wholly imaginary ; some of they be real enough ; and not the least substantial lay in my want of mastery over the medium through which I should be oblige to teach . I have , indeed , study french closely since my arrival in ; learn it be practice by day , and its theory in every leisure moment at night , to as late a hour as the rule of the house would allow candle - light ; but I be far from yet be able to trust my power of correct oral expression . " , " say sternly , " vous sentez vous reellement trop faible ? " I might have say " yes , " and go back to nursery obscurity , and there , perhaps , moulder for the rest of my life ; but look up at , I see in she countenance a something that make I think twice ere I decide . at that instant she do not wear a woman 's aspect , but rather a man 's . power of a particular kind strongly limn itself in all she trait , and that power be not my kind of power : neither sympathy , nor congeniality , nor submission , be the emotion it awaken . I stand -- not soothe , nor win , nor overwhelmed . it seem as if a challenge of strength between opposing gift be give , and I suddenly feel all the dishonour of my diffidence -- all the pusillanimity of my slackness to aspire . " will you , " she say , " go backward or forward ? " indicate with she hand , first , the small door of communication with the dwelling - house , and then the great double portal of the class or schoolroom . " avant , " I say . " but , " pursue she , cool as I warm , and continue the hard look , from very antipathy to which I draw strength and determination , " can you face the class , or be you over-excit ? " she sneer slightly in say this : nervous excitability be not much to 's taste . " I be no more excited than this stone , " I say , tap the flag with my toe : " or than you , " I add , return she look . " ! but let I tell you these be not quiet , decorous , English girl you be go to encounter . Ce so not de Labassecouriennes , ronde , franch , brusque , et tant soit peu rebelle . " I say : " I know ; and I know , too , that though I have study french hard since I come here , yet I still speak it with far too much hesitation -- too little accuracy to be able to command they respect I shall make blunder that will lay I open to the scorn of the most ignorant . still I mean to give the lesson . " " they always throw over timid teacher , " say she . " I know that too , ; I have hear how they rebel against and persecute " -- a poor friendless English teacher , whom have employ , and lightly discard ; and to whose piteous history I be no stranger . " C'est vrai , " say she , coolly . " have no
no more command over they than a servant from the kitchen would have have . she be weak and waver ; she have neither tact nor intelligence , decision nor dignity . would not do for these girl at all . " I make no reply , but advanc to the close schoolroom door . " you will not expect aid from I , or from any one , " say . " that would at once set you down as incompetent for you office . " I open the door , let she pass with courtesy , and follow she . there be three schoolroom , all large . that dedicate to the second division , where I be to figure , be considerably the largest , and accommodate a assemblage more numerous , more turbulent , and infinitely more unmanageable than the other two . in after day , when I know the ground better , I use to think sometimes ( if such a comparison may be permit ) , that the quiet , polish , tame first division be to the robust , riotous , demonstrative second division , what the of be to the of . the first glance inform I that many of the pupil be more than girl -- quite young woman ; I know that some of they be of noble family ( as nobility go in ) , and I be well convinced that not one amongst they be ignorant of my position in 's household . as I mount the estrade ( a low platform , raise a step above the flooring ) , where stand the teacher 's chair and desk , I beheld opposite to I a row of eye and brows that threaten stormy weather -- eye full of a insolent light , and brow hard and unblushing as marble . the continental " female " be quite a different being to the insular " female " of the same age and class : I never see such eye and brows in . introduce I in one cool phrase , sail from the room , and leave I alone in my glory . I shall never forget that first lesson , nor all the under - current of life and character it open up to I . then first do I begin rightly to see the wide difference that lie between the novelist 's and poet 's ideal " jeune fille " and the say " jeune fille " as she really be . it seem that three title belle in the first row have sit down predetermine that a _bonne d'enfant should not give they lesson in . they know they have succeed in expel obnoxious teacher before now ; they know that would at any time throw overboard a professeur or maitresse who become unpopular with the school -- that she never assist a weak official to retain he place -- that if he have not strength to fight , or tact to win he way , down he go : look at " , " they promise themselves a easy victory . , , and open the campaign by a series of tittering and whispering ; these soon swell into murmur and short laugh , which the remoter bench catch up and echo more loudly . this grow revolt of sixty against one , soon become oppressive enough ; my command of french be so limited , and exercise under such cruel constraint . could I but have speak in my own tongue , I feel as if I might have gain a hearing ; for , in the first place , though I know I look a poor creature , and in many respects actually be so , yet nature have give I a voice that could make itself hear , if lift in excitement or deepen by emotion . in the second place , while I have no flow , only a hesitating trickle of language , in ordinary circumstance , yet -- under stimulus such as be now rife through the mutinous mass -- I could , in , have roll out readily phrasis stigmatize they proceedings as such proceedings deserve to be stigmatize ; and then with some sarcasm , flavoure with contemptuous bitterness for the ringleader , and relieve with easy banter for the weaker but less knavish follower , it seem to I that one might possibly get command over this wild herd , and bring they into training , at least . all I could now do be to walk up to -- , a young baronne -- the eldest , tallest , handsomest , and most vicious -- stand before she desk , take from under she hand she exercise - book , remount the estrade , deliberately read the composition , which I find very stupid , and , as deliberately , and in the face of the whole school , tear the blotted page in two . this action avail to draw attention and check noise . one girl alone , quite in the background , persever in the riot with undiminished energy . I look at she attentively . she have a pale face , hair like night , broad strong eyebrow , decided feature , and a dark , mutinous , sinister eye : I note that she sit close by a little door , which door , I be well aware , open into a small closet where book be keep . she be stand up for the purpose of conduct she clamour with freer energie . I measure she stature and calculate she strength she seem both tall and wiry ; but , so the conflict be brief and the attack unexpected , I think I might manage she . Advance up the room , look as cool and careless as I possibly could , in short , _ayant l'air de
de rien , I slightly push the door and find it be ajar . in a instant , and with sharpness , I have turn on she . in another instant she occupy the closet , the door be shut , and the key in my pocket . it so happen that this girl , Dolore by name , and a Catalonian by race , be the sort of character at once dread and hat by all she associate ; the act of summary justice above note prove popular : there be not one present but , in she heart , like to see it do . they be stil for a moment ; then a smile -- not a laugh -- pass from desk to desk : then -- when I have gravely and tranquilly return to the estrade , courteously request silence , and commence a dictation as if nothing at all have happen -- the pens travel peacefully over the page , and the remainder of the lesson pass in order and industry . " C'est bien , " say , when I come out of class , hot and a little exhausted . " . " she have be listen and pee through a spy - heal the whole time . from that day I cease to be nursery governess , and become English teacher . raise my salary ; but she get thrice the work out of I she have extract from , at half the expense . . . my time be now well and profitably fill up . what with teaching other and study closely myself , I have hardly a spare moment . it be pleasant . I feel I be get , on ; not lie the stagnant prey of mould and rust , but polish my faculty and whett they to a keen edge with constant use . experience of a certain kind lay before I , on no narrow scale . be a cosmopolitan city , and in this school be girl of almost every european nation , and likewise of very varied rank in life . be much practise in ; though not republican in form , it be nearly so in substance , and at the desk of 's establishment the young countess and the young bourgeoise sit side by side . could you always by outward indication decide which be noble and which plebeian ; except that , indeed , the latter have often franker and more courteous manners , while the former bore away the bell for a delicately - balance combination of insolence and deceit . in the former there be often quick french blood mix with the marsh - phlegm : I regret to say that the effect of this vivacious fluid chiefly appear in the oilier glibness with which flattery and fiction run from the tongue , and in a manner lighter and livelier , but quite heartless and insincere . to do all party justice , the honest aboriginal Labassecourienne have a hypocrisy of they own , too ; but it be of a coarse order , such as could deceive few . whenever a lie be necessary for they occasion , they bring it out with a careless ease and breadth altogether untrouble by the rebuke of conscience . not a soul in 's house , from the scullion to the directress herself , but be above be asham of a lie ; they think nothing of it : to invent might not be precisely a virtue , but it be the most venial of fault . " J'ai menti plusieur fois , " form a item of every girl 's and woman 's monthly confession : the priest hear unshocked , and absolve unreluctant . if they have miss go to mass , or read a chapter of a novel , that be another thing : these be crime whereon rebuke and penance be the unfailing we . while yet but half - conscious of this state of thing , and unlearn in its result , I get on in my new sphere very well . after the first few difficult lesson , give amidst peril and on the edge of a moral volcano that rumble under my foot and send spark and hot fume into my eye , the eruptive spirit seem to subside , as far as I be concerned . my mind be a good deal bent on success : I could not bear the thought of be baffle by mere undisciplined disaffection and wanton indocility , in this first attempt to get on in life . many hour of the night I use to lie awake , think what plan I have best adopt to get a reliable hold on these mutineer , to bring this stiff - neck tribe under permanent influence . in , the first place , I see plainly that aid in no shape be to be expect from : she righteous plan be to maintain a unbroken popularity with the pupil , at any and every cost of justice or comfort to the teacher . for a teacher to seek she alliance in any crisis of insubordination be equivalent to secure she own expulsion . in intercourse with she pupil , only take to herself what be pleasant , amiable , and recommendatory ; rigidly require of she lieutenants sufficiency for every annoying crisis , where to act with adequate promptitude be to be unpopular . thus , I must look only to myself . -- it be clear as the day that this swinish multitude be not to be drive by force . they be to be humour , borne with very patiently : a courteous though sedate manner impress they ; a very rare flash of raillery do good . severe or continuous mental application they could not , or would not , bear : heavy demand on the
the memory , the reason , the attention , they reject point - blank . where a english girl of not more than average capacity and docility would quietly take a theme and bind herself to the task of comprehension and mastery , a would laugh in you face , and throw it back to you with the phrase , -- " , que c'est difficile ! not 'en veux pa . m'ennuie trop . " a teacher who understand she business would take it back at once , without hesitation , contest , or expostulation -- proceed with even exaggerate care to smoothe every difficulty , to reduce it to the level of they understanding , return it to they thus modify , and lay on the lash of sarcasm with unsparing hand . they would feel the sting , perhaps wince a little under it ; but they bear no malice against this sort of attack , provide the sneer be not _sour , but _hearty , and that it hold well up to they , in a clear , light , and bold type , so that she who run might read , they incapacity , ignorance , and sloth . they would riot for three additional line to a lesson ; but I never know they rebel against a wound give to they self - respect : the little they have of that quality be train to be crush , and it rather like the pressure of a firm heel than otherwise . by degrees , as I acquire fluency and freedom in they language , and could make such application of its more nervous idiom as sui they case , the elder and more intelligent girl begin rather to like I in they way : I notice that whenever a pupil have be rouse to feel in she soul the stirring of worthy emulation , or the quickening of honest shame , from that date she be win . if I could but once make they ( usually large ) ear burn under they thick glossy hair , all be comparatively well . by - and - by bouquet begin to be laid on my desk in the morning ; by way of acknowledgment for this little foreign attention , I use sometimes to walk with a select few during recreation . in the course of conversation it befel once or twice that i make a unpremeditated attempt to rectify some of they singularly distort notion of principle ; especially I express my idea of the evil and baseness of a lie . in a unguarded moment , I chance to say that , of the two error ; I consider falsehood worse than a occasional lapse in church - attendance . the poor girl be tutor to report in ear whatever the teacher say . a edifying consequence ensue . something -- a unseen , a indefinite , a nameless -- something steal between myself and these my best pupil : the bouquet continue to be offer , but conversation thenceforth become impracticable . as I pace the alley or sit in the berceau , a girl never come to my right hand but a teacher , as if by magic , appear at my left . also , wonderful to relate , 's shoe of silence bring she continually to my back , as quick , as noiseless and unexpected , as some wander zephyr . the opinion of my Catholic acquaintance concern my spiritual prospect be somewhat naively express to I on one occasion . a pensionnaire , to whom I have render some little service , exclaim one day as she sit beside I : " , what a pity you be a protestant ! " " why , ? " " Parceque , quand vous serez morte -- vous brulerez tout de suite dan . " " Croyez-vous ? " " Certainement que 'y crois : tout le monde le sait ; et d'ailleur le pretre I l'a dit . " be a odd , blunt little creature . she add , _sotto voce _: " pour assurer votre salut la-haut , on ferait bien de vous bruler toute vive ici -ba . " I laugh , as , indeed , it be impossible to do otherwise . * * * * * have the reader forget ? if so , I must be allow to re-introduce that young lady as a thrive pupil of 's ; for such she be . on she arrival in the , two or three day after my sudden settlement there , she encounter I with very little surprise . she must have have good blood in she vein , for never be any duchess more perfectly , radically , unaffectedly _nonchalante_ than she : a weak , transient amaze be all she know of the sensation of wonder . most of she other faculty seem to be in the same flimsy condition : she like and dislik , she love and hate , be mere cobweb and gossamer ; but she have one thing about she that seem strong and durable enough , and that be -- she selfishness . she be not proud ; and -- _bonne d'enfant as I be -- she would forthwith have make of I a sort of friend and confident . she tease I with a thousand vapid complaint about school - quarrel and household economy : the cookery be not to she taste ; the people about she , teacher and pupil , she hold to be despicable , because they be foreigner . I bear with she abuse of the 's salt fish and hard egg -- with she invective against the soup , the bread , the coffee -- with some patience for a time ; but at last , weary by iteration , I turn crusty , and put she to rights : a
a thing I ink to have do in the very beginning , for a salutary set down always agree with she . much longer have I to endure she demand on I in the way of work . she wardrobe , so far as concerned article of external wear , be well and elegantly supply ; but there be other habiliment be not so carefully provide : what she have , need frequent repair . she hate needle - drudgery herself , and she would bring she hose , &c. to I in heap , to be mende . a compliance of some week threaten to result in the establishment of a intolerable bore -- I at last distinctly tell she she must make up she mind to mmend she own garment . she cry on receive this information , and accuse I of have cease to be she friend ; but I hold by my decision , and let the hysteric pass as they could . Notwithstand these foible , and various other needless to mention -- but by no means of a refin or elevate character -- how pretty she be ! how charme she look , when she come down on a sunny morning , well - dress and well - humoure , rob in pale lilac silk , and with she fair long curl repose on she white shoulders . be a holiday which she always pass with friends resident in town ; and amongst these friend she speedily give I to understand be one who would afain become something more . by glimpse and hint it be show I , and by the general buoyancy of she look and manner it be ere long prove , that ardent admiration -- perhaps genuine love -- be at she command . she call she suitor " : " this , however , she intimate be not he real name , but one by which it pleas she to baptize he -- he own , she hint , not be " very pretty . " once , when she have be brag about the vehemence of " 's " attachment , I ask if she love he in return . " Comme cela , " say she : " he be handsome , and he love I to distraction , so that I be well amuse . can suffit . " find that she carry the thing on longer than , from she very fickle taste , I have anticipate , I one day take it upon I to make serious inquirie as to whether the gentleman be such as she parent , and especially she uncle -- on whom , it appear , she be dependent -- would be likely to approve . she allow that this be very doubtful , as she do not believe " " have much money . " do you encourage he ? " I ask . " Furieusement sometimes , " say she . " without be certain that you will be permit to marry he ? " " oh , how dowdyish you be ! I do not want to be marry . I be too young . " " but if he love you as much as you say , and yet it come to nothing in the end , he will be make miserable . " " of course he will break he heart . I should be shocked and , disappoint if he do not . " " I wonder whether this be . be a fool ? " say I . " he be , about I ; but he be wise in other thing , a ce qu'on dit . consider he extremely clever : she say he will push he way by he talents ; all I know is , that he do little more than sigh in my presence , and that I can wind he round my little finger . " wish to get a more definite idea of this love - stricken ; whose position seem to I of the least secure , I request she to favour I with a personal description ; but she could not describe : she have neither word nor the power of put they together so as to make graphic phrase . she even seem not properly to have notice he : nothing of he look , of the change in he countenance , have touch she heart or dwelt in she memory -- that he be " beau , mais plutot bel homme que joli garcon , " be all she could assert . my patience would often have fail , and my interest flag , in listen to she , but for one thing . all the hint she drop , all the detail she give , go unconsciously to prove , to my thinking , that m . 's homage be offer with great delicacy and respect . I inform she very plainly that I believe he much too good for she , and intimate with equal plainness my impression that she be but a vain coquette . she laugh , shook she curl from she eye , and dance away as if I have pay she a compliment . 's school - study be little better than nominal ; there be but three thing she practise in earnest , viz . music , singe , and dancing ; also embroider the fine cambric handkerchief which she could not afford to buy ready work : such mere trifle as lesson in history , geography , grammar , and arithmetic , she leave undone , or get other to do for she . very much of she time be spend in visiting . Madame , aware that she stay at school be now limit to a certain period , which would not be extend whether she make progress or not , allow she great
great licence in this particular . -- she _chaperon _-- a gay , fashionable lady , invite she whenever she have company at she own house , and sometimes take she to even - party at the house of she acquaintance . perfectly approve this mode of procedure : it have but one inconvenience ; she be oblige to be well dress , and she have not money to buy variety of dress . all she thought turn on this difficulty ; she whole soul be occupy with expedient for effect its solution . it be wonderful to witness the activity of she otherwise indolent mind on this point , and to see the much - daring intrepidity to which she be spur by a sense of necessity , and the wish to shine . she beg boldly of -- boldly , I say : not with a air of reluctant shame , but in this strain :-- " my darling , I have nothing in the world fit to wear for you party next week ; you _must give I a book -muslin dress , and then a _ceinture bleu celeste : _do _-- there be a angel ! will you ? " the " darl " yield at first ; but find that application increase as they be comply with , she be soon oblige , like all 's friend , to oppose resistance to encroachment . after a while I hear no more of 's present ; but still , visit go on , and the absolutely necessary dress continue to be supply : also many little expensive _etcetera_-- glove , bouquet , even trinket . these thing , contrary to she custom , and even nature -- for she be not secretive -- be most sedulously keep out of sight for a time ; but one evening , when she be go to a large party for which particular care and elegance of costume be demand , she could not resist come to my chamber to show herself in all she splendour . beautiful she look : so young , so fresh , and with a delicacy of skin and flexibility of shape altogether , and not find in the list of continental female charms . she dress be new , costly , and perfect . I see at a glance that it lack none of those finish detail which cost so much , and give to the general effect such a air of tasteful completeness . I viewed she from top to toe . she turn airily round that I might survey she on all side . conscious of she charms , she be in she best humour : she rather small blue eye sparkle gleefully . she be go to bestow on I a kiss , in she school - girl fashion of show she delight but I say , " ! let we be steady , and know what we be about , and find out the meaning of we magnificence " -- and so put she off at arm 's length , to undergo cooler inspection . " shall I do ? " be she question . " do ? " say I . " there be different way of do ; and , by my word , I do not understand yours . " " but how do i look ? " " you look well dress . " she think the praise not warm enough , and proceed to direct attention to the various decorative point of she attire . " look at this _parure , " say she . " the brooch , the ear - ring , the bracelet : no one in the school have such a set -- not Madame herself " " I see they all . " ( Pause . ) " do give you those jewel ? " " my uncle know nothing about they . " " be they present from ? " " not they , indeed . be a mean , stingy creature ; she never give I anything now . " I do not choose to ask any further question , but turn abruptly away . " now , old -- old Diogene " ( these be she familiar term for I when we disagree ) , " what be the matter now ? " " take yourself away . I have no pleasure in look at you or you _parure_. " for a instant , she seem take by surprise . " what now , ? I have not get into debt for it -- that be , not for the jewel , nor the glove , nor the bouquet . my dress be certainly not pay for , but uncle will pay it in the bill : he never notice item , but just look at the total ; and he be so rich , one need not care about a few guinea more or less . " " will you go ? I want to shut the door .... , people may tell you you be very handsome in that ball - attire ; but , in _my_ eye , you will never look so pretty as you do in the gingham gown and plain straw bonnet you wear when I first see you . " " other people have not you puritanical taste , " be she angry reply . " and , besides , I see no right you have to sermonize I . " " certainly ! I have little right ; and you , perhaps , have still less to come flourish and flutter into my chamber -- a mere jay in borrowed plume . I have not the least respect for you feather , ; and especially the peacock 's eyes you call a _parure _: very pretty thing , if you have buy they with money which be you own ,
, and which you could well spare , but not at all pretty under present circumstance . " " on est la pour ! " be announce by the portress , and away she trip . this semi-mystery of the _parure_ be not solve till two or three day afterwards , when she come to make a voluntary confession . " you need not be sulky with I , " she begin , " in the idea that I be run somebody , papa or , deeply into debt . I assure you nothing remain unpaid for , but the few dress I have lately have : all the rest be settled . " " there , " I think , " lie the mystery ; consider that they be not give you by , and that you own means be limit to a few shilling , of which I know you to be excessively careful . " " Ecoutez ! " she go on , draw near and speak in she most confidential and coax tone ; for my " sulkiness " be inconvenient to she : she like I to be in a talking and listen mood , even if I only talk to chide and listen to rail . " Ecoutez , chere grogneuse ! I will tell you all how and about it ; and you will then see , not only how right the whole thing be , but how cleverly manage . in the first place , I _must go out . himself say that he wish I to see something of the world ; he particularly remark to , that , though I be a sweet creature enough , I have rather a bread - and - butter - eating , school - girl air ; of which it be he special desire that I should get rid , by a introduction to society here , before I make my regular debutt in . well , then , if I go out , I _must dress . be turn shabby , and will give nothing more ; it would be too hard upon uncle to make he pay for _all_ the thing I need : _that you can not deny --_ that agree with you own preachment . well , but who hear I ( quite by chance , I assure you ) complain to of my distressed circumstance , and what strait I be put to for a ornament or two --_somebody , far from grudge one a present , be quite delighted at the idea of be permit to offer some trifle . you should have see what a _blanc - bec_ he look when he first spoke of it : how he hesitate and blush , and positively tremble from fear of a repulse . " " that will do , . I suppose I be to understand that m . be the benefactor : that it be from he you have accept that costly _parure ; that he supply you bouquet and you glove ? " " you express yourself so disagreeably , " say she , " one hardly know how to answer ; what I mean to say be , that I occasionally allow Isidore the pleasure and honour of express he homage by the offer of a trifle . " " it come to the same thing .... now , , to speak the plain truth , I do not very well understand these matters ; but I believe you be do very wrong -- seriously wrong . perhaps , however , you now feel certain that you will be able to marry ; you parent and uncle have give they consent , and , for you part , you love he entirely ? " " Mais pa du tout ! " ( she always have recourse to french when about to say something specially heartless and perverse ) . " Je suis sa reine , mai il n'est pa mon roi. " " excuse I , I must believe this language be mere nonsense and coquetry . there be nothing great about you , yet you be above profit by the good nature and purse of a man to whom you feel absolute indifference . you love m . Isidore far more than you think , or will avow . " " no . I dance with a young officer the other night , whom I love a thousand time more than he . I often wonder why I feel so very cold to , for everybody say he be handsome , and other lady admire he ; but , somehow , he bore I : let I see now how it be .... " and she seem to make a effort to reflect . in this I encourage she . " yes ! " I say , " try to get a clear idea of the state of you mind . to I it seem in a great mess -- chaotic as a rag - bag . " " it be something in this fashion , " she cry out ere long : " the man be too romantic and devote , and he expect something more of I than I find it convenient to be . he think I be perfect : furnish with all sort of sterling qualitie and solid virtue , such as I never have , nor intend to have . now , one can not help , in he presence , rather try to justify he good opinion ; and it do so tire one to be goody , and to talk sense , -- for he really think I be sensible . I be far more at my ease with you , old lady -- you , you dear crosspatch -- who take I at my lowest , and know I to be coquettish , and ignorant , and
and flirt , and fickle , and silly , and selfish , and all the other sweet thing you and I have agree to be a part of my character . " " this be all very well , " I say , make a strenuous effort to preserve that gravity and severity which run risk of be shake by this whimsical candour , " but it do not alter that wretch business of the present . pack they up , , like a good , honest girl , and send they back . " " indeed , I will not , " say she , stoutly . " then you be deceive . it stand to reason that by accept he present you give he to understand he will one day receive a equivalent , in you regard ... " " but he will not , " she interrupt : " he have he equivalent now , in the pleasure of see I wear they -- quite enough for he : he be only bourgeois . " this phrase , in its senseless arrogance , quite cure I of the temporary weakness which have make I relax my tone and aspect . she rattle on : " my present business be to enjoy youth , and not to think of fetter myself , by promise or vow , to this man or that . when first I see , I believe he would help I to enjoy it I believe he would be content with my be a pretty girl ; and that we should meet and part and flutter about like two butterfly , and be happy . lo , and behold ! I find he at time as grave as a judge , and deep - feeling and thoughtful . Bah ! Les penseur , les homme profonds et passionne ne so not pas a mon gout . suit I far better . pour les beaux fats et les jolis fripon ! Vive les joie et les plaisir ! a ba les grande passion et les severe vertus ! " she look for a answer to this tirade . I give none . " J'aime mon beau , " she go on : " je n'aimerai jamais son rival . Je ne serbe jamai femme de bourgeois , moi ! " I now signify that it be imperatively necessary my apartment should be relieve of the honour of she presence : she go away laugh . . . be a most consistent character ; forbear with all the world , and tender to no part of it . she own child draw she into no deviation from the even tenor of she stoic calm . she be solicitous about she family , vigilant for they interests and physical well - being ; but she never seem to know the wish to take she little child upon she lap , to press they rosy lip with she own , to gather they in a genial embrace , to shower on they softly the benignant caress , the loving word . I have watch she sometimes sit in the garden , view the little be afar off , as they walk in a distant alley with , they _bonne ; in she mien spoke care and prudence . I know she often ponder anxiously what she call " leur avenir ; " but if the youngest , a puny and delicate but engage child , chance to spy she , break from its nurse , and toddl down the walk , come all eager and laugh and pante to clasp she knee , would just calmly put out one hand , so as to prevent inconvenient concussion from the child 's sudden onset : " Prend garde , mon enfant ! " she would say unmoved , patiently permit it to stand near she a few moment , and then , without smile or kiss , or endear syllable , rise and lead it back to . she demeanour to the eldest girl be equally characteristic in another way . this be a vicious child . " Quelle peste que cette Desiree ! Quel poison que cet enfant la! " be the expressions dedicate to she , alike in kitchen and in schoolroom . amongst she other endowment she boast a exquisite skill in the art , of provocation , sometimes drive she _bonne_ and the servants almost wild . she would steal to they attic , open they drawer and box , wantonly tear they best cap and soil they best shawl ; she would watch she opportunity to get at the buffet of the salle - a - manger , where she would smash article of porcelain or glass -- or to the cupboard of the storeroom , where she would plunder the preserve , drink the sweet wine , break jar and bottle , and so contrive as to throw the onus of suspicion on the cook and the kitchen - maid . all this when Madame saw , and of which when she receive report , she sole observation , uttere with matchless serenity , be : " Desiree a besoin d'une surveillance toute particuliere . " accordingly she keep this promise olive - branch a good deal at she side . never once , I believe , do she tell she faithfully of she fault , explain the evil of such habit , and show the result which must thence ensue . surveillance must work the whole cure . it fail of course . be keep in some measure from the servants , but she tease and pillage she mamma instead . whatever belonging to 's work - table or toilet she could lay she hand on , she steal and hide . see all this , but she still pretend not to see : she have not rectitude of soul to confro not the
the child with she vex . when a article disappear whose value render restitution necessary , she would profess to think that have take it away in play , and beg she to restore it . be not to be so cheat : she have learn to bring falsehood to the aid of theft , and would deny have touch the brooch , ring , or scissors . carry on the hollow system , the mother would calmly assume a air of belief , and afterwards ceaselessly watch and dog the child till she track she : to she hiding - place -- some hole in the garden - wall -- some chink or cranny in garret or out - house . this do , would send out for a walk with she _bonne , and profit by she absence to rob the robber . prove herself the true daughter of she astute parent , by never suffer either she countenance or manner to betray the least sign of mortification on discover the loss . the second child , , be say to be like its dead father . certainly , though the mother have give it she healthy frame , she blue eye and ruddy cheek , not from she be derive it be moral being . it be a honest , gleeful little soul : a passionate , warm - temper , bust creature it be too , and of the sort likely to blunder often into peril and difficulty . one day it bethotch itself to fall from top to bottom of a steep flight of stone step ; and when Madame , hear the noise ( she always hear every noise ) , issue from the salle - a - manger and pick it up , she say quietly , -- " enfant a un os casse . " at first we hope this be not the case . it be , however , but too true : one little plump arm hng powerless . " let " ( mean I ) " take she , " say ; " et qu 'on aille tout de suite chercher un fiacre . " in a _fiacre_ she promptly , but with admirable coolness and self - possession , depart to fetch a surgeon . it appear she do not find the family - surgeon at home ; but that matter not : she seek until she lay she hand on a substitute to she mind , and bring he back with she . meantime I have cut the child 's sleeve from its arm , undressed and put it to bed . we none of we , I suppose ( by _we_ I mean the bonne , the cook , the portress , and myself , all which personage be now gather in the small and heat chamber ) , look very scrutinizingly at the new doctor when he come into the room . I , at least , be take up with endeavouring to soothe Fifine ; whose cry ( for she have good lung ) be appalling to hear . these cry redouble in intensity as the stranger approach she bed ; when he take she up , " let alone ! " she cry passionately , in she broken ( for she speak as do the other child ) . " I will not you : I will ! " " and be my very good friend , " be the answer , in perfect ; " but he be busy at a place three league off , and I be come in he stead . so now , when we get a little calmer , we must commence business ; and we will soon have that unlucky little arm bandage and in right order . " Hereupon he call for a glass of _eau sucree , feed she with some teaspoonful of the sweet liquid ( be a frank gourmande ; anybody could win she heart through she palate ) , promise she more when the operation should be over , and promptly go to work . some assistance be need , he demand it of the cook , a robust , strong - armed woman ; but she , the portress , and the nurse instantly fle . I do not like to touch that small , torture limb , but think there be no alternative , my hand be already extend to do what be requisite . I be anticipate ; have put out she own hand : hers be steady while mine tremble . " ca vaudra mieux , " say the doctor , turn from I to she . he show wisdom in he choice . mine would have be feign stoicism , force fortitude . hers be neither force nor feign . " , ; tr bien , fort bien ! " say the operator when he have finish . " Voila un sang - froid bien opportun , et qui vaut mille elans de sensibilite deplacee . " he be pleased with she firmness , she with he compliment . it be likely , too , that he whole general appearance , he voice , mien , and manner , wrotch impressions in he favour . indeed , when you look well at he , and when a lamp be bring in -- for it be evening and now wax dusk -- you see that , unless have be less than woman , it could not well be otherwise . this young doctor ( he _was_ young ) have no common aspect . he stature look imposingly tall in that little chamber , and amidst that group of - make woman ; he profile be clear , fine and expressive : perhaps he eye glance from face to face rather too vividly , too quickly , and too often ; but it have a most pleasant character ,
, and so have he mouth ; he ching be full , cleft , , and perfect . as to he smile , one could not in a hurry make up one 's mind as to the descriptive epithet it merit ; there be something in it that please , but something too that bring surge up into the mind all one 's foible and weak point : all that could lay one open to a laugh . yet like this doubtful smile , and think the owner genial : much as he have hurt she , she hold out she hand to bid he a friendly good - night . he patt the little hand kindly , and then he and go down - stair together ; she talk in she highest tide of spirit and volubility , he listen with a air of good - natured amenity , dash with that unconscious roguish archness I find it difficult to describe . I notice that though he speak french well , he speak better ; he have , too , a english complexion , eye , and form . I notice more . as he pass I in leave the room , turn he face in my direction one moment -- not to address I , but to speak to , yet so stand , that I almost necessarily look up at he -- a recollection which have be struggle to form in my memory , since the first moment I hear he voice , start up perfecte . this be the very gentleman to whom I have speak at the bureau ; who have help I in the matter of the trunk ; who have be my guide through the dark , wet park . listen , as he pass down the long vestibule out into the street , I recognise he very tread : it be the same firm and equal stride I have follow under the dripping tree . * * * * * it be , to be conclude that this young surgeon - physician 's first visit to the would be the last . the respectable be expect home the next day , there appear no reason why he temporary substitute should again represent he ; but the have write they decree to the contrary . have be summon to see a rich old hypochondriac at the antique university town of Bouquin- , and upon he prescribe change of air and travel as remedy , he be retain to accompany the timid patient on a tour of some week ; it but remain , therefore , for the new doctor to continue he attendance at the . I often see he when he come ; for would not trust the little invalid to Trinette , but require I to spend much of my time in the nursery . I think he be skilful . recovere rapidly under he care , yet even she convalescence do not hasten he dismissal . and seem in , and both have rule that he should make deliberate acquaintance with the vestibule , the private staircase and upper chamber of the . no sooner do emerge from he hand than declare herself ill . that possessed child have a genius for simulation , and captivate by the attention and indulgence of a sick - room , she come to the conclusion that a illness would perfectly accommodate she taste , and take she bed accordingly . she act well , and she mother still better ; for while the whole case be transparent to Madame as the day , she treat it with a astonishingly well - assure air of gravity and good faith . what surprise I be , that ( so the young have teach to call he , and we all take from she the habit of address he by this name , till it become a establish custom , and he be know by no other in the ) -- that consent tacitly to adopt 's tactic , and to fall in with she manoeuvre . he betraye , indeed , a period of comic doubt , cast one or two rapid glance from the child to the mother , indulge in a interval of self - consultation , but finally resign himself with a good grace to play he part in the farce . eat like a raven , gamboll day and night in she bed , pitch tent with the sheet and blanket , lounge like a amidst pillow and bolster , divert herself with throw she shoe at she bonne and grimace at she sister -- over - flow , in short , with unmerited health and evil spirit ; only languish when she mamma and the physician pay they diurnal visit . , I know , be glad , at any price , to have she daughter in bed out of the way of mischief ; but I wonder that do not tire of the business . every day , on this mere pretext of a motive , he give punctual attendance ; always receive he with the same empressement , the same sunshine for himself , the same admirably counterfeit air of concern for she child . write harmless prescription for the patient , and view she mother with a shrewdly sparkling eye . catch he rallying look without resent they -- she have too much good sense for that . Supple as the young doctor seem , one could not despise he -- this pliant part be evidently not adopt in the design to curry favour with he employer : while he like he office at the pensionnat , and linger strangely about the , he be independent , almost careless in he carriage there ; and yet , too , he be often thoughtful and preoccupy . it be not perhap my business to observe the mystery of he
he bearing , or search out its origin or aim ; but , place as I be , I could hardly help it . he lay himself open to my observation , accord to my presence in the room just that degree of notice and consequence a person of my exterior habitually expect : that be to say , about what be give to unobtrusive article of furniture , chair of ordinary joiner 's work , and carpet of no striking pattern . often , while wait for , he would muse , smile , watch , or listen like a man who think himself alone . I , meantime , be free to puzzle over he countenance and movement , and wonder what could be the meaning of that peculiar interest and attachment -- all mix up with doubt and strangeness , and inexplicably rule by some presid spell -- which wedde he to this demi-convent , seclude in the build - up core of a capital . he , I believe , never remember that I have eye in my head , much less a brain behind they . would he ever have find this out , but that one day , while he sit in the sunshine and I be observe the colouring of he hair , whisker , and complexion -- the whole be of such a tone as a strong light bring out with somewhat perilous force ( indeed I recollect I be drive to compare he beamy head in my thought to that of the " golden image " which Nebuchadnezzar the king have set up ) , a idea new , sudden , and start , rivet my attention with a over -mastering strength and power of attraction . I know not to this day how I look at he : the force of surprise , and also of conviction , make I forget myself ; and I only recover wont consciousness when I see that he notice be arrest , and that it have catch my movement in a clear little oval mirror fix in the side of the window recess -- by the aid of which reflector Madame often secretly spied persons walking in the garden below . through of so gay and sanguine a temperament , he be not without a certain nervous sensitiveness which make he ill at ease under a direct , inquire gaze . on surprising I thus , he turn and say , in a tone which , though courteous , have just so much dryness in it as to mark a shade of annoyance , as well as to give to what be say the character of rebuke , " do not spare I : I be not vain enough to fancy that it be my merit which attract she attention ; it must then be some defect . I ask -- what ? " I be confound , as the reader may suppose , yet not with a irrecoverable confusion ; be conscious that it be from no emotion of incautious admiration , nor yet in a spirit of unjustifiable inquisitiveness , that I have incur this reproof . I might have clear myself on the spot , but would not . I do not speak . I be not in the habit of speak to he . suffer he , then , to think what he choose and accuse I of what he would , I resume some work I have drop , and keep my head bend over it during the remainder of he stay . there be a perverse mood of the mind which be rather soothed than irritate by misconstruction ; and in quarter where we can never be rightly know , we take pleasure , I think , in be consummately ignore . what honest man , on be casually take for a housebreaker , do not feel rather tickled than vex at the mistake ? . the Portress 's cabinet . it be summer and very hot . , the youngest of 's child , take a fever . , suddenly cure of she ailment , be , together with , pack off to - , in the country , by way of precaution against infection . Medical aid be now really need , and , choose to ignore the return of , who have be at home a week , conjure he English rival to continue he visit . one or two of the pensionnaire complain of headache , and in other respects seem slightly to participate in 's ailment . " now , at last , " I think , " must be recal : the prudent directress will never venture to permit the attendance of so young a man on the pupil . " the directress be very prudent , but she could also be intrepidly venturous . she actually introduce to the school - division of the premise , and establish he in attendance on the proud and handsome , and the vain , flirt , she friend . , I think , testify a certain gratification at this mark of confidence ; and if discretion of bearing could have justifi the step , it would by he have be amply justifi . here , however , in this land of convent and confessional , such a presence as he be not to be suffer with impunity in a " pensionnat de demoiselle . " the school gossip , the kitchen whisper , the town catch the rumour , parent write letter and pay visit of remonstrance . , have she be weak , would now have be lose : a dozen rival educational house be ready to improve this false step -- if false step it be -- to she ruin ; but be not weak , and little Jesuit though she might be , yet I clap the hand of my heart ,
, and with it be voice cry " brava ! " as I watch she able bearing , she skill management , she temper and she firmness on this occasion . she meet the alarmed parent with a good - humoured , easy grace for nobody match she in , I know not whether to say the possession or the assumption of a certain " rondeur et franchise de bonne femme ; " which on various occasion gai the point aim at with instant and complete success , where severe gravity and serious reasoning would probably have fail . " Ce pauvre ! " she would say , chuckl and rub joyously she fat little white hand ; " ce cher jeune homme ! le yomeilleu creature do monde ! " and go on to explain how she happen to be employ he for she own child , who be so fond of he they would scream themselves into fit at the thought of another doctor ; how , where she have confidence for she own , she think it natural to repose trust for other , and au reste , it be only the most temporary expedient in the world ; Blanche and have the migraine ; have write a prescription ; voila tout ! the parent 's mouth be close . Blanche and save she all remain trouble by chant loud duet in they physician 's praise ; the other pupil echo they , unanimously declare that when they be ill they would have and nobody else ; and laugh , and the parent laugh too . the Labassecouriens must have a large organ of philoprogenitiveness : at least the indulgence of offspring be carry by they to excessive length ; the law of most household be the child 's will . Madame now get credit for have act on this occasion in a spirit of motherly partiality : she come off with fly colour ; people like she as a directress better than ever . to this day I never fully understand why she thus risk she interest for the sake of . what people say , of course I know well : the whole house --pupil , teacher , servants include -- affir that she be go to marry he . so they have settle it ; difference of age seem to make no obstacle in they eye : it be to be so . it must be admit that appearances do not wholly discountenance this idea ; seem so bent on retain he service , so oblivious of she former protege , . she make , too , such a point of personally receive he visit , and be so unfailingly cheerful , blithe , and benignant in she manner to he . moreover , she pay , about this time , mark attention to dress : the morning dishabille , the nightcap and shawl , be discard ; 's early visit always find she with auburn braid all nicly arrange , silk dress trimly fitte on , neat lace brodequin in lieu of slipper : in short the whole toilette complete as a model , and fresh as a flower . I scarcely think , however , that she intention in this go further than just to show a very handsome man that she be not quite a plain woman ; and plain she be not . without beauty of feature or elegance of form , she please . without youth and it be gay graces , she cheer . one never tired of see she : she be never monotonous , or insipid , or colourless , or flat . she unfaded hair , she eye with its temperate blue light , she cheek with its wholesome fruit - like bloom -- these thing pleas in moderation , but with constancy . have she , indeed , float vision of adopt as a husband , take he to she well - furnish home , endow he with she savings , which be say to amount to a moderate competency , and make he comfortable for the rest of he life ? do suspect she of such vision ? I have meet he come out of she presence with a mischievous half - smile about he lip , and in he eye a look as of masculine vanity elate and tick . with all he good look and good - nature , he be not perfect ; he must have be very imperfect if he roguishly encourage aim he never intend to be successful . but do he not intend they to be successful ? people say he have no money , that he be wholly dependent upon he profession . Madame -- though perhaps some fourteen year he senior -- be yet the sort of woman never to grow old , never to wither , never to break down . they certainly be on good term . He_ perhaps be not in love ; but how many people ever _do_ love , or at least marry for love , in this world . we wait the end . for what _he_ wait , I do not know , nor for what he watch ; but the peculiarity of he manner , he expectant , vigilant , absorb , eager look , never wear off : it rather intensify . he have never be quite within the compass of my penetration , and I think he range farther and farther beyond it . one morning little have be more feverish and consequently more peevish ; she be cry , and would not be pacify . I think a particular dratch order , disagree with she , and I doubt whether it ought to be continue ; I wait impatiently for the doctor 's come in order to consult he . the door - bell rang , he be admit ; I feel sure of this
this , for I hear he voice address the portress . it be he custom to mound straight to the nursery , take about three degree of the staircase at once , and come upon we like a cheerful surprise . five minute elapsed -- ten -- and I see and hear nothing of he . what could he be do ? possibly wait in the corridor below . still pipe she plaintive wail , appeal to I by she familiar term , " , , I very poorly ! " till my heart ach . I descend to ascertain why he do not come . the corridor be empty . Whither be he vanish ? be he with in the _salle - a - manger ?_ impossible : I have leave she but a short time since , dress in she own chamber . I listen . three pupil be just then hard at work practise in three proximate room -- the dining - room and the greater and lesser draw - room , between which and the corridor there be but the portress 's cabinet communicate with the salon , and intend originally for a boudoir . Farther off , at a fourth instrument in the oratory , a whole class of a dozen or more be take a singing lesson , and just then join in a " barcarole " ( I think they call it ) , whereor I yet remember these word " fraiche , " " brise , " and " . " under these circumstance , what could I hear ? a great deal , certainly ; have it only be to the purpose . yes ; I hear a giddy treble laugh in the above -mentioned little cabinet , close by the door of which I stand -- that door half - unclose ; a man 's voice in a soft , deep , pleading tone , uttere some , word , whereor I only catch the adjuration , " for 's sake ! " then , after a second 's pause , forth issue , he eye full shining , but not with either joy or triumph ; he fair English cheek high - colour ; a baffle , torture , anxious , and yet a tender mean on he brow . the open door serve I as a screen ; but have I be full in he way , I believe he would have pass without see I . some mortification , some strong vexation have hold of he soul : or rather , to write my impressions now as I receive they at the time I should say some sorrow , some sense of injustice . I do not so much think he pride be hurt , as that he affections have be wounded -- cruelly wounded , it seem to I . but who be the torturer ? what be in that house have he so much in she power ? I believe to be in she chamber ; the room whence he have step be dedicated to the portress 's sole use ; and she , , a unprincipled though pretty little french grisette , airy , fickle , dressy , vain , and mercenary -- it be not , surly , to _her_ hand he owe the ordeal through which he seem to have pass ? but while I ponder , she voice , clear , though somewhat sharp , break out in a lightsome french song , trill through the door still ajar : I glance in , doubt my sense . there at the table she sit in a smart dress of " jacona rose , " trimm a tiny blond cap : not a living thing save herself be in the room , except indeed some gold fish in a glass globe , some flower in pot , and a broad sunbeam . here be a problem : but I must go up - stair to ask about the medicine . sit in a chair at 's bedside ; Madame stood before he ; the little patient have be examine and soothe , and now lay compose in she crib . , as I enter , be discuss the physician 's own health , remark on some real or fancied change in he look , charge he with over-work , and recommend rest and change of air . he listen good - naturedly , but with laugh indifference , tell she that she be " trop bonne , " and that he feel perfectly well . appeal to I -- . follow she movement with a slow glance which seem to express languid surprise at reference be make to a quarter so insignificant . " what do you think , ? " ask . " be he not paler and thinner ? " it be very seldom that I utter more than monosyllable in 's presence ; he be the kind of person with whom I be likely ever to remain the neutral , passive thing he think I . now , however , I take licence to answer in a phrase : and a phrase I purposely make quite significant . " he look ill at this moment ; but perhaps it be owing to some temporary cause : may have be vex or harass . " I can not tell how he take this speech , as I never seek he face for information . here begin to ask I in she broken if she might have a glass of _eau sucree _. I answer she in . for the first time , I fancy , he notice that I speak he language ; hithertoo he have always take I for a foreigner , address I as " , " and give in the requisite direction about the child 's treatment . he seem on the point of make a remark ;
; but think better of it , hold he tongue . recommence advise he ; he shook he head , laugh , rise and bid she good - morning , with courtesy , but still with the regardless air of one whom too much unsolicited attention be surfeiting and spoiling . when he be gone , drop into the chair he have just left ; she rest she ching in she hand ; all that be animated and amiable vanish from she face : she look stony and stern , almost mortified and morose . she sigh ; a single , but a deep sigh . a loud bell rang for morning - school . she get up ; as she pass a dressing - table with a glass upon it , she look at she reflect image . one single white hair streak she nut - brown tress ; she pluck it out with a shudder . in the full summer daylight , she face , though it still have the colour , could plainly be see to have lose the texture of youth ; and then , where be 's contour ? ah , ! wise as you be , even _you_ know weakness . never have I pitie before , but my heart soften towards she , when she turn darkly from the glass . a calamity have come upon she . that hag disappointment be greet she with a grisly " all - hail , " and she soul reject the intimacy . but ! my bewilderment there surpass description . I embrace five opportunity of pass she cabinet that day , with a view to contemplate she charms , and find out the secret of they influence . she be pretty , young , and wear a well - make dress . all very good point , and , I suppose , amply sufficient to account , in any philosophic mind , for any amount of agony and distraction in a young man , like . still , I could not help form half a wish that the say doctor be my brother ; or at least that he have a sister or a mother who would kindly sermonize he . I say _half a wish ; I break it , and fling it away before it become a whole one , discover in good time its exquisite folly . " , " I argue , " might as well sermonize about she young physician : and what good would that do ? " I believe sermonize herself . she do not behave weakly , or make herself in any shape ridiculous . it be true she have neither strong feeling to overcome , nor tender feeling by which to be miserably pain . it be true likewise that she have a important avocation , a real business to fill she time , divert she thought , and divide she interest . it be especially true that she possess a genuine good sense which be not give to all woman nor to all man ; and by dint of these combine advantage she behave wisely -- she behave well . ! once more , . I see you match against a of a predilection ; you fight a good fight , and you overcome ! . the Casket . behind the house at the there be a garden -- large , consider that it lay in the heart of a city , and to my recollection at this day it seem pleasant : but time , like distance , lend to certain scene a influence so soften ; and where all be stone around , blank wall and hot pavement , how precious seem one shrub , how lovely a enclose and plant spot of ground ! there go a tradition that 's house have in old day be a convent . that in year go by -- how long go by I can not tell , but I think some centurie -- before the city have over-spread this quarter , and when it be tilled ground and avenue , and such deep and leafy seclusion as ought to embosom a religious house - that something have happene on this site which , rouse fear and inflict horror , have leave to the place the inheritance of a ghost - story . a vague tale go of a black and white nun , sometimes , on some night or night of the year , see in some part of this vicinage . the ghost must have be build out some age ago , for there be house all round now ; but certain convent - relic , in the shape of old and huge fruit - tree , yet consecrate the spot ; and , at the foot of one -- a of a pear - tree , dead , all but a few bough which still faithfully renew they perfume snow in spring , and they honey - sweet pendant in autumn -- you see , in scraping away the mossy earth between the half - bared root , a glimpse of slab , smooth , hard , and black . the legend go , unconfirmed and unaccredited , but still propagate , that this be the portal of a vault , imprison deep beneath that ground , on whose surface grass grew and flower bloom , the bone of a girl whom a monkish conclave of the drear middle age have here bury alive for some sin against she vow . she shadow it be that trembler have fear , through long generation after she poor frame be dust ; she black robe and white veil that , for timid eye , moonlight and shade have mock , as they fluctuate in the night - wind through the garden - thicket . independently of romantic rubbish , however , that old garden have its
its charms . on summer morning I use to rise early , to enjoy they alone ; on summer evening , to linger solitary , to keep tryste with the rising moon , or taste one kiss of the evening breeze , or fancy rather than feel the freshness of dew descending . the turf be verdant , the gravelled walks be white ; sun - bright nasturtium cluster beautiful about the root of the dodder orchard giant . there be a large berceau , above which spread the shade of a acacia ; there be a smaller , more sequester bower , nestle in the vine which run all along a high and grey wall , and gather they tendril in a knot of beauty , and hang they cluster in loving profusion about the favoured spot where jasmine and ivy meet and marry they . doubtless at high noon , in the broad , vulgar middle of the day , when 's large school turn out rampant , and externe and pensionnaire be spread abroad , vy with the denizen of the boy ' college close at hand , in the brazen exercise of they lung and limb -- doubtless _then_ the be a trite , trodden - down place enough . but at sunset or the hour of _salut , when the externe be go home , and the boarder quiet at they study ; pleasant be it then to stray down the peaceful alley , and hear the bell of peal out with they sweet , soft , exalted sound . I be walk thus one evening , and have be detain farther within the verge of twilight than usual , by the still - deepen calm , the mellow coolness , the fragrant breathing with which flower no sunshine could win now answer the persuasion of the dew . I see by a light in the oratory window that the household be then gather to even prayer -- a rite , from attendance on which , I now and then , as a protestant , exempt myself . " one moment longer , " whisper solitude and the summer moon , " stay with we : all be truly quiet now ; for another quarter of a hour you presence will not be miss : the day 's heat and bustle have ti you ; enjoy these precious minute . " the windowless back of house build in this garden , and in particular the whole of one side , be skirt by the rear of a long line of premise -- be the boarding - house of the neighbour college . this rear , however , be all blank stone , with the exception of certain attic loophole high up , open from the sleeping - room of the woman - servants , and also one casement in a lower story say to mark the chamber or study of a master . but , though thus secure , a alley , which run parallel with the very high wall on that side the garden , be forbidden to be enter by the pupil . it be call indeed " l'allee defendue , " and any girl set foot there would have render herself liable to as severe a penalty as the mild rule of 's establishment permit . teacher might indeed go there with impunity ; but as the walk be narrow , and the neglected shrub be grow very thick and close on each side , weave overhead a roof of branch and leaf which the sun 's ray penetrate but in rare chequer , this alley be seldom enter even during day , and after dusk be carefully shunn . from the first I be tempt to make a exception to this rule of avoidance : the seclusion , the very gloom of the walk attract I . for a long time the fear of seem singular scare I away ; but by degree , as people become accustom to I and my habits , and to such shade of peculiarity as be engrain in my nature -- shade , certainly not strike enough to interest , and perhaps not prominent enough to offend , but bear in and with I , and no more to be part with than my identity -- by slow degree I become a frequenter of this strait and narrow path . I make myself gardener of some tintless flower that grow between its closely - rank shrub ; I clear away the relic of past autumn , chok up a rustic seat at the far end . Borrowing of , the cuisiniere , a pail of water and a scrubbing - brush , I make this seat clean . see I at work and smile approbation : whether sincerely or not I do not know ; but she _seem sincere . " Voyez - vous , " cry she , " comme elle est propre , cette demoiselle ? Vous aimez do cette allee , ? " " yes , " I say , " it be quiet and shady . " " C' est juste , " cry she with a air of bont ; and she kindly recommend I to confine myself to it as much as I choose , say , that as I be not charge with the surveillance , I need not trouble myself to walk with the pupil : only I might permit she child to come there , to talk with I . on the night in question , I be sit on the hidden seat reclaim from fungi and mould , listen to what see the far - off sound of the city . far off , in truth , they be not : this school be in the city 's centre ; hence , it be but five minute ' walk to the park , scarce ten to
to building of palatial splendour . quite near be wide streets brightly lit , teem at this moment with life : carriage be roll through they to ball or to the opera . the same hour which toll curfew for we convent , which extinguish each lamp , and drop the curtain round each couch , ring for the gay city about we the summon to festal enjoyment . of this contrast I think not , however : gay instinct my nature have few ; ball or opera I have never see ; and though often I have hear they describe , and even wish to see they , it be not the wish of one who hope to partake a pleasure if she could only reach it -- who feel fitted to shine in some bright distant sphere , could she but thither win she way ; it be no yearning to attain , no hunger to taste ; only the calm desire to look on a new thing . a moon be in the sky , not a full moon , but a young crescent . I see she through a space in the bough overhead . she and the star , visible beside she , be no stranger where all else be strange : my childhood know they . I have see that golden sign with the dark globe in its curve lean back on azure , beside a old thorn at the top of a old field , in , in long past day , just as it now lean back beside a stately spire in this continental capital . oh , my childhood ! I have feeling : passive as I liv , little as I speak , cold as I look , when I think of past day , I _could feel . about the present , it be better to be stoical ; about the future -- such a future as mine -- to be dead . and in catalepsy and a dead trance , I studiously hold the quick of my nature . at that time , I well remember whatever could excite -- certain accident of the weather , for instance , be almost dread by I , because they wake the being I be always lull , and stir up a craving cry I could not satisfy . one night a thunder - storm break ; a sort of hurricane shake we in we bed : the rise in panic and praye to they saint . as for I , the tempest take hold of I with tyranny : I be roughly rouse and oblige to live . I get up and dress myself , and creepe outside the casement close by my bed , sit on its ledge , with my foot on the roof of a lower adjoining building . it be wet , it be wild , it be pitch - dark . within the dormitory they gather round the night - lamp in consternation , pray loud . I could not go in : too resistless be the delight of stay with the wild hour , black and full of thunder , pea out such a ode as language never deliver to man -- too terribly glorious , the spectacle of cloud , split and pierce by white and blinding bolt . I do long , achingly , then and for four and twenty hour afterwards , for something to fetch I out of my present existence , and lead I upwards and onwards . this longe , and all of a similar kind , it be necessary to knock on the head ; which I do , figuratively , after the manner of to , drive a nail through they temple . unlike , they do not die : they be but transiently stun , and at interval would turn on the nail with a rebellious wrench : then do the temple bleed , and the brain thrill to its core . to -night , I be not so mutinous , nor so miserable . my lay quiet in the tent , slumber ; and if he pain ach through he slumber , something like a angel -- the ideal -- knelt near , drop balm on the soothed temple , hold before the seal eye a magic glass , of which the sweet , solemn vision be repeat in dream , and shed a reflex from she moonlight wing and robe over the transfix sleeper , over the tent threshold , over all the landscape lie without . , the stern woman ; sit apart , relent somewhat over she captive ; but more prone to dwell on the faithful expectation of come home . by which word I mean that the cool peace and dewy sweetness of the night fill I with a mood of hope : not hope on any definite point , but a general sense of encouragement and heart - ease . should not such a mood , so sweet , so tranquil , so unwonted , have be the harbinger of good ? Alas , no good came of it ! I presently the rude Real burst coarsely in -- all evil grovelling and repellent as she too often be . amid the intense stillness of that pile of stone overlook the walk , the tree , the high wall , I hear a sound ; a casement [ all the window here be casement , open on hinge ] creak . Ere I have time to look up and mark where , in which story , or by whom unclosed , a tree overhead shook , as if strike by a missile ; some object drop prone at my foot . be strike by 's clock ; day be fad , but it be not dark : the crescent moon aid little , but the deep gilding of that
that point in heaven where the sun beam last , and the crystalline clearness of a wide space above , sustain the summer twilight ; even in my dark walk I could , by approach a opening , have manage to read print of a small type . easy be it to see then that the missile be a box , a small box of white and colou ivory ; it be loose lid open in my hand ; violet lay within , violet smother a closely fold bit of pink paper , a note , superscribe , " pwe la robe grise . " I wear indeed a dress of french grey . good . be this a billet - doux ? a thing I have hear of , but hithertoo have not have the honour of seeing or handling . be it this sort of commodity I hold between my finger and thumb at this moment ? Scarcely : I do not dream it for a moment . or admirer my very thought have not conceive . all the teacher have dream of some lover ; one ( but she be naturally of a credulous turn ) believe in a future husband . all the pupil above fourteen knew of some prospective bridegroom ; two or three be already affiance by they parent , and have be so from childhood : but into the realm of feeling and hope which such prospect open , my speculation , far less my presumption , have never once have warrant to intrude . if the other teacher go into town , or take a walk on the boulevard , or only attend mass , they be very certain ( accord to the account bring back ) to meet with some individual of the " opposite sex , " whose rapt , earnest gaze assure they of they power to strike and to attract . I can not say that my experience tally with theirs , in this respect . I go to church and I take walk , and be very well convince that nobody mind I . there be not a girl or woman in the who could not , and do not testify to have receive a admiring beam from we young doctor 's blue eye at one time or other . I be obliged , however humble it may sound , to except myself : as far as I be concerned , those blue eye be guiltless , and calm as the sky , to whose tint theirs see akin . so it come to pass that I hear the other talk , wonder often at they gaiety , security , and self - satisfaction , but do not trouble myself to look up and gaze along the path they see so certain of treading . this then be no billet - doux ; and it be in settled conviction to the contrary that I quietly open it . thus it run -- I translate :-- " angel of my dream ! a thousand , thousand thanks for the promise keep : scarcely do I venture to hope its fulfilment . I believe you , indeed , to be half in jest ; and then you seem to think the enterprise beset with such danger -- the hour so untimely , the alley so strictly seclude -- often , you say , haunt by that dragon , the english teacher -- une veritable begueule Britannique a ce que vous dite -- espece de monstre , brusque et rude comme un vieux caporal de grenadier , et reveche comme une religieuse " ( the reader will excuse my modesty in allow this flatter sketch of my amiable self to retain the slight veil of the original tongue ) . " you be aware , " go on this precious effusion , " that little , on account of he illness , have be remove to a master 's chamber -- that favour chamber , whose lattice overlook you prison - ground . there , I , the best uncle in the world , be admit to visit he . how tremblingly I approach the window and glance into you -- a for I , though a desert for you !--how I fear to behold vacancy , or the dragon aforesaid ! how my heart palpitate with delight when , through aperture in the envious bough , I at once catch the gleam of you graceful straw - hat , and the waving of you grey dress -- dress that I should recognise amongst a thousand . but why , my angel , will you not look up ? , to deny I one ray of those adorable eye !-- how a single glance would have revive I ! I write this in fiery haste ; while the physician examine , I snatch a opportunity to enclose it in a small casket , together with a bouquet of flower , the sweetest that blow -- yet less sweet than thee , my Perus --my all - charming ! ever thine - thou well knowest whom ! " " I wish I do know whom , " be my comment ; and the wish bear even closer reference to the person address in this choice document , than to the writer thereof . perhaps it be from the fiance of one of the engage pupil ; and , in that case , there be no great harm do or intend -- only a small irregularity . of the girl , the majority , indeed , have brothers or cousin at the neighbouring college . but " la robe grise , le chapeau de paille , " here surely be a clue -- a very confusing one . the straw - hat be a ordinary garden head - screen , common to a score besides myself . the grey dress hardly give more
more definite indication . Beck herself ordinarily wear a grey dress just now ; another teacher , and three of the pensionnaire , have have grey dress purchase of the same shade and fabric as mine : it be a sort of every - day wear which happen at that time to be in vogue . meanwhile , as I ponder , I know I must go in . light , move in the dormitory , announce that prayer be over , and the pupil go to be . another half - hour and all door would be lock -- all light extinguish . the front door yet stood open , to admit into the heated house the coolness of the summer night ; from the portress 's cabinet close by shine a lamp , show the long vestibule with the two - leave drawing - room door on one side , the great street - door close the vista . all at once , quick ring the bell -- quick , but not loud -- a cautious tinkle - - a sort of warning metal whisper . dart from she cabinet and run to open . the person she admit stand with she two minute in parley : there seem a demur , a delay . come to the garden door , lamp in hand ; she stand on the step , lifte she lamp , look round vaguly . " Quel cont ! " she cry , with a coquettish laugh . " Personne n'y a ete . " " let I pass , " plead a voice I know : " I ask but five minute ; " and a familiar shape , tall and grand ( as we of the all think it ) , issue from the house , and strode down amongst the bed and walk . it be sacrilege -- the intrusion of a man into that spot , at that hour ; but he know himself privileged , and perhaps he trust to the friendly night . he wandere down the alley , look on this side and on that -- he be lose in the shrub , trampl flower and break branch in he search -- he penetrat at last the " forbidden walk . " there I meet he , like some ghost , I suppose . " ! it be find . " he do not ask by whom , for with he quick eye he perceive that I hold it in my hand . " do not betray she , " he say , look at I as if I be indeed a dragon . " be I ever so dispose to treachery , I can not betray what I do not know , " be my answer . " read the note , and you will see how little it reveal . " " perhaps you have read it , " I think to myself ; and yet I could not believe he write it : that could hardly be he style : beside , I be fool enough to think there would be a degree of hardship in he call I such name . he own look vindicate he ; he grow hot , and colour as he read . " this be indeed too much : this be cruel , this be humiliat , " be the word that fall from he . I think it _was_ cruel , when I see he countenance so move . no matter whether he be to blame or not ; somebody , it seem to I , must be more to blame . " what shall you do about it ? " he inquire of I . " shall you tell what you have find , and cause a stir -- a esclandre ? " I think I ought to tell , and say so ; add that I do not believe there would be either stir or esclandre : be much too prudent to make a noise about a affair of that sort connect with she establishment . he stand look down and meditat . he be both too proud and too honourable to entreat my secresy on a point which duty evidently command I to communicate . I wish to do right , yet loath to grieve or injure he . just then glance out through the open door ; she could not see we , though between the tree I could plainly see she : she dress be grey , like mine . this circumstance , take in connection with prior transaction , suggest to I that perhaps the case , however deplorable , be one in which I be under no obligation whatever to concern myself . accordingly , I say ,-- " if you can assure I that none of 's pupil be implicate in this business , I shall be very happy to stand aloon from all interference . take the casket , the bouquet , and the billet ; for my part , I gladly forget the whole affair . " " look there ! " he whisper suddenly , as he hand close on what I offer , and at the same time he point through the bough . I look . , in shawl , wrapping - gown , and slipper , softly descend the step , and steal like a cat round the garden : in two minute she would have be upon . if _she be like a cat , however , _he , quite as much , resemble a leopard : nothing could be lighter than he tread when he choose . he watch , and as she turn a corner , he take the garden at two noiseless bounds . she reappear , and he be gone . help he , instantly interpose the door between he and he huntress . I , too , might
might have get , away , but I prefer to meet openly . though it be my frequent and well - know custom to spend twilight in the garden , yet , never till now , have I remain so late . full sure be I that have miss -- be come in search of I , and design now to pounce on the defaulter unaware . I expect a reprimand . no . Madame be all goodness . she tender not even a remonstrance ; she testify no shade of surprise . with that consummate tact of hers , in which I believe she be never surpass by liive thing , she even profess merely to have issue forth to taste " la brise do soir . " " Quelle belle nuit ! " cry she , look up at the star -- the moon be now go down behind the broad tower of . " Qu'il fait bon ? que l'air est frais ! " and , instead of send I in , she detain I to take a few turn with she down the principal alley . when at last we both re-enter , she lean affably on my shoulder by way of support in mount the front - door step ; at parting , she cheek be present to my lip , and " soir , my bonne amie ; dormez bien ! " be she kindly adieu for the night . I catch myself smile as I lay awake and thoughtful on my couch -- smile at . the unction , the suavity of she behaviour offer , for one who know she , a sure teak that suspicion of some kind be busy in she brain . from some aperture or summit of observation , through parte bough or open window , she have catch a glimpse , remote or near , deceptive or instructive , of that night 's transaction . Finely accomplish as she be in the art of surveillance , it be next to impossible that a casket could be throw into she garden , or a interloper could cross she walk to seek it , without that she , in shaken branch , pass shade , unwonted footfall , or stilly murmur ( and though have speak very low in the few word he drop I , yet the hum of he man 's voice pervad , I think , the whole conventual ground ) -- without , I say , that she should have catch intimation of thing extraordinary transpire on she premise . what thing , she might by no means see , or at that time be able to discover ; but a delicious little ravelled plot lay temp she to disentanglement ; and in the midst , fold round and round in cobweb , have she not secure " " clumsily involved , like the foolish fly she be ? chapter XIII . a Sneeze out . I have occasion to smile -- nay , to laugh , at again , within the space of four and twenty hour after the little scene treat of in the last chapter . own a climate as variable , though not so humid , as that of any english town . a night of high wind follow upon that soft sunset , and all the next day be one of dry storm -- dark , becloude , yet rainless , -- the street be dim with sand and dust , whir from the boulevard . I know not that even lovely weather would have temp I to spend the evening - time of study and recreation where I have spend it yesterday . my alley , and , indeed , all the walk and shrubs in the garden , have acquire a new , but not a pleasant interest ; they seclusion be now become precarious ; they calm -- insecure . that casement which raine billet , have vulgarize the once dear nook it overlook ; and elsewhere , the eye of the flower have gain vision , and the knot in the tree - bole listen like secret ear . some plant there be , indeed , trode down by in he search , and he hasty and heedless progress , which I wish to prop up , water , and revive ; some footmark , too , he have leave on the bed : but these , in spite of the strong wind , I find a moment 's leisure to efface very early in the morning , ere common eye have discover they . with a pensive sort of content , I sit down to my desk and my german , while the pupil settle to they evening lesson ; and the other teacher take up they needlework . the scene of the " etude du soir " be always the refectory , a much smaller apartment than any of the three class or schoolroom ; for here none , save the boarder , be ever admit , and these number only a score . two lamp hang from the ceiling over the two table ; these be light at dusk , and they kindling be the signal for school - book be set aside , a grave demeanou assume , general silence enforce , and then commence " la lecture pieuse . " this say " lecture pieuse " be , I soon find , mainly design as a wholesome mortification of the , a useful humiliation of the reason ; and such a dose for common sense as she might digest at she leisure , and thrive on as she best could . the book bring out ( it be never change , but when finish , recommence ) be a venerable volume , old as the hill -- grey as the . I would have give two franc for the chance of get
get that book once into my band , turn over the sacred yellow leave , ascertain the title , and peruse with my own eye the enormous figment which , as a unworthy heretic , it be only permit I to drink in with my bewildered ears . this book contain legend of the saint . ! ( I speak the word reverently ) what legends they be . what gasconad rascal those saint must have be , if they first boast these exploit or invent these miraacle . these legend , however , be no more than monkish extravagance , over which one laugh inwardly ; there be , besides , priestly matter , and the priestcraft of the book be far worse than its monkery . the ears burn on each side of my head as I listen , perforce , to tale of moral martyrdom inflict by ; the dread boast of confessor , who have wickedly abuse they office , trampl to deep degradation high - born lady , make of countess and princess the most tormented slave under the sun . story like that of and of , recur again and again , with all its dreadful viciousness , sicken tyranny and black impiety : tale that be nightmare of oppression , privation , and agony . I sit out this " lecture pieuse " for some night as well as I could , and as quietly too ; only once break off the point of my scissors by involuntarily stick they somewhat deep in the worm -eaten board of the table before I . but , at last , it make I so burn hot , and my temple , and my heart , and my wrist throb so fast , and my sleep afterwards be so broken with excitement , that I could sit no longer . Prudence recommend henceforward a swift clearance of my person from the place , the moment that guilty old book be bring out . no ever feel a stronger call to take up she testimony against , than I -- to speak my mind in this matter of the popish " lecture pieuse . " however , I do manage somehow to curb and rein in ; and though always , as soon as come to light the lamps , I shoot from the room quickly , yet also I do it quietly ; seize that vantage moment give by the little bustle before the dead silence , and vanish whilst the boarder put they book away . when I vanish -- it be into darkness ; candle be not allow to be carry about , and the teacher who forsook the refectory , have only the unlit hall , schoolroom , or bedroom , as a refuge . in winter I seek the long class , and pace they fast to keep myself warm -- fortunate if the moon shone , and if there be only star , soon reconcile to they dim gleam , or even to the total eclipse of they absence . in summer it be never quite dark , and then I go up - stair to my own quarter of the long dormitory , open my own casement ( that chamber be light by five casement large as great door ) , and lean out , look forth upon the city beyond the garden , and listen to band - music from the park or the palace - square , think meantime my own thought , liive my own life , in my own still , shadow - world . this evening , fugitive as usual before the and he work , I mount the staircase , approach the dormitory , and quietly open the door , which be always keep carefully shut , and which , like every other door in this house , revolv noiselessly on well - oiled hinge . before I _see , I _felt that life be in the great room , usually void : not that there be either stir or breath , or rustle of sound , but lack , be not at home . all the white bed -- the " lits dg ange , " as they be poetically term -- lay visible at a glance ; all be empty : no sleeper repose therein . the sound of a drawer cautiously slid out strike my ear ; step a little to one side , my vision take a free range , unimped by fall curtain . I now commande my own bed and my own toilet , with a locked work - box upon it , and lock drawer underneath . very good . a dumpy , motherly little body , in decent shawl and the cleanest of possible nightcap , stand before this toilet , hard at work apparently do I the kindness of " tidy out " the " meuble . " stand the lid of the work - box , open the top drawer ; duly and impartially be each succeed drawer open in turn : not a article of they contents but be lift and unfolded , not a paper but be glance over , not a little box but be unlidded ; and beautiful be the adroitness , exemplary the care with which the search be accomplish . wrotch at it like a true star , " unhasting yet unresting . " I will not deny that it be with a secret glee I watch she . have I be a gentleman I believe would have find favour in my eye , she be so handy , neat , thorough in all she do : some people 's movement provoke the soul by they loose awkwardness , hers -- satisfy by they trim compactness . I stand , in short , fascinate ; but it be necessary to make a effort to break this spell a retreat
retreat must be beat . the searcher might have turn and catch I ; there would have be nothing for it then but a scene , and she and I would have have to come all at once , with a sudden clash , to a thorough knowledge of each other : down would have go conventionality , away sweep disguise , and _i_ should have look into she eye , and she into mine -- we should have know that we could work together no more , and part in this life for ever . where be the use of tempting such a catastrophe ? I be not angry , and have no wish in the world to leave she . I could hardly get another employer whose yoke would be so light and so , easy of carriage ; and truly I like for she capital sense , whatever I might think of she principle : as to she system , it do I no harm ; she might work I with it to she heart 's content : nothing would come of the operation . loverless and inexpectant of love , I be as safe from spy in my heart - poverty , as the beggar from thief in he destitution of purse . I turn , then , and fle ; descende the stair with progress as swift and soundless as that of the spider , which at the same instant run down the bannister . how I laugh when I reach the schoolroom . I know now she have certainly see in the garden ; I know what she thought be . the spectacle of a suspicious nature so far misl by its own invention , tick I much . yet as the laugh die , a kind of wrath smote I , and then bitterness follow : it be the rock struck , and 's water gush out . I never have felt so strange and contradictory a inward tumult as I feel for a hour that even : soreness and laughter , and fire , and grief , share my heart between they . I cry hot tear : not because mistrust I -- I do not care twopence for she mistrust -- but for other reason . complicate , disquiet thoughts break up the whole repose of my nature . however , that turmoil subside : next day i be again . on revisit my drawer , I find they all securely lock ; the closest subsequent examination could not discover change or apparent disturbance in the position of one object . my few dress be fold as I have leave they ; a certain little bunch of white violet that have once be silently present to I by a stranger ( a stranger to I , for we have never exchange word ) , and which I have dry and keep for its sweet perfume between the fold of my best dress , lay there unstirred ; my black silk scarf , my lace chemisette and collar , be unrumpled . have she crease one solitary article , I own I should have feel much greater difficulty in forgive she ; but find all straight and orderly , I say , " let bygones be bygone . I be unharmed : why should I bear malice ? " * * * * * a thing there be which puzzl myself , and I seek in my brain a key to that riddle almost as sedulously as have seek a guide to useful knowledge in my toilet drawer . how be it that , if he have not be accessory to the dropping of that casket into the garden , should have know that it _was_ drop , and appear so promptly on the spot to seek it ? so strong be the wish to clear up this point that I begin to entertain this daring suggestion : " why may I not , in case I should ever have the opportunity , ask himself to explain this coincidence ? " and so long as be absent , I really believe I have courage to test he with such a question . be now convalescent ; and she physician accordingly make he visit very rare : indeed , he would have cease they altogether , have not insist on he give a occasional call till the child should be quite well . she come into the nursery one evening just after I have listen to 's lisp and break prayer , and have put she to bed . take the little one 's hand , she say , " enfant a toujour un peu de fievre . " and presently afterwards , look at I with a quicker glance than be habitual to she quiet eye , " l'a - t - il vue dernierement ? , n'est - ce pa ? " of course she know this better than any other person in the house . " well , " she continue , " I be go out , pour faire quelque course en fiacre . I shall call on , and send he to the child . I will that he see she this evening ; she cheek be flush , she pulse be quick ; _you_ will receive he -- for my part , I shall be from home . " now the child be well enough , only warm with the warmth of ; it be scarcely less needful to send for a priest to administer extreme unction than for a doctor to prescribe a dose ; also Madame rarely make " course , " as she call they , in the evening : moreover , this be the first time she have choose to absent herself on the occasion of a visit from . the whole arrangement indicate some plan ; this I see , but without the
the least anxiety . " ! ha ! , " laugh - heart the , " you crafty wits be on the wrong tack . " she depart , attire very smartly , in a shawl of price , and a certain _chapeau vert tendre _-- hazardous , as to its tint , for any complexion less fresh than she own , but , to she , not unbecoming . I wonder what she intend : whether she really would send or not ; or whether indeed he would come : he might be engage . have charge I not to let sleep till the doctor come ; I have therefore sufficient occupation in tell she nursery tale and palaver the little language for she benefit . I affec ; she be a sensitive and a loving child : to hold she in my lap , or carry she in my arm , be to I a treat . to - night she would have I lay my head on the pillow of she crib ; she even put she little arm round my neck . she clasp , and the nestling action with which she press she cheek to mine , make I almost cry with a tender pain . feel of no kind abound in that house ; this pure little drop from a pure little source be too sweet : it penetrat deep , and subdue the heart , and send a gush to the eyes . half a hour or a hour pass ; murmure in she soft lisp that she be grow sleepy . " and you _shall_ sleep , " think I , " malgre maman and medecin , if they be not here in ten minute . " ! there be the ring , and there the tread , astonish the staircase by the fleetness with which it leave the step behind . introduce , and , with a freedom of manner not altogether peculiar to herself , but characteristic of the domestic of generally , she stay to hear what he have to say . 's presence would have aw she back to she own realm of the vestibule and the cabinet -- for mine , or that of any other teacher or pupil , she care not a jot . smart , trim and pert , she stand , a hand in each pocket of she gay grisette apron , eye with no more fear or shyness than if he have be a picture instead of a living gentleman . " marmot n'a rien , nest - ce pa ? " say she , indicate with a jerk of she ching . " Pas beaucoup , " be the answer , as the doctor hastily scribble with he pencil some harmless prescription . " Eh bien ! " pursue , approach he quite near , while he put up he pencil . " and the box -- do you get it ? yoMonsieu go off like a coup - de - vent the other night ; I have not time to ask he . " " I find it : yes . " " and who throw it , then ? " continue , speak quite freely the very word I should so much have wish to say , but have no address or courage to bring it out : how short some people make the road to a point which , for other , seem unattainable ! " that may be my secret , " rejoin briefly , but with no , sort of yohauteu : he seem quite to understand the Rosine or grisette character . " Mais enfin , " continue she , nothing abash , " yomonsieu know it be throw , since be come to seek it -- how do he know ? " " I be attend a little patient in the college near , " say he , " and see it drop out of he chamber window , and so come to pick it up . " how simple the whole explanation ! the note have allude to a physician as then examine " . " " ah can ! " pursue ; " il n'y a donc rien la-dessous : pa de mystere , pa d'amourette , par exemple ? " " Pas plus que sur ma main , " respond the doctor , show he palm . " Quel dommage ! " respond the grisette : " et moi -- a qui tout cela commencait a donner des idee . " " Vraiment ! vous en ete pour vos frais , " be the doctor 's cool rejoinder . she poute . the doctor could not help laugh at the sort of " moue " she make : when he laugh , he have something peculiarly good - natured and genial in he look . I see he hand incline to he pocket . " how many time have you open the door for I within this last month ? " he ask . " yoMonsieu ought to have keep count of that , " say , quite readily . " as if I have not something better to do ! " rejoin he ; but I see he give she a piece of gold , which she take unscrupulously , and then dance off to answer the door - bell , ring just now every five minute , as the various servants come to fetch the half - boarder . the reader must not think too hardly of ; on the whole , she be not a bad sort of person , and have no idea there could be any disgrace in grasp at whatever she could get , or any effrontery in chatter like a pie to the best gentleman in . I have lear not something from the above scene besides what concern the ivory box : viz. ,
, that not on the robe de jacona , pink or grey , nor yet on the frilled and pocket apron , lay the blame of breaking 's heart : these item of array be obviously guiltless as 's little blue tunic . so much the better . but who then be the culprit ? what be the ground -- what the origin -- what the perfect explanation of the whole business ? some point have be clear , but how many yet remain obscure as night ! " however , " I say to myself , " it be no affair of yours ; " and turn from the face on which I have be unconsciously dwell with a question gaze , I look through the window which command the garden below . , meantime , stand by the bed - side , be slowly draw on he glove and watch he little patient , as she eye close and she rosy lip part in come sleep . I wait till he should depart as usual , with a quick bow and scarce articulate " good - night . " . just as he take he hat , my eye , fix on the tall house bound the garden , see the one lattice , already commemorate , cautiously open ; forth from the aperture project a hand and a white handkerchief ; both wave . I know not whether the signal be answer from some viewless quarter of we own dwelling ; but immediately after there flutter from , the lattice a fall object , white and light -- billet the second , of course . " there ! " I ejaculate involuntarily . " where ? " , ask with energy , make direct for the window . " what , be it ? " " they have go and do it again , " be my reply . " a handkerchief wav and something fall : " and I point to the lattice , now close and look hypocritically blank . " go , at once ; pick it up and bring it here , " be he prompt direction ; add , " nobody will take notice of _you : I should be see . " straight I go . after some little search , I find a fold paper , lod on the lower branch of a shrub ; I seize and bring it direct to . this time , I believe not even see I . he instantly tore the billet into small piece , without read it . " it be not in the least _her_ fault , you must remember , " he say , look at I . " _Whose fault ? " I ask . " Who_ be it ? " " you do not yet know , then ? " " not in the least . " " have you no guess ? " " none . " " if I know you better , I might be temp to risk some confidence , and thus secure you as guardian over a most innocent and excellent , but somewhat inexperienced being . " " as a duenna ? " I ask . " yes , " say he abstractedly . " what snare be round she ! " he add , musingly : and now , certainly for the first time , he examine my face , anxious , doubtless , to see if any kindly expression there , would warrant he in recommend to my care and indulgence some ethereal creature , against whom power of darkness be plott . I feel no particular vocation to undertake the surveillance of ethereal creature ; but recalle the scene at the bureau , it seem to I that I owe _him a good turn : if I _could help he then I would , and it lay not with I to decide how . with as little reluctance as might be , I intimate that " I be willing to do what I could towards take care of any person in whom he might be interested . " . " I be no farther interested than as a spectator , " say he , with a modesty , admirable , as I think , to witness . " I happen to be acquaint with the rather worthless character of the person , who , from the house opposite , have now twice invade the , sanctity of this place ; I have also meet in society the object at whom these vulgar attempt be aim . she exquisite superiority and innate refinement ought , one would think , to scare impertinence from she very idea . it be not so , however ; and innocent , unsuspicious as she be , I would guard she from evil if I could . in person , however , I can do nothing I can not come near she " -- he pause . " well , I be willing to help you , " say I , " only tell I how . " and busily , in my own mind , I run over the list of we inmate , seek this paragon , this pearl of great price , this gem without flaw . " it must be Madame , " I conclude . " _She only , amongst we all , have the art even to _seem_ superior : but as to be unsuspicious , inexperienced , & c. , need not distract himself about that . however , this be just he whim , and I will not contradict he ; he shall be humoure : he angel shall be a angel . " just notify the quarter to which my care be to be direct , " I continue gravely : chuckling , however , to myself over the thought of be set to chaperon or any
any of she pupil . now have a fine set of nerve , and he at once feel by instinct , what no more coarsely constitut mind would have detect ; namely , that I be a little amused at he . the colour rise to he cheek ; with half a smile he turn and take he hat -- he be go . my heart smote I . " I will -- I will help you , " say I eagerly . " I will do what you wish . I will watch over you angel ; I will take care of she , only tell I who she be . " " but you _must_ know , " say he then with earnestness , yet speak very low . " so spotless , so good , so unspeakably beautiful ! impossible that one house should contain two like she . I allude , of course -- " here the latch of 's chamber - door ( open into the nursery ) give a sudden click , as if the hand hold it have be slightly convulse ; there be the suppressed explosion of a irrepressible sneeze . these little accident will happen to the best of we . Madame --excellent woman ! be then on duty . she have come home quietly , steal up - stair on tip - toe ; she be in she chamber . if she have not sneeze , she would have hear all , and so should I ; but that unlucky sternutation route . while he stand aghast , she come forward alert , compose , in the best yet most tranquil spirit : no novice to she habits but would have think she have just come in , and scoute the idea of she ear have be glue to the key - hole for at least ten minute . she affec to sneeze again , declare she be " enrhumee , " and then proceed volubly to recound she " course en fiacre . " the prayer - bell rang , and I leave she with the doctor . . the Fete . as soon as be well , send she away into the country . I be sorry ; I love the child , and she loss make I poorer than before . but I must not complain . I live in a house full of robust life ; I might have have companion , and I choose solitude . each of the teacher in turn make I overture of special intimacy ; I try they all . one I find to be a honest woman , but a narrow thinker , a coarse feeler , and a egotist . the second be a Parisienne , externally refin -- at heart , corrupt --without a creed , without a principle , without a affection : have penetrat the outward crust of decorum in this character , you find a slough beneath . she have a wonderful passion for present ; and , in this point , the third teacher -- a person otherwise characterless and insignificant -- closely resemble she . this last - name have also one other distinctive property -- that of avarice . in she reign the love of money for its own sake . the sight of a piece of gold would bring into she eye a green glisten , singular to witness . she once , as a mark of high favour , take I up - stair , and , open a secret door , show I a hoard -- a mass of coarse , large coin -- about fifteen guinea , in five - franc piece . she love this hoard as a bird love it be egg . these be she savings . she would come and talk to I about they with a infatuate and persever dotage , strange to behold in a person not yet twenty - five . the , on the other hand , be prodigal and profligate ( in disposition , that be : as to action , I do not know ) . that latter quality show it be snake - head to I but once , pee out very cautiously . a curious kind of reptile it seem , judge from the glimpse I get ; its novelty whet my curiosity : if it would have come out boldly , perhaps I might philosophically have stand my ground , and coolly survey the long thing from fork tongue to scaly tail - tip ; but it merely rust in the leaf of a bad novel ; and , on encounter a hasty and ill - advise demonstration of wrath , recoil and vanish , hiss . she hate I from that day . this be always in debt ; she salary be anticipate , not only in dress , but in perfume , cosmetic , confectionery , and condiment . what a cold , callous epicure she be in all thing ! I see she now . thing in face and figure , sallow in complexion , regular in feature , with perfect tooth , lips like a thread , a large , prominent ching , a well - open , but freeze eye , of light at once crave and ingrate . she mortally hate work , and love what she call pleasure ; be a insipid , heartless , brainless dissipation of time . know this woman 's character perfectly well . she once talk to I about she , with a odd mixture of discrimination , indifference , and antipathy . I ask why she keep she in the establishment . she answer plainly , " because it suit she interest to do so ; " and point out a fact I have already notice , namely , that . Pierre possess , in a almost unique degree , the power of
of keep order amongst she undisciplined rank of scholar . a certain petrifying influence accompany and surround she : without passion , noise , or violence , she hold they in check as a breezeless frost - air might still a brawling stream . she be of little use as far as communication of knowledge go , but for strict surveillance and maintenance of rule she be invaluable . " sai bien qu'elle n'a pa de principe , ni , peut - etre , de moeur , " admit frankly ; but add with philosophy , " son maintien en classe est toujour convenable et rempli meme d'une certaine dignite : c'est tout ce qu'il faut . Ni les eleve ni les parent ne regardent plus loin ; ni , par consequent , moi non plus . " * * * * * a strange , frolicsome , noisy little world be this school : great pain be take to hide chain with flower : a subtle essence of pervad every arrangement : large sensual indulgence ( so to speak ) be permit by way of counterpoise to jealous spiritual restraint . each mind be be rear in slavery ; but , to prevent reflection from dwelling on this fact , every pretext for physical recreation be seize and make the most of . there , as elsewhere , the Church strove to bring up she child robust in body , feeble in soul , fat , ruddy , hale , joyous , ignorant , unthinking , unquestioning . " eat , drink , and live ! " she say . " look after you body ; leave you soul to I . I hold they cure -- guide they course : I guarantee they final fate . " a bargain , in which every true deem himself a gainer . just offer the same term : " all this power will I give thee , and the glory of it ; for that be deliver unto I , and to whomsoever I will I give it . if thou , therefore , will worship I , all shall be thine ! " about this time -- in the ripest glow of summer -- 's house become as merry a place as a school could well be . all day long the broad folding - door and the two - leave casement stand wide open : settled sunshine seem naturalize in the atmosphere ; cloud be far off , sai away beyond sea , rest , no doubt , round island such as -- that dear land of mist -- but withdraw wholly from the drier continent . we live far more in the garden than under a roof : class be hold , and meal partaken of , in the " grand berceau . " moreover , there be a note of holiday preparation , which almost turn freedom into licence . the autumnal long vacation be but two month distant ; but before that , a great day -- a important ceremony -- none other than the fete of -- await celebration . the conduct of this fete devolve chiefly on : Madame herself be suppose to stand aloon , disinterestedly unconscious of what might be go forward in she honour . especially , she never know , never in the least suspect , that a subscription be annually levy on the whole school for the purchase of a handsome present . the polite tact of the reader will please to leave out of the account a brief , secret consultation on this point in 's own chamber . " what will you have this year ? " be ask by she parisian lieutenant . " oh , no matter ! let it alone . let the poor child keep they franc , " and look benign and modest . the would here protrude she ching ; she know by heart ; she always call she air of " bont " --" des grimace . " she never even profess to respect they one instant . " ! " she would say coldly . " name the article . shall it be jewellery or porcelain , haberdashery or silver ? " " Eh bien ! Deux out trois cuiller , et autant de fourchette en argent . " and the result be a handsome case , contain 300 franc worth of plate . the programme of the fete - day 's proceedings comprise : Presentation of plate , collation in the garden , dramatic performance ( with pupil and teacher for actor ) , a dance and supper . very gorgeous seem the effect of the whole to I , as I well remember . understand these thing and manage they ably . the play be the main point ; a month 's previous drilling be there require . the choice , too , of the actor require knowledge and care ; then come lesson in elocution , in attitude , and then the fatigue of countless rehearsal . for all this , as may well be suppose , . do not suffice : other management , other accomplishment than hers be requisite here . they be supply in the person of a master -- m . , professor of literature . it be never my lot to be present at the histrionic lesson of , but I often see he as he cross the _carre_ ( a square hall between the dwelling - house and school - house ) . I hear he , too , in the warm evening , lectur with open door , and he name , with anecdote of he , resound in one ear from all side . especially we former acquaintance , , -- who have be select to take a prominent part in the play -- use , in bestow upon I a large portion of she leisure , to lard
lard she discourse with frequent allusion to he saying and doings . she esteem he hideously aplain , and use to profess herself frightene almost into hysteric at the sound of he step or voice . a dark little man he certainly be ; pungent and austere . even to I he seem a harsh apparition , with he close - shorn , black head , he broad , sallow brow , he thin cheek , he wide and quiver nostril , he thorough glance , and hurrie bearing . Irritable he be ; one hear that , as he apostrophize with vehemence the awkward squad under he order . sometimes he would break out on these raw amateur actresse with a passion of impatience at they falseness of conception , they coldness of emotion , they feebleness of delivery . " ! " he would cry ; and then he voice ring through the premise like a trumpet ; and when , mimick it , come the small pipe of a , a Mathilde , or a Blanche , one understood why a hollow groan of scorn , or a fierce hiss of rage , reward the tame echo . " Vous n'ete donc que des poupee , " I hear he thunder . " Vous n'avez pa de passion -- vous autre . Vous ne sentez donc rien ? Votre chair est de neige , votre sang de glace ! Moi , je veux que tout cela s'allume , qu'il ain une vie , une ame ! " vain resolve ! and when he at last find it _be vain , he suddenly break the whole business down . Hitherto he have be teach they a grand tragedy ; he tore the tragedy in morsel , and come next day with a compact little comic trifle . to this they take more kindly ; he presently knock it all into they smooth round pate . Pierre always preside at 's lesson , and I be tell that the polish of she manner , she seem attention , she tact and grace , impress that gentleman very favourably . she have , indeed , the art of pleasing , for a given time , whom she would ; but the feeling would not last : in a hour it be dry like dew , vanish like gossamer . the day precede 's fete be as much a holiday as the fete itself . it be devoted to clear out , clean , arrange and decorate the three schoolroom . all within - door be the gayest bustle ; neither up - stair nor down could a quiet , isolated person find rest for the sole of she foot ; accordingly , for my part , I take refuge in the garden . the whole day do I wander or sit there alone , find warmth in the sun , shelter among the tree , and a sort of companionship in my own thought . I well remember that I exchange but two sentence that day with any living being : not that I feel solitary ; I be glad to be quiet . for a looker - on , it suffice to pass through the room once or twice , observe what change be be wrotch , how a green - room and a dressing - room be be contrive , a little stage with scenery erect , how m . , in conjunction with , be direct all , and how a eager band of pupil , amongst they , be work gaily under he control . the great day arrive . the sun rise hot and unclouded , and hot and uncloude it burn on till evening . all the door and all the window be set open , which give a pleasant sense of summer freedom -- and freedom the most complete seem indeed the order of the day . teacher and pupil descend to breakfast in dressing - gowns and curl -paper : anticipat " avec delice " the toilette of the evening , they seem to take a pleasure in indulge that forenoon in a luxury of slovenliness ; like aldermen fast in preparation for a feast . about nine o'clock A.M. , a important functionary , the " coiffeur , " arrive . Sacrilegious to state , he fix he head - quarter in the oratory , and there , in presence of _benitier , candle , and crucifix , solemnise the mystery of he art . each girl be summon in turn to pass through he hand ; emerge from they with head as smooth as a shell , intersect by faultless white line , and wreathe about with Grecian plait that shine as if lacquer . I take my turn with the rest , and could hardly believe what the glass say when I apply to it for information afterwards ; the lavished garlandry of woven brown hair amaze I -- I fear it be not all my own , and it require several convince pull to give assurance to the contrary . I then acknowledge in the coiffeur a first - rate artist -- one who certainly make the most of indifferent material . the oratory close , the dormitory become the scene of ablution , arraying and bedizening curiously elaborate . to I it be , and ever must be a enigma , how they contrive to spend so much time in do so little . the operation seem close , intricate , prolonge : the result simple . a clear white muslin dress , a blue sash ( the 's colours ) , a pair of white , or straw - colour kid glove --such be the gala uniform , to the assumption whereon that houseful of teacher and pupil devote three mortal hour . but though simple , it must be allow the array be perfect --perfect in
in fashion , fit , and freshness ; every head be also dress with exquisite nicety , and a certain compact taste -- suit the full , firm comeliness of contour , though too stiff for any more flowing and flexible style of beauty -- the general effect be , on the whole , commendable . in behold this diaphanous and snowy mass , I well remember feel myself to be a mere shadowy spot on a field of light ; the courage be not in I to put on a transparent white dress : something thin I must wear -- the weather and room be too hot to give substantial fabric sufferance , so I have seek through a dozen shop till I light upon a crape - like material of purple - gray -- the colour , in short , of dun mist , lie on a moor in bloom . my _tailleuse_ have kindly make it as well as she could : because , as she judiciously observe , it be " sus triste -- si pen voyant , " care in the fashion be the more imperative : it be well she take this view of the matter , for I , have no flower , no jewel to relieve it : and , what be more , I have no natural rose of complexion . we become oblivious of these deficiency in the uniform routine of daily drudgery , but they _will force upon we they unwelcome blank on those bright occasion when beauty should shine . however , in this same gown of shadow , I feel at home and at ease ; a advantage I should not have enjoy in anything more brilliant or strike . , too , keep I in countenance ; she dress be almost as quiet as mine , except that she wear a bracelet , and a large brooch bright with gold and fine stone . we chance to meet on the stair , and she give I a nod and smile of approbation . not that she think I be look well - - a point unlikly to engage she interest -- but she consider I dress " convenablement , " " decemment , " and la Convenance et la Decence be the two calm deity of 's worship . she even pause , laid on my shoulder she glove hand , hold a embroidered and perfume handkerchief , and confide to my ear a sarcasm on the other teacher ( whom she have just be compliment to they face ) . " nothing so absurd , " she say , " as for de femme mure 'to dress themselves like girl of fifteen ' -- quant a la . , elle a l'air d'une vieille coquette qui fait l'ingenue . " be dress at least a couple of hour before anybody else , I feel a pleasure in betak myself -- not to the garden , where servants be busy prop up long table , place seat , and spread clot in readiness for the collation but to the schoolroom , now empty , quiet , cool , and clean ; they wall fresh staine , they plank floor fresh scour and scarce dry ; flower fresh gather adorn the recess in pot , and drapery , fresh hung , beautify the great window . withdraw to the first classe , a smaller and neater room than the other , and take from the glazed bookcase , of which I keep the key , a volume whose title promise some interest , I sit down to read . the glass - door of this " classe , " or schoolroom , open into the large berceau ; acacia - bough caress its pane , as they stretch across to meet a rose - bush bloom by the opposite lintel : in this rose - bush be murmure busy and happy . I commence reading . just as the stilly hum , the embowering shade , the warm , lonely calm of my retreat be begin to steal mean from the page , vision from my eye , and to lure I along the track of reverie , down into some deep dell of dreamland -- just then , the sharpest ring of the street - door bell to which that much - try instrument have ever thrill , snatch I back to consciousness . now the bell have be ring all the morning , as workmen , or servants , or _coiffeur , or _tailleuse , go and come on they several errand . moreover , there be good reason to expect it would ring all the afternoon , since about one hundred externe be yet to arrive in carriage or fiacre : nor could it be expect to rest during the evening , when parent and friend would gather thronge to the play . under these circumstance , a ring -- even a sharp ring -- be a matter of course : yet this particular peal have a accent of its own , which chase my dream , and start my book from my knee . I be stoop to pick up this last , when -- firm , fast , straight -- right on through vestibule -- along corridor , across carre , through first division , second division , grand salle -- strode a step , quick , regular , intent . the close door of the first classe -- my sanctuary -- offer no obstacle ; it burst open , and a paletot and a bonnet grec fill the void ; also two eye first vaguly strike upon , and then hungrily div into I . " C'est cela ! " say a voice . " Je la connais : c'est l'Anglaise . Tant pis . Toute Anglaise , et , par consequent , toute begueule qu'elle soit -- elle fera mon affaire
affaire , ou je saurai pourquoi . " then , with a certain stern politeness ( I suppose he think I have not catch the drift of he previous uncivil muttering ) , and in a jargon the most execrable that ever be hear , " Meess ----, play you must : I be plan there . " " what can I do for you , ? " I inquire : for m . it be , and in a state of no little excitement . " play you must . I will not have you shrink , or fry , or make the prude . I read you skull that night you come ; I see you moyen : play you can ; play you must . " " but how , ? what do you mean ? " " there be no time to be lose , " he go on , now speak in ; " and let we thrust to the wall all reluctance , all excuse , all minaudery . you must take a part . " " in the vaudeville ? " " in the vaudeville . you have say it . " I gas , horror -struck . what do the little man mean ? " ! " he say . " the case shall be state , and you shall then answer I yes , or ; and accord to you answer shall I ever after estimate you . " the scarce -suppress impetus of a most irritable nature glow in he cheek , feed with sharp shaft he glance , a nature -- the injudicious , the mawkish , the hesitating , the sullen , the affected , above all , the unyielding , might quickly render violent and implacable . Silence and attention be the best balm to apply : I listen . " the whole matter be go to fail , " he begin . " have fall ill -- at least so she ridiculous mother assert ; for my part , I feel sure she might play if she would : it be only good - will that lack . she be charge with a _role , as you know , or do _not_ know -- it be equal : without that _role_ the play be stop . there be now but a few hour in which to learn it : not a girl in this school would hear reason , and accept the task . , it be not a interesting , not a amiable , part ; they vile _amour - propre _-- that base quality of which woman have so much -- would revolt from it . Englishwomen be either the best or the worst of they sex . sait que je les deteste comme la peste , ordinairement " ( this between he recreant tooth ) . " I apply to a to rescue I . what be she answer -- yes , or ? " a thousand objection rush into my mind . the foreign language , the limited time , the public display ... Inclination recoil , ability falter , self - respect ( that " vile quality " ) tremble . " non , non , non ! " say all these ; but look up at , and see in he vex , fiery , and search eye , a sort of appeal behind all its menace , my lip drop the word " oui " . for a moment he rigid countenance relax with a quiver of content : quickly bend up again , however , he go on ,-- " Vite a l'ouvrage ! here be the book ; here be you _role : read . " and I read . he do not commend ; at some passage he scowl and stampe . he give I a lesson : I diligently imitate . it be a disagreeable part -- a man 's -- a empty - head fop 's . one could put into it neither heart nor soul : I hate it . the play -- a mere trifle -- run chiefly on the effort of a brace of rival to gain the hand of a fair coquette . one lover be call the " , " a good and gallant but unpolished man , a sort of diamond in the rough ; the other be a butterfly , a talker , and a traitor : and I be to be the butterfly , talker , and traitor . I do my best -- which be bad , I know : it provoke ; he fume . put both -- hand to the work , I endeavoure to do better than my best ; I presume he give I credit for good intention ; he profess to be partially content . " ! " he cry ; and as voice begin sound from the garden , and white dress flutter among the tree , he add : " you must withdraw : you must be alone to learn this . come with I . " without be allow time or power to deliberate , I find myself in the same breath convoy along as in a species of whirlwind , up - stair , up two pair of stair , nay , actually up three ( for this fiery little man seem as by instinct to know he way everywhere ) ; to the solitary and lofty attic be I borne , put in and lock in , the key being , in the door , and that key he take with he and vanish . the attic be no pleasant place : I believe he do not know how unpleasant it be , or he never would have lock I in with so little ceremony . in this summer weather , it be hot as ; as in , it be always cold as . box
box and lumber fill it ; old dress drape its unstained wall -- cobweb its unswept ceiling . well be it know to be tenant by rat , by black beetle , and by cockroach -- nay , rumou affir that the ghostly nun of the garden have once be see here . a partial darkness obscure one end , across which , as for deeper mystery , a old russet curtain be draw , by way of screen to a sombre band of winter cloak , pendent each from its pin , like a malefactor from he gibbet . from amongst these cloak , and behind that curtain , the be say to issue . I do not believe this , nor be I trouble by apprehension thereon ; but I see a very dark and large rat , with a long tail , come glid out from that squalid alcove ; and , moreover , my eye fell on many a black - beetle , dott the floor . these object discompose I more , perhaps , than it would be wise to say , as also do the dust , lumber , and stifle heat of the place . the last inconvenience would soon have become intolerable , have I not find means to open and prop up the skylight , thus admit some freshness . underneath this aperture I push a large empty chest , and have mount upon it a smaller box , and wip from both the dust , I gather my dress ( my best , the reader must remember , and therefore a legitimate object of care ) fastidiously around I , ascend this species of extempore throne , and be seat , commence the acquisition of my task ; while I learn , not forget to keep a sharp look - out on the black - beetle and cockroach , of which , more even , I believe , than of the rat , I sit in mortal dread . my impression at first be that I have undertaken what it really be impossible to perform , and I simply resolve to do my best and be resign to fail . I soon find , however , that one part in so short a piece be not more than memory could master at a few hour ' notice . I learn and learn on , first in a whisper , and then aloud . perfectly secure from human audience , I act my part before the garret-vermin . enter into its emptiness , frivolity , and falsehood , with a spirit inspire by scorn and impatience , I take my revenge on this " fat , " by make he as fatuitous as I possibly wcould . in this exercise the afternoon pass : day begin to glide into evening ; and I , who have eat nothing since breakfast , grow excessively hungry . now I think of the collation , which doubtless they be just then devour in the garden far below . ( I have see in the vestibule a basketful of small _pate a la creme_ , than which nothing in the whole range of cookery see to I better ) . a _pate_ , or a square of cake , it seem to I would come very _apropo ;_ and as my relish for those dainty increase , it begin to appear somewhat hard that I should pass my holiday , fast and in prison . remote as be the attic from the street - door and vestibule , yet the ever - tinkling bell be faintly audible here ; and also the ceaseless roll of wheel , on the torment pavement . I know that the house and garden be thronge , and that all be gay and glad below ; here it begin to grow dusk : the beetle be fad from my sight ; I tremble lest they should steal on I a march , mount my throne unseen , and , unsuspected , invade my skirt . impatient and apprehensive , I recommence the rehearsal of my part merely to kill time . just as I be conclude , the long - delay rattle of the key in the lock come to my ear -- no unwelcome sound . ( I could just see through the dusk that it _was_ , for light enough still linger to show the velvet blackness of he close - shorn head , and the sallow ivory of he brow ) look in . " ! " cry he , hold the door open and remain at the threshold . " tout entendu . C'est assez bien . ! " a moment I hesitate . " Encore ! " say he sternly . " et point de grimace ! a ba la timidite ! " again I go through the part , but not half so well as I have speak it alone . " , elle sait , " say he , half dissatisfied , " and one can not be fastidious or exact under the circumstance . " then he add , " you may yet have twenty minute for preparation : au revoir ! " and he be go . " Monsieur , " I call out , take courage . " Eh bien ! Qu'est - ce que c'est , ? " " J'ai bien faim . " " comment , vous avez faim ! et la collation ? " " I know nothing about it . I have not see it , shut up here . " " ah ! C'est vrai , " cry he . in a moment my throne be abdicate , the attic evacuate ; a inverse repetition of the impetus which have bring I up into the attic , instantly take I down -- down -- down to the very kitchen . I think I should have go
go to the cellar . the cook be imperatively order to produce food , and I , as imperatively , be command to eat . to my great joy this food be limit to coffee and cake : I have fear wine and sweet , which I do not like . how he guess that I should like a _petit pate a la creme_ I can not tell ; but he go out and procure I one from some quarter . with considerable willingness I eat and drank , keep the _petit pate_ till the last , as a _bonne bouche _. m . superintend my repast , and almost force upon I more than I could swallow . " a la bonne heure , " he cry , when I signify that I really could take no more , and , with uplifted hand , implor to be spare the additional roll on which he have just spread butter . " you will set I down as a species of tyrant and Bluebeard , starve woman in a garret ; whereas , after all , I be no such thing . now , , do you feel courage and strength to appear ? " I say , I think I do ; though , in truth , I be perfectly confused , and could hardly tell how I feel : but this little man be of the order of being who must not be opposed , unless you possess a all - dominant force sufficient to crush he at once . " come then , " say he , offer he hand . I give he mine , and he set off with a rapid walk , which oblige I to run at he side in order to keep pace . in the carre he stop a moment : it be light with large lamps ; the wide door of the class be open , and so be the equally wide garden - door ; orange - tree in tubs , and tall flower in pot , ornament these portal on each side ; group of lady and gentleman in evening - dress stood and walk amongst the flowers . within , the long vista of the school - room present a thronging , undulating , murmuring , wave , stream multitude , all rose , and blue , and half translucent white . there be lustre burn overhead ; far off there be a stage , a solemn green curtain , a row of footlight . " nest - ce pa que c'est beau ? " demand my companion . I should have say it be , but my heart get up into my throat . m . discover this , and give I a side - scowl and a little shake for my pain . " I will do my best , but I wish it be over , " say I ; then I ask : " be we to walk through that crowd ? " " by no means : I manage matter better : we pass through the garden -- here . " in a instant we be out of door : the cool , calm night revive I somewhat . it be moonless , but the reflex from the many glow window light the court brightly , and even the alley -- dimly . be cloudless , and grand with the quiver of its living fire . how soft be the night of the continent ! how bland , balmy , safe ! no sea -fog ; no chilling damp : mistless as noon , and fresh as morning . have cross court and garden , we reach the glass door of the first classe . it stand open , like all other door that night ; we pass , and then I be usher into a small cabinet , divide the first classe from the grand salle . this cabinet dazzl I , it be so full of light : it deafen I , it be clamorous with voice : it stifle I , it be so hot , chok , thronge . " de l'ordre ! silence ! " cry . " be this chaos ? " , he demand ; and there be a hush . with a dozen word , and as many gesture , he turn out half the person present , and oblige the remnant to fall into rank . those leave be all in costume : they be the performer , and this be the green - room . introduce I . all stare and some tittered . it be a surprise : they have not expect the would play in a _vaudeville . , beautifully dress for she part , and look fascinatingly pretty , turn on I a pair of eye as round as bead . in the highest spirit , unpertur by fear or bashfulness , delighte indeed at the thought of shining off before hundred -- my entrance seem to transfix she with amazement in the midst of she joy . she would have exclaim , but . hold she and all the rest in check . have survey and criticize the whole troop , he turn to I . " you , too , must be dress for you part . " " dress -- dress like a man ! " exclaim , dart forwards ; add with officiousness , " I will dress she myself . " to be dress like a man do not please , and would not suit I . I have consent to take a man 's name and part ; as to he dress --_halte la!_ no . I would keep my own dress , come what might . m . might storm , might rage : I would keep my own dress . I say so , with a voice as resolute in intent ,
, as it be low , and perhaps unsteady in utterance . he do not immediately storm or rage , as I fully think he would he stand silent . but again interpose . " she will make a capital _petit-maitre . here be the garment , all -- all complete : somewhat too large , but -- I will arrange all that . come , chere amie -- belle Anglaise ! " and she sneer , for I be not " belle . " she seize my hand , she be draw I away . m . stand impassable --neutral . " you must not resist , " pursue -- for resist I do . " you will spoil all , destroy the mirth of the piece , the enjoyment of the company , sacrifice everything to you _amour-propre . this would be too bad -- yomonsieu will never permit this ? " she seek he eye . I watch , likewise , for a glance . he give she one , and then he give I one . " stop ! " he say slowly , arrest , who continue she effort to drag I after she . everybody await the decision . he be not angry , not irritate ; I perceive that , and take heart . " you do not like these clothes ? " he ask , point to the masculine vestment . " I do not object to some of they , but I will not have they all . " " how must it be , then ? how accept a man 's part , and go on the stage dress as a woman ? this be a amateur affair , it be true -- a _vaudeville de pensionnat ;_ certain modification I might sanction , yet something you must have to announce you as of the nobler sex . " " and I will , ; but it must be arrange in my own way : nobody must meddle ; the thing must not be force upon I . just let I dress myself . " , without another word , take the costume from . , give it to I , and permit I to pass into the dressing - room . once alone , I grow calm , and collectedly go to work . Retain my woman 's garb without the slightest retrenchment , I merely assume , in addition , a little vest , a collar , and cravat , and a paletot of small dimension ; the whole be the costume of a brother of one of the pupil . have loose my hair out of its braid , make up the long back - hair close , and brush the front hair to one side , I take my hat and glove in my hand and come out . m . be wait , and so be the other . he look at I . " that may pass in a pensionnat , " he pronounce . then add , not unkindly , " courage , mon ami ! un peu de sangfroid -- un peu d'aplomb , , et tout ira bien . " sneer again , in she cold snaky manner . I be irritable , because excited , and I could not help turn upon she and say , that if she be not a lady and I a gentleman , I should feel disposed to call she out . " after the play , after the play , " say . " I will then divide my pair of pistol between you , and we will settle the dispute accord to form : it will only be the old quarrel of and . " but now the moment approach for the performance to commence . , set we before he , harangue we briefly , like a general addressing soldier about to charge . I do not know what he say , except that he recommend each to penetrate herself with a sense of she personal insignificance . know I think this advice superfluous for some of we . a bell tinkle . I and two more be usher on to the stage . the bell tinkle again . I have to speak the very first word . " do not look at the crowd , nor think of it , " whisper in my ear . " imagine yourself in the garret , act to the rat . " he vanish . the curtain draw up -- shrivell to the ceiling : the bright light , the long room , the gay throng , burst upon we . I think of the black - beetle , the old boxe , the worm -eaten bureau . I say my say badly ; but I say it . that first speech be the difficulty ; it reveal to I this fact , that it be not the crowd I fear so much as my own voice . foreigners and strangers , the crowd be nothing to I . do I think of they . when my tongue once get free , and my voice take its true pitch , and find its natural tone , I think of nothing but the personage I represent -- and of , who be listen , watch , prompt in the side - scene . by - and - by , feel the right power come -- the spring demand gush and rise inwardly -- I become sufficiently compose to notice my fellow - actor . some of they play very well ; especially , who have to coquette between two suitor , and manage admirably : in fact she be in she element . I observ that she once or twice throw a certain mark fondness and point partiality into she manner towards I -- the fop . with such emphasis and animation do she favour I
I , such glance do she dart out into the listening and applaud crowd , that to I -- who know she -- it presently become evident she be act _at_ some one ; and I follow she eye , she smile , she gesture , and ere long discover that she have at least singl out a handsome and distinguished aim for she shaft ; full in the path of those arrow -- taller than other spectator , and therefore more sure to receive they -- stood , in attitude quiet but intent , a well - know form -- that of . the spectacle seem somehow suggestive . there be language in 's look , though I can not tell what he say ; it animate I : I draw out of it a history ; I put my idea into the part I per for ; I throw it into my wooing of . in the " ours , " or sincere lover , I see . do I pity he , as erst ? no , I harden my heart , rivall and out - rivall he . I know myself but a fop , but where _he_ be outcast _i_ could please . now I know act as if wishful and resolute to win and conquer . seconde I ; between we we half - change the nature of the _role , gild it from top to toe . between the act , tell we he know not what possess we , and half expostulate . " C' est peut - etre plus beau que votre modele , " say he , " mais ce n'est pas juste . " I know not what possess I either ; but somehow , my longing be to eclipse the " ours , " _i.e ._ , . be tender ; how could I be otherwise than chivalric ? Retain the letter , I recklessly alte the spirit of the _role _. without heart , without interest , I could not play it at all . it must be play -- in go the yearned - for seasoning -- thus favour , I play it with relish . what I feel that night , and what I do , I no more expect to feel and do , than to be lift in a trance to the seventh heaven . cold , reluctant , apprehensive , I have accept a part to please another : ere long , war , become interested , take courage , I act to please myself . yet the next day , when I think it over , I quite disapprove of these amateur performances ; and though glad that I have oblige , and try my own strength for once , I take a firm resolution , never to be draw into a similar affair . a keen relish for dramatic expression have reveal itself as part of my nature ; to cherish and exercise this new - found faculty might gift I with a world of delight , but it would not do for a mere looker - on at life : the strength and long must be put by ; and I put they by , and fasten they in with the lock of a resolution which neither nor have since pick . no sooner be the play over , and _well_ over , than the choleric and arbitrary undergo a metamorphosis . he hour of managerial responsibility past , he at once laid aside he magisterial austerity ; in a moment he stand amongst we , vivacious , kind , and social , shook hand with we all round , thanke we separately , and announce he determination that each of we should in turn be he partner in the come ball . on he claim my promise , I tell he I do not dance . " for once I must , " be the answer ; and if I have not slip aside and keep out of he way , he would have compelle I to this second performance . but I have act enough for one evening ; it be time I retire into myself and my ordinary life . my dun - colou dress do well enough under a paletot on the stage , but would not suit a waltz or a quadrille . withdraw to a quiet nook , whence unobserve I could observe -- the ball , its splendour and its pleasure , pass before I as a spectacle . again be the belle , the fairest and the gayest present ; she be select to open the ball : very lovely she look , very gracefully she dance , very joyously she smile . such scene be she triumph -- she be the child of pleasure . work or suffering find she listless and deject , powerless and repin ; but gaiety expand she butterfly 's wing , light up they gold - dust and bright spot , make she flash like a gem , and flush like a flower . at all ordinary diet and plain beverage she would pout ; but she feed on creams and ex like a humming - bird on honey - paste : sweet wine be she element , and sweet cake she daily bread . liv she full life in a ball - room ; elsewhere she droop dispirit . think not , reader , that she thus bloom and sparkle for the mere sake of , she partner , or that she lavish she best graces that night for the edification of she companion only , or for that of the parent and grand - parent , who fill the carre , and line the ball - room ; under circumstance so insipid and limit , with motives so chilly and vapid , would scarce have deign to walk one quadrille , and weariness and
and fretfulness would have replace animation and good - humour , but she know of a leaven in the otherwise heavy festal mass which light the whole ; she taste a condiment which give it zest ; she perceive reason justify the display of she choicest attraction . in the ball - room , indeed , not a single male spectator be to be see who be not marry and a father -- m . accept -- that gentleman , too , be the sole creature of he sex permit to lead out a pupil to the dance ; and this exceptional part be allow he , partly as a matter of old - establish custom ( for he be a kinsman of 's , and high in she confidence ) , partly because he would always have he own way and do as he please , and partly because -- wilful , passionate , partial , as he might be -- he be the soul of honour , and might be trust with a regiment of the fairest and purest ; in perfect security that under he leadership they would come to no harm . many of the girl -- it may be note in parenthesis -- be not pure-mind at all , very much otherwise ; but they no more dare betray they natural coarseness in 's presence , than they dare tread purposely on he corn , laugh in he face during a stormy apostrophe , or speak above they breath while some crisis of irritability be cover he human visage with the mask of a intelligent tiger . , then , might dance with whom he would -- and woe be to the interference which put he out of step . other there be admit as spectator -- with ( see ) reluctance , through prayer , by influence , under restriction , by special and difficult exercise of 's gracious good - nature , and whom she all the evening -- with she own personal surveillance -- keep far aloon at the remotest , drearest , coldest , darkest side of the carre -- a small , forlorn band of " jeune gen ; " these be all of the best family , grow - up son of mother present , and whose sister be pupil in the school . that whole evening be Madame on duty beside these " jeune gen " -- attentive to they as a mother , but strict with they as a dragon . there be a sort of cordon stretch before they , which they weary she with prayer to be permit to pass , and just to revive themselves by one dance with that " belle blonde , " or that " jolie brune , " or " cette jeune fille magnifique aux cheveux noirs comme le jais . " " Taisez - vous ! " Madame would reply , heroically and inexorably . " Vous ne passerez pas a moin que ce ne soit sur mon cadavre , et vous ne danserez qu'avec la nonnette du jardin " ( allud to the legend ) . and she majestically walk to and for along they disconsolate and impatient line , like a little Bonaparte in a mouse - colou silk gown . know something of the world ; know much of human nature . I do not think that another directress in would have da to admit a " jeune homme " within she wall ; but know that by grant such admission , on a occasion like the present , a bold stroke might be strike , and a great point gai . in the first place , the parent be make accomplice to the deed , for it be only through they mediation it be bring about . secondly : the admission of these rattlesnake , so fascinating and so dangerous , serve to draw out precisely in she strongest character -- that of a first - rate _surveillante . thirdly : they presence furnish a most piquant ingredient to the entertainment : the pupil know it , and see it , and the view of such golden apple shin afar off , animate they with a spirit no other circumstance could have kindle . the child 's pleasure spread to the parent ; life and mirth circulate quickly round the ball - room ; the " jeune gen " themselves , though restrain , be amuse : for never permit they to feel dull -- and thus 's fete annually ensure a success unknown to the fete of any other directress in the land . I observ that be at first permit to walk at large through the class : there be about he a manly , responsible look , that redeem he youth , and half - expiate he beauty ; but as soon as the ball begin , run up to he . " come , wolf ; come , " say she , laugh : " you wear sheep 's clothing , but you must quit the fold notwithstanding . come ; I have a fine menagerie of twenty here in the carre : let I place you amongst my collection . " " but first suffer I to have one dance with one pupil of my choice . " " have you the face to ask such a thing ? it be madness : it be impiety . Sortez , sortez , au plus vite . " she drive he before she , and soon have he enclose within the cordon . being , I suppose , tire with dancing , seek I out in my retreat . she throw herself on the bench beside I , and ( a demonstration I could very well have dispense with ) cast she arm round my neck . " ! ! " she cry in a somewhat sobbing voice , half hysterical . "
" what in the world be the matter ? " I drily say . " how do I look -- how do I look to - night ? " she demand . " as usual , " say I ; " preposterously vain . " " Caustic creature ! you never have a kind word for I ; but in spite of you , and all other envious detractor , I know I be beautiful ; I feel it , I see it -- for there be a great look - glass in the dressing - room , where I can view my shape from head to foot . will you go with I now , and let we two stand before it ? " " I will , : you shall be humour even to the top of you bent . " the dressing - room be very near , and we step in . put she arm through mine , she draw I to the mirror . without resistance remonstrance , or remark , I stand and let she self - love have its feast and triumph : curiious to see how much it could swallow -- whether it be possible it could feed to satiety -- whether any whisper of consideration for other could penetrate she heart , and moderate its vainglorious exultation . not at all . she turn I and herself round ; she view we both on all side ; she smile , she wave she curl , she retouch she sash , she spread she dress , and finally , let go my arm , and curtsey with mock respect , she say : " I would not be you for a kingdom . " the remark be too _naive to rouse anger ; I merely say : " very good . " " and what would _you_ give to be I ? " she inquire . " not a bad sixpence -- strange as it may sound , " I reply . " you be but a poor creature . " " you do not think so in you heart . " " no ; for in my heart you have not the outline of a place : I only occasionally turn you over in my brain . " " well , but , " say she , in a expostulatory tone , " just listen to the difference of we position , and then see how happy be I , and how miserable be you . " " go on ; I listen . " " in the first place : I be the daughter of a gentleman of family , and though my father be not rich , I have expectation from a uncle . then , I be just eighteen , the finest age possible . I have have a continental education , and though I can not spell , I have abundant accomplishment . I _am_ pretty ; _you_ can not deny that ; I may have as many admirer as I choose . this very night I have be break the heart of two gentleman , and it be the dying look I have from one of they just now , which put I in such spirit . I do so like to watch they turn red and pale , and scowl and dart fiery glance at each other , and languishing one at I . there be _me _--happy Me ; now for you , poor soul ! " I suppose you be nobody be daughter , since you take care of little child when you first come to : you have no relation ; you can not call yourself young at twenty - three ; you have no attractive accomplishment -- no beauty . as to admirer , you hardly know what they be ; you can not even talk on the subject : you sit dumb when the other teacher quote they conquest . I believe you never be in love , and never will be : you do not know the feeling , and so much the better , for though you might have you own heart break , no living heart will you ever break . be not it all true ? " " a good deal of it be true as gospel , and shrewd beside . there must be good in you , , to speak so honestly ; that snake , , could not utter what you have utter . , , hapless as I be , accord to you show , sixpence I would not give to purchase you , body and soul . " " just because I be not clever , and that be all _you_ think of . nobody in the world but you care for cleverness . " " on the contrary , I consider you _are_ clever , in you way -- very smart indeed . but you be talk of breaking heart -- that edify amusement into the merit of which I do not quite enter ; pray on whom do you vanity lead you to think you have do execution to - night ? " she approach she lip to my ear -- " and be both here ? " she whisper . " oh ! they be ? I should like to see they . " " there be a dear creature ! you curiosity be rouse at last . follow I , I will point they out . " she proudly lead the way --" but you can not see they well from the class , " say she , turn , " Madame keep they too far off . let we cross the garden , enter by the corridor , and get close to they behind : we shall be scold if we be see , but never mind . " for once , I do not mind .
. through the garden we go -- penetrate into the corridor by a quiet private entrance , and approach the _carre , yet keep in the corridor shade , command a near view of the band of " jeune gen . " I believe I could have pick out the conquer even undirect . he be a straight - nose , very correct -featured little dandy . I say _little_ dandy , though he be not beneath the middle standard in stature ; but he lineament be small , and so be he hand and foot ; and he be pretty and smooth , and as trim as a doll : so nicly dress , so nicely curled , so boot and glove and cravate -- he be charme indeed . I say so . " what , a dear personage ! " cry I , and commend 's taste warmly ; and ask she what she think might have do with the precious fragment of that heart she have break -- whether he keep they in a scent - vial , and conserve they in otto of rose ? I observ , too , with deep rapture of approbation , that the colonel 's hand be scarce larger than 's own , and suggest that this circumstance might be convenient , as he could wear she glove at a pinch . on he dear curl , I tell she I doate : and as to he low , Grecian brow , and exquisite classic headpiece , I confess I have no language to do such perfection justice . " and if he be you lover ? " suggest the cruelly exultant . " oh ! heaven , what bliss ! " say I ; " but do not be inhuman , : to put such thought into my head be like show poor outcast Cain a far , glimpse of paradise . " " you like he , then ? " " as I like sweet , and jam , and comfit , and conservatory flower . " admire my taste , for all these thing be she adoration ; she could then readily credit that they be mine too . " now for , " I go on . I own I feel still more curious to see he than he rival ; but be absorb in the latter . " be admit here to - night , " say she , " through the influence of he aunt , ; and now , have see he , can you not understand why I have be in such spirit all the evening , and act so well , and dance with such life , and why I be now happy as a queen ? ! ! it be such good fun to glance first at he and then at the other , and madden they both . " " but that other -- where be he ? show I . " " I do not like . " " why not ? " " I be asham of he . " " for what reason ? " " because -- because " ( in a whisper ) " he have such -- such whisker , orange -- red -- there now ! " " the murder be out , " I subjoin . " never mind , show he all the same ; I engage not to faint . " she look round . just then a english voice speak behind she and I . " you be both stand in a dratch ; you must leave this corridor . " " there be no dratch , , " say I , turn . " she take cold so easily , " he pursue , look at with extreme kindness . " she be delicate ; she must be care for : fetch she a shawl . " " permit I to judge for myself , " say , with yohauteu . " I want no shawl . " " you dress be thin , you have be dance , you be heat . " " always preach , " retort she ; " always coddl and admonish . " the answer would have give do not come ; that he heart be hurt become evident in he eye ; darken , and sadden , and pain , he turn a little aside , but be patient . I know where there be plenty of shawl near at hand ; I run and fetch one . " she shall wear this , if I have strength to make she , " say I , fold it well round she muslin dress , cover carefully she neck and she arm . " be that Isidore ? " I ask , in a somewhat fierce whisper . she push up she lip , smile , and nod . " be _that_ ? " I repeat , give she a shake : I could have give she a dozen . " C' est lui-meme , " say she . " how coarse he be , compare with the - ! and then -- oh ciel !-- the whisker ! " now pass on . " the - ! " I echo . " the doll -- the puppet -- the manikin -- the poor inferior creature ! a mere lackey for he valet , he foot - boy ! be it possible that fine generous gentleman -- handsome as a vision -- offer you he honourable hand and gallant heart , and promise to protect you flimsy person and feckless mind through the storm and struggle of life -- and you hang back -- you scorn , you s , you torture he ! have you power to do this ? who give you that power ? where be it ? do it lie all in you beauty -- you pink and
and white complexion , and you yellow hair ? do this bind he soul at you foot , and bend he neck under you yoke ? do this purchase for you he affection , he tenderness , he thought , he hope , he interest , he noble , cordial love -- and will you not have it ? do you scorn it ? you be only dissembl : you be not in earnest : you love he ; you long for he ; but you trifle with he heart to make he more surely yours ? " " Bah ! how you run on ! I do not understand half you have say . " I have get she out into the garden ere this . I now set she down on a seat and tell she she should not stir till she have avow which she mean in the end to accept -- the man or the monkey . " you call the man , " say she , " be bourgeois , sandy - hair , and answer to the name of !-- cela suffit : je and 'en veux pa . be a gentleman of excellent connections , perfect manners , sweet appearance , with pale interesting face , and hair and eye like a italian . then too he be the most delightful company possible -- a man quite in my way ; not sensible and serious like the other ; but one with whom I can talk on equal term -- who do not plague and bear , and harass I with depth , and height , and passion , and talents for which I have no taste . there now . do not hold I so fast . " I slacken my grasp , and she dart off . I do not care to pursue she . somehow I could not avoid return once more in the direction of the corridor to get another glimpse of ; but I meet he on the garden - step , stand where the light from a window fell broad . he well - proportion figure be not to be mistaken , for I doubt whether there be another in that assemblage he equal . he carry he hat in he hand ; he uncovered head , he face and fine brow be most handsome and manly . _His feature be not delicate , not slight like those of a woman , nor be they cold , frivolous , and feeble ; though well cut , they be not so chisell , so fritter away , as to lose in expression or significance what they gain in unmeaning symmetry . much feeling speak in they at time , and more sat silent in he eye . such at least be my thought of he : to I he seem all this . a inexpressible sense of occupy I , as I look at this man , and reflecte that _he could not be slighte . it be , not my intention to approach or address he in the garden , we term of acquaintance not warrant such a step ; I have only meant to view he in the crowd -- myself unsee : come upon he thus alone , I withdraw . but he be look out for I , or rather for she who have be with I : therefore he descende the step , and follow I down the alley . " you know ? I have often wish to ask whether you know she , " say he . " yes : I know she . " " intimately ? " " quite as intimately as I wish . " " what have you do with she now ? " " be I she keeper ? " I feel inclin to ask ; but I simply answer , " I have shake she well , and would have shake she better , but she escape out of my hand and run away . " " would you favour I , " he ask , " by watch over she this one evening , and observe that she do nothing imprudent -- do not , for instance , run out into the night - air immediately after dancing ? " " I may , perhaps , look after she a little ; since you wish it ; but she like she own way too well to submit readily to control . " " she be so young , so thoroughly artless , " say he . " to I she be a enigma , " I respond . " be she ? " he ask -- much interested . " how ? " " it would be difficult to say how -- difficult , at least , to tell _you_ how . " " and why I ? " " I wonder she be not better please that you be so much she friend . " " but she have not the slightest idea how much I _am_ she friend . that be precisely the point I can not teach she . may I inquire do she ever speak of I to you ? " " under the name of ' ' she have talk about you often ; but I must add that it be only within the last ten minute I have discover that you and ' ' be identical . it be only , , within that brief space of time I have learn that be the person , under this roof , in whom you have long be interested -- that she be the magnet which attract you to the , that for she sake you venture into this garden , and seek out casket drop by rival . " " you know all ? " " I know so much . " " for more than a year I have
have be accustom to meet she in society . , she friend , be a acquaintance of mine ; thus I see she every . but you observ that under the name of ' ' she often speak of I : may I -- without invite you to a breach of confidence -- inquire what be the tone , what the feeling of she remark ? I feel somewhat anxious to know , be a little torment with uncertainty as to how I stand with she . " " oh , she varie : she shift and change like the wind . " " still , you can gather some general idea --? " " I can , " think I , " but it would not do to communicate that general idea to you . besides , if I say she do not love you , I know you would not believe I . " " you be silent , " he pursue . " I suppose you have no good news to impart . no matter . if she feel for I positive coldness and aversion , it be a sign I do not deserve she . " " do you doubt yourself ? do you consider yourself the inferior of ? " " I love far more than love any human being , and would care for and guard she better than he . respecte , I fear she be under a illusion ; the man 's character be know to I , all he antecedent , all he scrap . he be not worthy of you beautiful young friend . " " my ' beautiful young friend ' ought to know that , and to know or feel who be worthy of she , " say I . " if she beauty or she brain will not serve she so far , she merit the sharp lesson of experience . " " be you not a little severe ? " " I be excessively severe -- more severe than I choose to show you . you should hear the stricture with which I favour my ' beautiful young friend , ' only that you would be unutterably shocked at my want of tender considerateness for she delicate nature . " " she be so lovely , one can not but be love towards she . you -- every woman older than herself , must feel for such a simple , innocent , girlish fairy a sort of motherly or elder - sisterly fondness . graceful angel ! do not you heart yearn towards she when she pour into you ear she pure , childlike confidence ? how you be privileg ! " and he sigh . " I cut short these confidence somewhat abruptly now and then , " say I . " but excuse I , , may I change the theme for one instant ? what a - like person be that ! what a nose on he face -- perfect ! one in putty or clay , you could not make a better or straighter , or neater ; and then , such classic lip and ching -- and he bearing -- sublime . " " be a unutterable puppy , besides be a very white - livere hero . " " you , , and every man of a less - refin mould than he , must feel for he a sort of admiring affection , such as and the coarser deity may be suppose to have borne the young , graceful . " " a unprincipled , gambl little jackanape ! " say curtly , " whom , with one hand , I could lift up by the waistband any day , and lay low in the kennel if I like . " " the sweet seraph ! " say I . " what a cruel idea ! be you not a little severe , ? " and now I pause . for the second time that night I be go beyond myself -- venture out of what I look on as my natural habit -- speak in a unpremeditated , impulsive strain , which start I strangely when I halt to reflect . on rise that morning , have I anticipat that before night I should have act the part of a gay lover in a vaudeville ; and a hour after , frankly discuss with the question of he hapless suit , and rally he on he illusion ? I have no more presaged such feat than I have look forward to a ascent in a balloon , or a voyage to Cape . the Doctor and I , have pace down the walk , be now return ; the reflex from the window again light he face : he smile , but he eye be melancholy . how I wish that he could feel heart 's - ease ! how I grieve that he brood over pain , and pain from such a cause ! he , with he great advantage , _he_ to live in vain ! I do not then know that the pensiveness of reverse be the best phase for some mind ; nor do I reflect that some herb , " though scentless when entire , yield fragrance when they be bruise . " " do not be sorrowful , do not grieve , " I break out . " if there be in one spark of worthiness of you affection , she will -- she _must feel devotion in return . be cheerful , be hopeful , . who should hope , if not you ? " in return for this speech I get -- what , it must be suppose , I deserv -- a look of surprise : I think also of some disapprobation . we part , and I go into the house very chill . the clock struck and the
the bell toll midnight ; people be leave fast : the fete be over ; the lamps be fad . in another hour all the dwelling - house , and all the pensionnat , be dark and hushed . I too be in bed , but not asleep . to I it be not easy to sleep after a day of such excitement . . the long vacation . follow 's fete , with its three preceding week of relaxation , its brief twelve hour ' burst of hilarity and dissipation , and its one subsequent day of utter languor , come a period of reaction ; two month of real application , of close , hard study . these two month , be the last of the " annee scolaire , " be indeed the only genuine work month in the year . to they be procrastinate -- into they concentrate , alike by professor , mistress , and pupil -- the main burden of preparation for the examination precede the distribution of prize . candidate for reward have then to work in good earnest ; master and teacher have to set they shoulders to the wheel , to urge on the backward , and diligently ay and train the more promising . a showy demonstration -- a tell exhibition --must be get up for public view , and all means be fair to this end . I scarcely note how the other teacher go to work ; I have my own business to mind ; and _my task be not the least onerous , be to imbue some ninety set of brain with a due tincture of what they consider a most complicated and difficult science , that of the language ; and to drill ninety tongue in what , for they , be a almost impossible pronunciation -- the lisping and hiss dental of the Isle . the examination - day arrive . awful day ! prepare for with anxious care , dress for with silent despatch -- nothing vaporous or flutter now -- no white gauze or azure streamer ; the grave , close , compact be the order of the toilette . it seem to I that I be this day , especially doom -- the main burden and trial fal on I alone of all the female teacher . the other be not expect to examine in the study they teach ; the professor of literature , , take upon himself this duty . he , this school autocrat , gather all and sundry rein into the hollow of he one hand ; he irefully reject any colleague ; he would not have help . Madame herself , who evidently rather wish to undertake the examination in geography -- she favourite study , which she teach well -- be force to succumb , and be subordinate to she despotic kinsman 's direction . the whole staff of instructor , male and female , he set aside , and stand on the examiner 's estrade alone . it irk he that he be force to make one exception to this rule . he could not manage : he be oblige to leave that branch of education in the english teacher 's hand ; which he do , not without a flash of naive jealousy . a constant crusade against the " amour-propre " of every human being but himself , be the crotchet of this able , but fiery and grasp little man . he have a strong relish for public representation in he own person , but a extreme abhorrence of the like display in any other . he quell , he keep down when he could ; and when he could not , he fume like a bottled storm . on the evening precede the examination - day , I be walk in the garden , as be the other teacher and all the boarder . join I in the " allee defendue ; " he cigar be at he lip ; he paletot -- a most characteristic garment of no particular shape -- hang dark and menace ; the tassel of he bonnet grec sternly shadowed he leave temple ; he black whisker curl like those of a wrathful cat ; he blue eye have a cloud in its glitter . " Ainsi , " he begin , abruptly fronte and arrest I , " vous allez troner comme une reine ; demain -- troner a m cote ? doute vous savourez d'avance les delice de l'autorite . crois voir en je ne sai quoi de rayonnante , petite ambitieuse ! " now the fact be , he happen to be entirely mistaken . I do not -- could not -- estimate the admiration or the good opinion of tomorrow 's audience at the same rate he do . have that audience number as many personal friend and acquaintance for I as for he , I know not how it might have be : I speak of the case as it stand . on I school - triumph shed but a cold lustre . I have wonder -- and I wonder now -- how it be that for he they seem to shine as with hearth - warmth and hearth - glow . _o care for they perhaps too much ; , probably , too little . however , I have my own fancie as well as he . I like , for instance , to see ; it light up he nature , and wake he spirit ; it throw all sort of queer light and shadows over he dun face , and into he violet - azure eye ( he use to say that he black hair and blue eye be " une de se beaute " ) . there be a relish in he anger ; it be artless , earnest , quite unreasonable , but never hypocritical . I
I utter no disclaimer then of the complacency he attribute to I ; I merely ask where the examination come in -- whether at the commencement or close of the day ? " I hesitate , " say he , " whether at the very beginning , before many person be come , and when you aspiring nature will not be gratify by a large audience , or quite at the close , when everybody be tired , and only a jaded and worn - out attention will be at you service . " " que vous ete dur , ! " I say , affect dejection . " one ought to be ' dur ' with you . you be one of those being who must be _keep down _. I know you ! I know you ! other people in this house see you pass , and think that a colourless shadow have go by . as for I , I scrutinize you face once , and it suffice . " " you be satisfy that you understand I ? " without answer directly , he go on , " be you not gratify when you succeed in that vaudeville ? I watch you and see a passionate ardour for triumph in you physiognomy . what fire shoot into the glance ! not mere light , but flame : je I tien pour averti. " " what feel I have on that occasion , Monsieur -- and pardon I , if I say , you immensely exaggerate both its quality and quantity -- be quite abstract . I do not care for the vaudeville . I hate the part you assign I . I have not the slightest sympathy with the audience below the stage . they be good people , doubtless , but do I know they ? be they anything to I ? can I care for be bring before they view again to - morrow ? will the examination be anything but a task to I -- a task I wish well over ? " " shall I take it out of you hand ? " " with all my heart ; if you do not fear failure . " " but I should fail . I only know three phrase of , and a few word : par exemple , , mone , de stare -- est - ce bien dit ? my opinion be that it would be better to give up the thing altogether : to have no English examination , eh ? " " if Madame consent , I consent . " " Heartily ? " " very heartily . " he smoke he cigar in silence . he turn suddenly . " Donnez - moi la main , " say he , and the spite and jealousy melt out of he face , and a generous kindliness shone there instead . " come , we will not be rival , we will be friend , " he pursue . " the examination shall take place , and I will choose a good moment ; and instead of vexing and hindering , as I feel half - inclin ten minute ago -- for I have my malevolent mood : I always have from childhood -- I will aid you sincerely . after all , you be solitary and a stranger , and have you way to make and you bread to earn ; it may be well that you should become known . we will be friend : do you agree ? " " out of my heart , . I be glad of a friend . I like that better than a triumph . " " ? " say he , and turn away and leave the alley . the examination pass over well ; . be as good as he word , and do he best to make my part easy . the next day come the distribution of prize ; that also pass ; the school break up ; the pupil go home , and now begin the long vacation . that vacation ! shall I ever forget it ? I think not . go , the first day of the holiday , to join she child at the sea -side ; all the three teacher have parent or friend with whom they take refuge ; every professor quit the city ; some go to , some to - ; . set forth on a pilgrimage to ; the house be leave quite empty , but for I , a servant , and a poor deform and imbecile pupil , a sort of cretin , whom she stepmother in a distant province would not allow to return home . my heart almost die within I ; miserable longing strain its chord . how long be the day ! how silent , how lifeless ! how vast and void seem the desolate premise ! how gloomy the forsaken garden -- grey now with the dust of a town summer depart . look forward at the commencement of those eight week , I hardly know how I be to live to the end . my spirit have long be gradually sink ; now that the prop of employment be withdraw , they go down fast . even to look forward be not to hope : the dumb future speak no comfort , offer no promise , give no inducement to bear present evil in reliance on future good . a sorrowful indifference to existence often presse on I -- a despairing resignation to reach betimes the end of all thing earthly . ! when I have full leisure to look on life as life must be look on by such as I , I find it but a hopeless desert : tawny sand , with no green field , no palm - tree , no well in view . the hope
hope which be dear to , which bear it up and lead it on , I know not and da not know . if they knock at my heart sometimes , a inhospitable bar to admission must be inwardly draw . when they turn away thus reject , tear sad enough sometimes flow : but it could not be help : I da not give such guest lod . so mortally do I fear the sin and weakness of presumption . religious reader , you will preach to I a long sermon about what I have just write , and so will you , moralist : and you , stern sage : you , stoic , will fry ; you , cynic , sneer ; you , epicure , laugh . well , each and all , take it you own way . I accept the sermon , frown , sneer , and laugh ; perhaps you be all right : and perhaps , circumstance like I , you would have be , like I , wrong . the first month be , indeed , a long , black , heavy month to I . the cretin do not seem unhappy . I do my best to feed she well and keep she warm , and she only ask food and sunshine , or when that lack , fire . she weak faculty approve of inertion : she brain , she eye , she ear , she heart sleep content ; they could not wake to work , so lethargy be they paradise . three week of that vacation be hot , fair , and dry , but the fourth and fifth be tempestuous and wet . I do not know why that change in the atmosphere make a cruel impression on I , why the raging storm and beat rain crush I with a deadlier paralysis than I have experience while the air have remain serene ; but so it be ; and my nervous system could hardly support what it have for many day and night to undergo in that huge empty house . how I use to pray to for consolation and support ! with what dread force the conviction would grasp I that be my permanent foe , never to be conciliate . I do not , in my heart , arraign the mercy or justice of for this ; I conclude it to be a part of he great plan that some must deeply suffer while they live , and I thrill in the certainty that of this number , I be one . it be some relief when a aunt of the cretin , a kind old woman , come one day , and take away my strange , deform companion . the hapless creature have be at time a heavy charge ; I could not take she out beyond the garden , and I could not leave she a minute alone : for she poor mind , like she body , be warp : its propensity be to evil . a vague bend to mischief , a aimless malevolence , make constant vigilance indispensable . as she very rarely speak , and would sit for hour together mo and mow , and distort she feature with indescribable grimace , it be more like be prison with some strange tameless animal , than associate with a human being . then there be personal attention to be render which require the nerve of a hospital nurse ; my resolution be so try , it sometimes fall dead - sick . these duty should not have fall on I ; a servant , now absent , have render they hithertoo , and in the hurry of holiday departure , no substitute to fill this office have be provide . this tax and trial be by no means the least I have know in life . still , menial and distasteful as they be , my mental pain be far more wasting and wear . attendance on the cretin deprive I often of the power and inclination to swallow a meal , and send I faint to the fresh air , and the well or fountain in the court ; but this duty never wrng my heart , or brim my eye , or scald my cheek with tear hot as molten metal . the cretin be go , I be free to walk out . at first I lack courage to venture very far from the , but by degree I seek the city gate , and pass they , and then go wander away far along chaussee , through field , beyond cemetery , and , beyond farmstead , to lane and little wood , and I know not where . a goad thrust I on , a fever forbade I to rest ; a want of companionship maintain in my soul the craving of a most deadly famine . I often walk all day , through the burn noon and the arid afternoon , and the dusk evening , and come back with moonrise . while wandere in solitude , I would sometimes picture the present probable position of other , my acquaintance . there be Madame Beck at a cheerful watering - place with she child , she mother , and a whole troop of friend who have seek the same scene of relaxation . be at , with she relatives ; the other teacher be at they home . there be , whom certain of she connection have carry on a pleasant tour southward . seem to I the happiest . she be on the route of beautiful scenery ; these sun shone for she on fertile plain , where harvest and vintage matur under they mellow beam . these gold and crystal moons rise on she vision over blue horizon wav in mount line . but all this be nothing ; I
I too feel those autumn suns and see those harvest moon , and I almost wish to be cover in with earth and turf , deep out of they influence ; for I could not live in they light , nor make they comrade , nor yield they affection . but have a kind of spirit with she , empower to give constant strength and comfort , to gladden daylight and embalm darkness ; the best of the good genii that guard humanity curtain she with he wing , and canopy she head with he bending form . by true love be follow : never could she be alone . be she insensible to this presence ? it seem to I impossible : I could not realize such deadness . I imagine she grateful in secret , love now with reserve ; but purpose one day to show how much she love : I picture she faithful hero half conscious of she coy fondness , and comforte by that consciousness : I conceive a electric chord of sympathy between they , a fine chain of mutual understanding , sustain union through a separation of a hundred leagu -- carry , across mound and hollow , communication by prayer and wish . gradually become with I a sort of heroine . one day , perceive this grow illusion , I say , " I really believe my nerve be get overstretch : my mind have suffer somewhat too much a malady be grow upon it -- what shall I do ? how shall I keep well ? " indeed there be no way to keep well under the circumstance . at last a day and night of peculiarly agonizing depression be succeed by physical illness , I take perforce to my bed . about this time the indian summer close and the equinoctial storm begin ; and for nine dark and wet day , of which the hour rush on all turbulent , deaf , dishevell -- bewilder with sounding hurricane -- I lay in a strange fever of the nerve and blood . sleep go quite away . I use to rise in the night , look round for she , beseech she earnestly to return . a rattle of the window , a cry of the blast only reply --- sleep never come ! I err . she come once , but in anger . impatient of my importunity she brotch with she a avenging dream . by the clock of . , that dream remain scarce fifteen minute -- a brief space , but suffice to wr my whole frame with unknown anguish ; to confer a nameless experience that have the hue , the mien , the terror , the very tone of a visitation from eternity . between twelve and one that night a cup be force to my lip , black , strong , strange , draw from no well , but fill up seethe from a bottomless and boundless sea . , brew in temporal or calculable measure , and mix for mortal lip , taste not as this suffering taste . have drank and woke , I think all be over : the end come and past by . Trembl fearfully -- as consciousness return -- ready to cry out on some fellow - creature to help I , only that I know no fellow - creature be near enough to catch the wild summon -- in she far distant attic could not hear -- I rise on my knee in bed . some fearful hour go over I : indescribably be I tear , rack and oppress in mind . Amidst the horror of that dream I think the worst lay here . Methotch the well - love dead , who have love _me_ well in life , meet I elsewhere , alienate : gall be my inmost spirit with a unutterable sense of despair about the future . motive there be none why I should try to recover or wish to live ; and yet quite unendurable be the pitiless and haughty voice in which challenge I to engage he unknown terror . when I try to pray I could only utter these word : " from my youth up thy terrors have I suffer with a troubled mind . " most true be it . on bring I my tea next morning urge I to call in a doctor . I would not : I think no doctor could cure I . one evening -- and I be not delirious : I be in my sane mind , I get up -- I dress myself , weak and shake . the solitude and the stillness of the long dormitory could not be borne any longer ; the ghastly white bed be turn into spectre -- the coronal of each become a death 's - head , huge and sun - bleach -- dead dream of a elder world and mightier race lay freeze in they wide gaping eyehole . that eve more firmly than ever fasten into my soul the conviction that be of stone , and hope a false idol -- blind , bloodless , and of granite core . I feel , too , that the trial have appoint I be gain its climax , and must now be turn by my own hand , hot , feeble , trembl as they be . it raine still , and blow ; but with more clemency , I think , than it have pour and rage all day . twilight be fall , and I deem its influence pitiful ; from the lattice I see come night - cloud trailing low like banner droop . it seem to I that at this hour there be affection and sorrow in above for all pain suffer on earth beneath ; the weight of my dreadful dream become alleviated -- that insufferable thought
thought of be no more loved -- no more owned , half - yield to hope of the contrary -- I be sure this hope would shine clearer if I get out from under this house - roof , which be crush as the slab of a tomb , and go outside the city to a certain quiet hill , a long way distant in the field . cover with a cloak ( I could not be delirious , for I have sense and recollection to put on warm clothing ) , forth I set . the bell of a church arrest I in passing ; they seem to call I in to the _salut , and I go in . any solemn rite , any spectacle of sincere worship , any opening for appeal to be as welcome to I then as bread to one in extremity of want . I knelt down with other on the stone pavement . it be a old solemn church , it be pervad gloom not gild but purple by light she through stain glass . few worshipper be assemble , and , the _salut over , half of they depart . I discover soon that those leave remain to confess . I do not stir . carefully every door of the church be shut ; a holy quiet sank upon , and a solemn shade gather about we . after a space , breathless and spend in prayer , a penitent approach the confessional . I watch . she whisper she avowal ; she shrift be whisper back ; she return consol . another went , and another . a pale lady , knee near I , say in a low , kind voice :--" go you now , I be not quite prepare . " Mechanically obedient , I rise and go . I know what I be about ; my mind have run over the intent with lightning - speed . to take this step could not make I more wretch than I be ; it might soothe I . the priest within the confessional never turn he eye to regard I ; he only quietly inclin he ear to my lip . he might be a good man , but this duty have become to he a sort of form : he go through it with the phlegm of custom . I hesitate ; of the formula of confession I be ignorant : instead of commencing , then , with the prelude usual , I say :-- " pere , je tsuis Protestante . " he directly turn . he be not a native priest : of that class , the cast of physiognomy be , almost invariably , grovell : I see by he profile and brow he be a Frenchman ; though grey and advanced in year , he do not , I think , lack feeling or intelligence . he inquire , not unkindly , why , be a protestant , I come to he ? I say I be perish for a word of advice or a accent of comfort . I have be live for some week quite alone ; I have be ill ; I have a pressure of affliction on my mind of which it would hardly any longer endure the weight . " be it a sin , a crime ? " he inquire , somewhat start . I reassure he on this point , and , as well as I could , I show he the mere outline of my experience . he look thoughtful , surprise , puzzl . " you take I unaware , " say he . " I have not have such a case as yours before : ordinarily we know we routine , and be prepare ; but this make a great break in the common course of confession . I be hardly furnish with counsel fit the circumstance . " of course , I have not expect he would be ; but the mere relief of communication in a ear which be human and sentient , yet consecrate -- the mere pour out of some portion of long accumulating , long pent - up pain into a vessel whence it could not be again diffuse -- have do I good . I be already solace . " must I go , father ? " I ask of he as he sit silent . " my daughter , " he say kindly -- and I be sure he be a kind man : he have a compassionate eye -- " for the present you have better go : but I assure you you word have strike I . , like other thing , be apt to become formal and trivial with habit . you have come and pour you heart out ; a thing seldom do . I would fain think you case over , and take it with I to my oratory . be you of we faith I should know what to say -- a mind so toss can find repose but in the bosom of retreat , and the punctual practice of piety . the world , it be well know , have no satisfaction for that class of nature . Holy man have bidden penitent like you to hasten they path upward by penance , self - denial , and difficult good work . Tears be give they here for meat and drink -- bread of affliction and water of affliction -- they recompence come hereafter . it be my own conviction that these impression under which you be smarting be messenger from to bring you back to the true Church . you be make for we faith : depend upon it we faith alone could heal and help you -- be altogether too dry , cold , prosaic for you . the further I look into this matter , the more
more plainly I see it be entirely out of the common order of thing . on no account would I lose sight of you . go , my daughter , for the present ; but return to I again . " I rise and thanke he . I be withdraw when he sign I to return . " you must not come to this church , " say he : " I see you be ill , and this church be too cold ; you must come to my house : I live ---- " ( and he give I he address ) . " be there to - morrow morning at ten . " in reply to this appointment , I only bow ; and pull down my veil , and gather round I my cloak , I glide away . do I , do you suppose , reader , contemplate venturing again within that worthy priest 's reach ? as soon should I have think of walking into a Babylonish furnace . that priest have arm which could influence I : he be naturally kind , with a sentimental french kindness , to whose softness I know myself not wholly impervious . without respecte some sort of affection , there be hardly any sort have a fibre of root in reality , which I could rely on my force wholly to withstand . have I go to he , he would have show I all that be tender , and comforting , and gentle , in the honest Popish superstition . then he would have try to kindle , blow and stir up in I the zeal of good work . I know not how it would all have end . we all think ourselves strong in some point ; we all know ourselves weak in many ; the probability be that have I visit 10 , Rue des , at the hour and day appoint , I might just now , instead of write this heretic narrative , be count my bead in the cell of a certain Carmelite convent on the of , in . there be something of about that benign old priest ; and whatever most of he breth may be , and whatever I may think of he Church and creed ( and I like neither ) , of himself I must ever retain a grateful recollection . he be kind when I need kindness ; he do I good . May heaven bless he ! twilight have pass into night , and the lamps be light in the street ere I issue from that sombre church . to turn back be now become possible to I ; the wild long to breathe this wind on the little hill far without the city wall have cease to be a imperative impulse , and be soften into a wish with which could cope : she put it down , and I turn , as I think , to the . but I have become involved in a part of the city with which I be not familiar ; it be the old part , and full of narrow street of picturesque , ancient , and moulder house . I be much too weak to be very collect , and I be still too careless of my own welfare and safety to be cautious ; I grow embarrassed ; I get immeshed in a network of turn unknown . I be lose and have no resolution to ask guidance of any passenger . if the storm have lull a little at sunset , it make up now for lost time . strong and horizontal thunder the current of the wind from north - west to south - east ; it bring rain like spray , and sometimes a sharp hail , like shot : it be cold and pierce I to the vital . I bend my head to meet it , but it beat I back . my heart do not fail at all in this conflict ; I only wish that I have wing and could ascend the gale , spread and repose my pinion on its strength , career in its course , sweep where it sweep . while wish this , I suddenly feel colder where before I be cold , and more powerless where before I be weak . I try to reach the porch of a great building near , but the mass of frontage and the giant spire turn black and vanish from my eyes . instead of sinke on the step as I intend , I seem to pitch headlong down a abyss . I remember no more . . Auld . where my soul go during that swoon I can not tell . whatever she see , or wherever she travel in she trance on that strange night she keep she own secret ; never whisper a word to , and baffle imagination by a indissoluble silence . she may have go upward , and come in sight of she eternal home , hope for leave to rest now , and deem that she painful union with matter be at last dissolved . while she so deem , a angel may have warn she away from heaven 's threshold , and , guide she weeping down , have bound she , once more , all shuddering and unwilling , to that poor frame , cold and waste , of whose companionship she be grow more than weary . I know she re-enter she prison with pain , with reluctance , with a moan and a long shiver . the divorced mate , and , be hard to re-unite : they greet each other , not in a embrace , but a rack sort of struggle . the return sense of sight come upon I , red , as if it swbe in blood ; suspend hearing rush
rush back loud , like thunder ; consciousness revive in fear : I sit up appal , wonder into what region , amongst what strange being I be wake . at first I know nothing I look on : a wall be not a wall - - a lamp not a lamp . I should have understood what we call a ghost , as well as I do the commonest object : which be another way of intimating that all my eye rest on strike it as spectral . but the faculty soon settle each in he place ; the life - machine presently resum its wonted and regular work . still , I know not where I be ; only in time I see I have be remove from the spot where I fall : I lay on no portico -step ; night and tempest be exclude by wall , window , and ceiling . into some house I have be carry -- but what house ? I could only think of the pensionnat in the . half - dreaming , I try hard to discover in what room they have put I ; whether the great dormitory , or one of the little dormitory . I be puzzl , because I could not make the glimpse of furniture I see accord with my knowledge of any of these apartment . the empty white bed be want , and the long line of large window . " surely , " think I , " it be not to 's own chamber they have carry I ! " and here my eye fall on a easy - chair cover with blue damask . other seat , cushion to match , dawn on I by degree ; and at last I take in the complete fact of a pleasant parlour , with a wood fire on a clear - shining hearth , a carpet where arabesque of bright blue relieve a ground of shade fawn ; pale wall over which a slight but endless garland of azure forget - I - not ran maze and bewilder amongst myriad gold leave and tendril . a gild mirror fill up the space between two window , curtain amply with blue damask . in this mirror I see myself laid , not in bed , but on a sofa . I look spectral ; my eye larger and more hollow , my hair darker than be natural , by contrast with my thing and ashe face . it be obvious , not only from the furniture , but from the position of window , door , and fireplace , that this be a unknown room in a unknown house . hardly less plain be it that my brain be not yet settle ; for , as I gaze at the blue arm - chair , it appear to grow familiar ; so do a certain scroll - couch , and not less so the round centre -table , with a blue - covering , border with autumn - tinte foliage ; and , above all , two little footstool with work cover , and a small ebony - fram chair , of which the seat and back be also work with group of brilliant flower on a dark ground . strike with these thing , I explore further . strange to say , old acquaintance be all about I , and " auld ling syne " smile out of every nook . there be two oval miniature over the mantel - piece , of which I know by heart the pearl about the high and powder " head ; " the velvet circle the white throat ; the swell of the full muslin kerchief : the pattern of the lace sleeve- ruffle . upon the mantel - shelf there be two china vase , some relic of a diminutive tea - service , as smooth as enamel and as thin as egg - shell , and a white centre ornament , a classic group in alabaster , preserve under glass . of all these thing I could have tell the peculiarity , number the flaw or crack , like any _clairvoyante . above all , there be a pair of handscreens , with elaborate pencil - drawing finish like line engraving ; these , my very eye ach at beholding again , recalle hour when they have follow , streak by stroke and touch by touch , a tedious , feeble , finical , school - girl pencil hold in these finger , now so skeleton - like . where be I ? not only in what spot of the world , but in what year of we ? for all these objects be of past day , and of a distant country . ten year ago I bade they good - by ; since my fourteenth year they and I have never meet . I gas audibly , " where be I ? " a shape hitherto unnoticed , stir , rise , come forward : a shape inharmonious with the environment , serve only to complicate the riddle further . this be no more than a sort of native bonne , in a common - place bonne 's cap and print - dress . she speak neither nor , and I could get no intelligence from she , not understand she phrase of dialect . but she bath my temples and forehead with some cool and perfume water , and then she heighten the cushion on which I recline , make sign that I be not to speak , and resume she post at the foot of the sofa . she be busy knitt ; she eye thus draw from I , I could gaze on she without interruption . I do mightily wonder how she come there , or what she could have to do among the scene , or with the
the day of my girlhood . still more I marvell what those scene and day could now have to do with I . too weak to scrutinize thoroughly the mystery , I try to settle it by say it be a mistake , a dream , a fever - fit ; and yet I know there could be no mistake , and that I be not sleep , and I believe I be sane . I wish the room have not be so well lighted , that I might not so clearly have see the little picture , the ornament , the screen , the work chair . all these object , as well as the blue - damask furniture , be , in fact , precisely the same , in every minutest detail , with those I so well remembe , and with which i have be so thoroughly intimate , in the drawing - room of my godmother 's house at . Methotch the apartment only be change , be of different proportion and dimension . I think of , transport in he sleep from to the gate of . have a stoop he dark we down the storm to whose stress I have succumb , and gather I from the church - step , and " rise high into the air , " as the eastern tale say , have he borne I over land and ocean , and lay I quietly down beside a hearth of ? but no ; I know the fire of that hearth burn before its Lare no more -- it go out long ago , and the household gods have be carry elsewhere . the bonne turn again to survey I , and see my eye wide open , and , I suppose , deem they expression pertur and excit , she put down she knitting . I see she busy for a moment at a little stand ; she pour out water , and measure drop from a phial : glass in hand , she approach I . what dark - tinge dratch might she now be offer ? what or - distillation ? it be too late to inquire -- I have swallow it passively , and at once . a tide of quiet thought now come gently caresse my brain ; softer and softer rise the flow , with tepid undulation smoother than balm . the pain of weakness leave my limb , my muscle sleep . I lose power to move ; but , lose at the same time wish , it be no privation . that kind bonne place a screen between I and the lamp ; I see she rise to do this , but do not remember see she resume she place : in the interval between the two act , I " fell on sleep . " * * * * * at waking , lo ! all be again change . the light of high day surround I ; not , indeed , a warm , summer light , but the leaden gloom of raw and bluster autumn . I feel sure now that I be in the pensionnat -- sure by the beat rain on the casement ; sure by the " wuther " of wind amongst tree , denote a garden outside ; sure by the chill , the whiteness , the solitude , amidst which I lay . I say _whiteness _-- for the dimity curtain , drop before a french bed , bound my view . I lift they ; I look out . my eye , prepare to take in the range of a long , large , and whitewashed chamber , blink baffle , on encounter the limited area of a small cabinet -- a cabinet with seagreen wall ; also , instead of five wide and naked window , there be one high lattice , shade with muslin festoon : instead of two dozen little stand of painted wood , each hold a basin and a ewer , there be a toilette - table dress , like a lady for a ball , in a white robe over a pink skirt ; a polished and large glass crown , and a pretty pin-cushion frill with lace , adorn it . this toilette , together with a small , low , green and white chintz arm - chair , a washstand top with a marble slab , and supply with utensil of pale greenware , sufficiently furnish the tiny chamber . reader ; I feel alarmed ! why ? you will ask . what be there in this simple and somewhat pretty sleep - closet to startle the most timid ? merely this -- these article of furniture could not be real , solid arm - chair , look - glass , and washstand -- they must be the ghost of such article ; or , if this be deny as too wild a hypothesis -- and , confound as I be , I _did_ deny it -- there remain but to conclude that I have myself pass into a abnormal state of mind ; in short , that I be very ill and delirious : and even then , mine be the strangest figment with which delirium have ever harass a victim . I know -- I be oblige to know -- the green chintz of that little chair ; the little snug chair itself , the carved , shining - black , foliate frame of that glass ; the smooth , milky - green of the china vessel on the stand ; the very stand too , with it be top of grey marble , splinter at one corner ; -- all these I be compelle to recognise and to hail , as last night I have , perforce , recognise and haile the rosewood , the drapery , the porcelain , of the drawing
drawing - room . ! ! and ten year ago shone reflect in that mirror . and why do and my fourteenth year haunt I thus ? why , if they come at all , do they not return complete ? why hover before my distemper vision the mere furniture , while the room and the locality be go ? as to that pincushion make of crimson satin , ornament with gold bead and frill with thread - lace , I have the same right to know it as to know the screen -- I have make it myself . rise with a start from the bed , I take the cushion in my hand and examine it . there be the cipher " . . " form in gold bed , and surround with a oval wreath embroider in white silk . these be the initial of my godmother 's name -- . " be I in ? be I at ? " I mutter ; and hastily pull up the blind with which the lattice be shroude , I look out to try and discover _where I be ; half - prepare to meet the calm , old , handsome building and clean grey pavement of . 's , and to see at the end the towers of the minster : or , if otherwise , fully expectant of a town view somewhere , a rue in , if not a street in a pleasant and ancient English city . I look , on the contrary , through a frame of leafage , cluster round the high lattice , and forth thence to a grassy mead - like level , a lawn - terrace with tree rise from the lower ground beyond -- high forest - tree , such as I have not see for many a day . they be now groane under the gale of , and between they trunk I trace the line of a avenue , where yellow leave lay in heap and drift , or be whir singly before the sweeping west wind . whatever landscape might lie further must have be flat , and these tall beech shut it out . the place seem seclude , and be to I quite strange : I do not know it at all . once more I lay down . my be stood in a little alcove ; on turn my face to the wall , the room with its bewildering accompaniment become excluded . exclud ? no ! for as I arrange my position in this hope , behold , on the green space between the divided and loope - up curtain , hang a broad , gild picture - frame enclose a portrait . it be draw -- well draw , though but a sketch -- in water - colour ; a head , a boy 's head , fresh , life - like , speak , and animate . it seem a youth of sixteen , fair - complexion , with sanguine health in he cheek ; hair long , not dark , and with a sunny sheen ; penetrat eye , a arch mouth , and a gay smile . on the whole a most pleasant face to look at , especially for , those claim a right to that youth 's affection -- parent , for instance , or sister . any romantic little school - girl might almost have love it in its frame . those eye look as if when somewhat older they would flash a lightning - response to love : I can not tell whether they keep in store the steady - beam shine of faith . for whatever sentiment meet he in form too facile , he lip menace , beautifully but surly , caprice and light esteem . Strive to take each new discovery as quietly as I could , I whisper to myself -- " ah ! that portrait use to hang in the breakfast - room , over the mantel - piece : somewhat too high , as I think . I well remember how I use to mount a music - stool for the purpose of unhook it , hold it in my hand , and search into those bonny well of eye , whose glance under they hazel lash see like a pencill laugh ; and well I like to note the colouring of the cheek , and the expression of the mouth . " I hardly believe fancy could improve on the curve of that mouth , or of the ching ; even _my ignorance know that both be beautiful , and ponder perplex over this doubt : " how it be that what charme so much , could at the same time so keenly pain ? " once , by way of test , I take little , and , lift she in my arm , tell she to look at the picture . " do you like it , Polly ? " I ask . she never answer , but gaze long , and at last a darkness go trembl through she sensitive eye , as she say , " put I down . " so I put she down , say to myself : " the child feel it too . " all these thing do I now think over , add , " he have he fault , yet scarce ever be a finer nature ; liberal , suave , impressible . " my reflection close in a audibly pronounced word , " ! " " ! " echo a sudden voice at the bedside . " do you want ? " I look . the plot be but thicken ; the wonder but culminating . if it be strange to see that well - remember picture form on the wall , still stranger be it to turn and behold the equally well - remember liive
liive form opposite -- a woman , a lady , most real and substantial , tall , well - attire , wear widow 's silk , and such a cap as best become she matron and motherly braid of hair . hers , too , be a good face ; too mark , perhaps , now for beauty , but not for sense or character . she be little change ; something sterner , something more robust -- but she be my godmother : still the distinct vision of . I keep quiet , yet internally _i_ be much agitate : my pulse flutter , and the blood leave my cheek , which turn cold . " madam , where be I ? " I inquire . " in a very safe asylum ; well protect for the present ; make you mind quite easy till you get a little better ; you look ill this morning . " " I be so entirely bewilder , I do not know whether I can trust my sense at all , or whether they be mislead I in every particular : but you speak , do you not , madam ? " " I should think you might hear that : it would puzzle I to hold a long discourse in french . " " you do not come from ? " " I be lately arrive thence . have you be long in this country ? you seem to know my son ? " " do , I , madam ? perhaps I do . you son -- the picture there ? " " that be he portrait as a youth . while look at it , you pronounce he name . " " ? " she nod . " I speak to , formerly of , ---- shire ? " " quite right ; and you , I be tell , be a english teacher in a foreign school here : my son recognise you as such . " " how be I find , madam , and by whom ? " " my son shall tell you that by - and - by , " say she ; " but at present you be too confused and weak for conversation : try to eat some breakfast , and then sleep . " Notwithstand all I have undergone -- the bodily fatigue , the perturbation of spirit , the exposure to weather -- it seem that I be better : the fever , the real malady which have oppress my frame , be abat ; for , whereas during the last nine day I have take no solid food , and suffer from continual thirst , this morning , on breakfast be offer , I experience a craving for nourishment : a inward faintness which cause I eagerly to taste the tea this lady offer , and to eat the morsel of dry toast she allow in accompaniment . it be only a morsel , but it suffice ; keep up my strength till some two or three hour afterwards , when the bonne bring I a little cup of broth and a biscuit . as evening begin to darken , and the ceaseless blast still blow wild and cold , and the rain stream on , deluge - like , I grow weary -- very weary of my bed . the room , though pretty , be small : I feel it confin : I longe for a change . the increase chill and gather gloom , too , depresse I ; I want to see -- to feel firelight . besides , I keep think of the son of that tall matron : when should I see he ? certainly not till I leave my room . at last the bonne come to make my bed for the night . she prepare to wrap I in a blanket and place I in the little chintz chair ; but , decline these attention , I proceed to dress myself : the business be just achieve , and I be sit down to take breath , when once more appear . " dress ! " she exclaim , smile with that smile I so well know -- a pleasant smile , though not soft . " you be quite better then ? quite strong -- eh ? " she speak to I so much as of old she use to speak that I almost fancie she be begin to know I . there be the same sort of patronage in she voice and manner that , as a girl , I have always experience from she -- a patronage I yield to and even like ; it be not found on conventional grounds of superior wealth or station ( in the last particular there have never be any inequality ; she degree be mine ) ; but on natural reason of physical advantage : it be the shelter the tree give the herb . I put a request without further ceremony . " do let I go down - stair , madam ; I be so cold and dull here . " " I desire nothing better , if you be strong enough to bear the change , " be she reply . " come then ; here be a arm . " and she offer I hers : I take it , and we descende one flight of carpet step to a landing where a tall door , stand open , give admission into the blue - damask room . how pleasant it be in its air of perfect domestic comfort ! how warm in its amber lamp - light and vermilion fire - flush ! to render the picture perfect , tea stood ready on the table -- a english tea , whereor the whole shining service glance at I familiarly ; from the solid silver urn , of
of antique pattern , and the massive pot of the same metal , to the thin porcelain cup , dark with purple and gilding . I know the very seed - cake of peculiar form , bake in a peculiar mould , which always have a place on the tea - table at . like it , and there it be as of yore -- set before 's plate with the silver knife and fork beside it . be then expect to tea : be now , perhaps , in the house ; ere many minute I might see he . " sit down -- sit down , " say my conductress , as my step falter a little in passing to the hearth . she seat I on the sofa , but I soon pass behind it , say the fire be too hot ; in its shade I find another seat which suit I better . be never will not to make a fuss about any person or anything ; without remonstrance she suffer I to have my own way . she make the tea , and she take up the newspaper . I like to watch every action of my godmother ; all she movement be so young : she must have be now above fifty , yet neither she sinews nor she spirit see yet touch by the rust of age . though portly , she be alert , and though serene , she be at time impetuous -- good health and a excellent temperament keep she green as in she spring . while she read , I perceive she listen -- listen for she son . she be not the woman ever to confess herself uneasy , but there be yet no lull in the weather , and if be out in that hoarse wind -- roar still unsatisfied -- I well know he mother 's heart would be out with he . " ten minute behind he time , " say she , look at she watch ; then , in another minute , a lifting of she eye from the page , and a slight inclination of she head towards the door , denote that she hear some sound . presently she brow clear ; and then even my ear , less practise , catch the iron clash of a gate swing to , step on gravel , lastly the door - bell . he be come . he mother fill the teapot from the urn , she draw nearer the hearth the stuff and cushion blue chair -- she own chair by right , but I see there be one who might with impunity usurp it . and when that _one_ come up the stair -- which he soon do , after , I suppose , some such attention to the toilet as the wild and wet night render necessary , and strode straight in -- " be it you , ? " say he mother , hide a glad smile and speak curtly . " who else should it be , ? " demand the Unpunctual , possesse himself irreverently of the abdicated throne . " do not you deserve cold tea , for be late ? " " I shall not get my desert , for the urn sings cheerily . " " wheel yourself to the table , lazy boy : no seat will serve you but mine ; if you have one spark of a sense of propriety , you would always leave that chair for the . " " so I should ; only the dear persist in leave it for I . how be you patient , mamma ? " " will she come forward and speak for herself ? " say , turn to my corner ; and at this invitation , forward I come . courteously rise up to greet I . he stand tall on the hearth , a figure justify he mother 's unconcealed pride . " so you be come down , " say he ; " you must be better then -- much better . I scarcely expect we should meet thus , or here . I be alarm last night , and if I have not be force to hurry away to a die patient , I certainly would not have leave you ; but my mother herself be something of a doctress , and a excellent nurse . I see the case be a fainting - fit , not necessarily dangerous . what bring it on , I have yet to learn , and all particular ; meantime , I trust you really do feel better ? " " much better , " I say calmly . " much better , I thank you , . " for , reader , this tall young man -- this darling son -- this host of mine -- this , _was_ : he , and no other ; and , what be more , I ascertaine this identity scarcely with surprise . what be more , when I hear 's step on the stair , I know what manner of figure would enter , and for whose aspect to prepare my eye . the discovery be not of to - day , its dawn have penetrat my perceptions long since . of course I remembe young well ; and though ten year ( from sixteen to twenty - six ) may greatly change the boy as they mature he to the man , yet they could bring no such utter difference as would suffice wholly to blind my eye , or baffle my memory . retain still a affinity to the youth of sixteen : he have he eye ; he have some of he feature ; to wit , all the excellently - moulded lower half of the face ; I find he out soon . I first recognise he on
on that occasion , no several chapter back , when my unguardedly - fix attention have draw on I the mortification of a implied rebuke . subsequent observation confirm , in every point , that early surmise . I trace in the gesture , the port , and the habits of he manhood , all he boy 's promise . I hear in he now deep tone the accent of former day . certain turn of phrase , peculiar to he of old , be peculiar to he still ; and so be many a trick of eye and lip , many a smile , many a sudden ray level from the irid , under he well - character brow . to _say anything on the subject , to _hint at my discovery , have not suit my habits of thought , or assimilate with my system of feeling . on the contrary , I have prefer to keep the matter to myself . I like enter he presence cover with a cloud he have not see through , while he stand before I under a ray of special illumination which shine all partial over he head , tremble about he foot , and cast light no farther . well I know that to he it could make little difference , be I to come forward and announce , " this be ! " so I keep back in my teacher 's place ; and as he never ask my name , so I never give it . he hear I call " , " and " ; " he never hear the surname , " . " as to spontaneous recognition -- though I , perhaps , be still less change than he -- the idea never approach he mind , and why should I suggest it ? during tea , be kind , as it be he nature to be ; that meal over , and the tray carry out , he make a cosy arrangement of the cushion in a corner of the sofa , and oblige I to settle amongst they . he and he mother also draw to the fire , and ere we have sit ten minute , I catch the eye of the latter fasten steadily upon I . woman be certainly quicker in some thing than man . " well , " she exclaim , presently , " I have seldom see a stronger likeness ! , have you observe it ? " " Observ what ? what ail the now ? how you stare , mamma ! one would think you have a attack of second sight . " " tell I , , of whom do that young lady remind you ? " point to I . " Mamma , you put she out of countenance . I often tell you abruptness be you fault ; remember , too , that to you she be a stranger , and do not know you way . " " now , when she look down ; now , when she turn sideway , who be she like , ? " " indeed , mamma , since you propound the riddle , I think you ought to solve it ! " " and you have know she some time , you say -- ever since you first begin to attend the school in the :-- yet you never mention to I that singular resemblance ! " " I could not mention a thing of which I never think , and which I do not now acknowledge . what _can you mean ? " " stupid boy ! look at she . " do look : but this be not to be endure ; I see how it must end , so I think it best to anticipate . " , " I say , " have have so much to do and think of , since he and I shook hand at we last parting in 's , that , while I readily find out , some month ago , it never occur to I as possible that he should recognise . " " ! I think so ! I know it ! " cry . and she at once step across the hearth and kiss I . some lady would , perhaps , have make a great bustle upon such a discovery without be particularly glad of it ; but it be not my godmother 's habit to make a bustle , and she prefer all sentimental demonstration in ba - relief . so she and I get over the surprise with few word and a single salute ; yet I daresay she be pleased , and I know I be . while we renew old acquaintance , , sit opposite , silently dispose of he paroxysm of astonishment . " Mamm a call I a stupid boy , and I think I be so , " at length he say ; " for , upon my honour , often as I have see you , I never once suspect this fact : and yet I perceive it all now . ! to be sure ! I recollect she perfectly , and there she sit ; not a doubt of it . but , " he add , " you surely have not know I as a old acquaintance all this time , and never mention it . " " that I have , " be my answer . comment not . I suppose he regard my silence as eccentric , but he be indulgent in refrain from censure . I daresay , too , he would have deem it impertinent to have interrogate I very closely , to have ask I the why and wherefore of my reserve ; and , though he might feel a little curiious , the importance of the case be by no means such as to tempt
tempt curiosity to infringe on discretion . for my part , I just venture to inquire whether he remember the circumstance of my once look at he very fixedly ; for the slight annoyance he have betraye on that occasion still linger sore on my mind . " I think I do ! " say he : " I think I be even cross with you . " " you consider I a little bold ; perhaps ? " I inquire . " not at all . only , shy and retire as you general manner be , I wonder what personal or facial enormity in I prove so magnetic to you usually avert eye . " " you see how it be now ? " " perfectly . " and here break in with many , many question about past time ; and for she satisfaction I have to recur to go - by trouble , to explain cause of see estrangement , to touch on single - hand conflict with , with , with , with Fate . listen , say little . he and she then tell I of change they have know : even with they all have not go smoothly , and fortune have retrench she once abundant gift . but so courageous a mother , with such a champion in she son , be well fitte to fight a good fight with the world , and to prevail ultimately . himself be one of those on whose birth benign planet have certainly smile . Adversity might set against he she most sullen front : he be the man to beat she down with smile . strong and cheerful , and firm and courteous ; not rash , yet valiant ; he be the aspirant to woo herself , and to win from she stone eyeball a beam almost love . in the profession he have adopt , he success be now quite decide . within the last three month he have take this house ( a small chateau , they tell I , about half a league without the ) ; this country site be choose for the sake of he mother 's health , with which town air do not now agree . Hither he have invite , and she , on leave , have bring with she such residue furniture of the former 's mansion as she have think fit to keep unsold . hence my bewilderment at the phantom of chair , and the wraith of look - glass , tea -urn , and teacup . as the clock struck eleven , stop he mother . " miss Snowe must retire now , " he say ; " she be begin to look very pale . to -morrow I will venture to put some question respect the cause of she loss of health . she be much change , indeed , since last , when I see she enact with no little spirit the part of a very killing fine gentleman . as to last night 's catastrophe , I be sure thereby hang a tale , but we will inquire no further this evening . good - night , . " and so he kindly lead I to the door , and hold a wax - candle , light I up the one flight of stair . when I have say my prayer , and when I be undressed and lay down , I feel that I still have friend . Friends , not professe vehement attachment , not offer the tender solace of well - match and congenial relationship ; on whom , therefore , but moderate demand of affection be to be make , of whom but moderate expectation for ; but towards whom my heart soften instinctively , and year with a importunate gratitude , which I entreate betimes to check . " do not let I think of they too often , too much , too fondly , " I implor : " let I be contend with a temperate dratch of this living stream : let I not run athirst , and apply passionately to its welcome water : let I not imagine in they a sweeter taste than earth 's fountain know . oh ! would to I may be enable to feel enough sustain by a occasional , amicable intercourse , rare , brief , unengrossing and tranquil : quite tranquil ! " still repeat this word , I turn to my pillow ; and _still_ repeat it , I steep that pillow with tear . . . these struggles with the natural character , the strong native bent of the heart , may seem futile and fruitless , but in the end they do good . they tend , however slightly , to give the action , the conduct , that turn which reason approve , and which feel , perhaps , too often oppose : they certainly make a difference in the general tenour of a life , and enable it to be better regulate , more equable , quieter on the surface ; and it be on the surface only the common gaze will fall . as to what lie below , leave that with . Man , you equal , weak as you , and not fit to be you judge , may be shut out thence : take it to you maker -- show he the secret of the spirit he give -- ask he how you be to bear the pain he have appoint -- kneel in he presence , and pray with faith for light in darkness , for strength in piteous weakness , for patience in extreme need . certainly , at some hour , though perhaps not _your_ hour , the waiting water will stir ; in _some_ shape , though perhaps not the shape you dream , which you heart love , and for
for which it b , the healing herald will descmend , the cripple and the blind , and the dumb , and the possess will be lead to bathey . , come quickly ! thousand lie round the pool , weeping and despairing , to see it , through slow year , stagnant . long be the " time " of : the orbit of angel messenger seem wide to mortal vision ; they may enr ag : the cycle of one departure and return may clasp unnumbered generation ; and dust , kindl to brief suffer life , and through pain , pass back to dust , may meanwhile perish out of memory again , and yet again . to how many maim and mourn million be the first and sole angel visitant , he eastern call ! I try to get up next morning , but while I be dress , and at interval drink cold water from the _carafe on my washstand , with design to brace up that trembling weakness which make dressing so difficult , in come . " here be a absurdity ! " be she morning accost . " not so , " she add , and deal with I at once in she own brusque , energetic fashion -- that fashion which I use formerly to enjoy see apply to she son , and by he vigorously resist -- in two minute she consign I captive to the french bed . " there you lie till afternoon , " say she . " my boy leave order before he go out that such should be the case , and I can assure you my son be master and must be obey . presently you shall have breakfast . " presently she bring that meal -- bring it with she own active hand -- not leave I to servant . she seat herself on the bed while I eat . now it be not everybody , even amongst we respecte friend and esteem acquaintance , whom we like to have near we , whom we like to watch we , to wait on we , to approach we with the proximity of a nurse to a patient . it be not every friend whose eye be a light in a sick room , whose presence be there a solace : but all this be to I ; all this she have ever be . food or drink never please I so well as when it come through she hand . I do not remember the occasion when she entrance into a room have not make that room cheerier . we nature own predilection and antipathy alike strange . there be people from whom we secretly shrink , whom we would personally avoid , though reason confess that they be good people : there be other with fault of temper , & c. , evident enough , beside whom we live content , as if the air about they do we good . my godmother 's lively black eye and clear brunette cheek , she warm , prompt hand , she self - reliant mood , she decide bearing , be all beneficial to I as the atmosphere of some salubrious climate . she son use to call she " the old lady ; " it fill I with pleasant wonder to note how the alacrity and power of five - and - twenty still breathe from she and around she . " I would bring my work here , " she say , as she take from I the empty teacup , " and sit with you the whole day , if that overbear have not put he veto upon such a proceeding . ' now , mamma ,' he say , when he go out , ' take notice , you be not to knock up you god - daughter with gossip , ' and he particularly desire I to keep close to my own quarter , and spare you my fine company . he say , , he think you have have a nervous fever , judge from you look , -- be that so ? " I reply that I do not quite know what my ailment have be , but that I have certainly suffer a good deal especially in mind . further , on this subject , I do not consider it advisable to dwell , for the detail of what I have undergone belong to a portion of my existence in which I never expect my godmother to take a share . into what a new region would such a confidence have lead that hale , serene nature ! the difference between she and I might be figure by that between the stately ship cruise safe on smooth seas , with it be full complement of crew , a captain gay and brave , and venturous and provident ; and the life - boat , which most day of the year lie dry and solitary in a old , dark boat - house , only put to sea when the billow run high in rough weather , when cloud encounter water , when danger and death divide between they the rule of the great deep . no , the " " never be out of harbour on such a night , and in such a scene : she crew could not conceive it ; so the half - drown life - boat man keep he own counsel , and spin no yarn . she leave I , and I lay in bed content : it be good of to remember I before he go out . my day be lonely , but the prospect of come evening abridge and cheer it . then , too , I feel weak , and rest seem welcome ; and after the morning hour be go by ,-- those hour which always
always bring , even to the necessarily unoccupied , a sense of business to be do , of task wait fulfilment , a vague impression of obligation to be employ -- when this stirring time be past , and the silent descent of afternoon hush housemaid step on the stair and in the chamber , I then pass into a dreamy mood , not unpleasant . my calm little room seem somehow like a cave in the sea . there be no colour about it , except that white and pale green , suggestive of foam and deep water ; the blanched cornice be adorn with shell - shape ornament , and there be white moulding like dolphin in the ceiling - angles . even that one touch of colour visible in the red satin pincushion bear affinity to coral ; even that dark , shining glass might have mirror a mermaid . when I close my eye , I hear a gale , subside at last , bear upon the house - fro not like a settle swell upon a rock - base . I hear it draw and withdraw far , far off , like a tide retire from a shore of the upper world -- a world so high above that the rush of its largest wave , the dash of its fiercest breaker , could sound down in this submarine home , only like murmur and a lullaby . Amidst these dream come evening , and then bring a light ; with she aid I be quickly dress , and stronger now than in the morning , I make my way down to the blue saloon unassisted . , it appear , have conclude he round of professional call earlier than usual ; he form be the first object that meet my eye as I enter the parlour ; he stand in that window - recess opposite the door , read the close type of a newspaper by such dull light as closing day yet give . the fire shone clear , but the lamp stand on the table unlit , and tea be not yet bring up . as to , my active godmother -- who , I afterwards find , have be out in the open air all day -- lay half - recline in she deep - cushioned chair , actually lose in a nap . she son see I , come forward . I notice that he trod carefully , not to wake the sleeper ; he also speak low : he mellow voice never have any sharpness in it ; modulated as at , it be calculate rather to soothey than startle slumber . " this be a quiet little chateau , " he observ , after invite I to sit near the casement . " I do not know whether you may have notice it in you walk : though , indeed , from the chaussee it be not visible ; just a mile beyond the , you turn down a lane which soon become a avenue , and that lead you on , through meadow and shade , to the very door of this house . it be not a modern place , but build somewhat in the old style of the - . it be rather a manoir than a chateau ; they call it , ' because its front rise from a broad turf walk , whence step lead down a grassy slope to the avenue . see yonder ! the moon rise : she look well through the tree - bole . " where , indeed , do the moon not look well ? what be the scene , confin or expansive , which she orb do not hallow ? or fiery , she mount now above a not distant bank ; even while we watch she flush ascent , she clear to gold , and in very brief space , float up stainless into a now calm sky . do moonlight soften or sadden ? do it touch he with romance ? I think it do . albeit of no sighing mood , he sigh in watch it : sigh to himself quietly . no need to ponder the cause or the course of that sigh ; I know it be wake by beauty ; I know it pursue . know this , the idea presse upon I that it be in some sort my duty to speak the name he meditate . of course he be ready for the subject : I see in he countenance a teeming plenitude of comment , question and interest ; a pressure of language and sentiment , only check , I think , by sense of embarrassment how to begin . to spare he this embarrassment be my best , indeed my sole use . I have but to utter the idol 's name , and love 's tender litany would flow out . I have just find a fitting phrase , " you know that be go on a tour with the , " and be open my lip to speak to it , when he scatter my plan by introduce another theme . " the first thing this morning , " say he , put he sentiment in he pocket , turn from the moon , and sit down , " I go to the , and tell the cuisiniere that you be safe and in good hand . do you know that I actually find that she have not yet discover you absence from the house : she think you safe in the great dormitory . with what care you must have be wait on ! " " oh ! all that be very conceivable , " say I . " could do nothing for I but bring I a little tisane and a crust of bread , and I have reject both so often during
during the past week , that the good woman get tired of useless journey from the dwelling - house kitchen to the school - dormitory , and only come once a day at noon to make my bed . I believe , however , that she be a good - natured creature , and would have be delighted to cook I cotelette de mouton , if I could have eat they . " " what do mean by leave you alone ? " " could not foresee that I should fall ill . " " you nervous system bear a good share of the suffering ? " " I be not quite sure what my nervous system be , but I be dreadfully low - spirit . " " which disable I from help you by pill or potion . Medicine can give nobody good spirit . my be halt at the threshold of : she just look in and see a chamber of torture , but can neither say nor do much . Cheerful society would be of use ; you should be as little alone as possible ; you should take plenty of exercise . " Acquiescence and a pause follow these remark . they sound all right , I think , and bear the safe sanction of custom , and the well - worn stamp of use . " , " recommence -- my health , nervous system include , be now , somewhat to my relief , discuss and do with -- " be it permit I to ask what you religion be ? be you a ? " I look up in some surprise -- " a ? no ! why suggest such a idea ? " " the manner in which you be consign to I last night make I doubt . " " I consign to you ? but , indeed , I forget . it yet remain for I to learn how I fall into you hand . " " why , under circumstance that puzzl I . I have be in attendance all day yesterday on a case of singularly interesting and critical character ; the disease be rare , and its treatment doubtful : I see a similar and still finer case in a hospital in ; but that will not interest you . at last a mitigation of the patient 's most urgent symptom ( acute pain be one of its accompaniment ) liberate I , and I set out homeward . my shortest way lay through the - , and as the night be excessively dark , wild , and wet , I take it . in riding past a old church belong to a community of , I see by a lamp burn over the porch or deep arch of the entrance , a priest lift some object in he arm . the lamp be bright enough to reveal the priest 's feature clearly , and I recognise he ; he be a man I have often meet by the sick bed of both rich and poor : and chiefly the latter . he be , I think , a good old man , far better than most of he class in this country ; superior , indeed , in every way , better inform , as well as more devote to duty . we eye meet ; he call on I to stop : what he support be a woman , faint or die . I alight . " ' this person be one of you countrywoman ,' he say : ' save she , if she be not dead . ' " my countrywoman , on examination , turn out to be the english teacher at 's pensionnat . she be perfectly unconscious , perfectly bloodless , and nearly cold . " ' what do it all mean ? ' be my inquiry . " he communicate a curiious account ; that you have be to he that evening at confessional ; that you exhaust and suffer appearance , couple with some thing you have say -- " " I have say ? I wonder what thing ! " " awful crime , no doubt ; but he do not tell I what : there , you know , the seal of the confessional check he garrulity , and my curiosity . you confidences , however , have not make a enemy of the good father ; it seem he be so struck , and feel so sorry that you should he out on such a night alone , that he have esteem it a duty to watch you when you quit the church , and so to manage as not to lose sight of you , till you should have reach home . perhaps the worthy man might , half unconsciously , have blend in this proceeding some little of the subtlety of he class : it might have be he resolve to learn the locality of you home -- do you impart that in you confession ? " " I do not : on the contrary , I carefully avoid the shadow of any indication : and as to my confession , , I suppose you will think I mad for take such a step , but I could not help it : I suppose it be all the fault of what you call my ' nervous system . ' I can not put the case into word , but my day and night be grow intolerable : a cruel sense of desolation pain my mind : a feeling that would make its way , rush out , or kill I -- like ( and this you will understand , ) the current which pass through the heart , and which , if aneurism or any other morbid cause obstruct its natural channel , seek abnormal outlet . I want companionship , I want
want friendship , I want counsel . I could find none of these in closet or chamber , so I go and seek they in church and confessional . as to what I say , it be no confidence , no narrative . I have do nothing wrong : my life have not be active enough for any dark deed , either of romance or reality : all I pour out be a dreary , desperate complaint . " " Lucy , you ought to travel for about six month : why , you calm nature be grow quite excitable ! ! have the little buxom widow no bowel , to condemn she best teacher to solitary confinement ? " " it be not 's fault , " say I ; " it be no living be 's fault , and I will not hear any one blame . " " who be in the wrong , then , ? " " I -- -- I ; and a great abstraction on whose wide shoulder I like to lay the mountain of blame they be sculpture to bear : I and Fate . " " ' I ' must take better care in future , " say -- smile , I suppose , at my bad grammar . " change of air -- change of scene ; those be my prescription , " pursue the practical young doctor . " but to return to we mutton , . as yet , , with all he tact ( they say he be a Jesuit ) , be no wiser than you choose he to be ; for , instead of return to the , you fevere wandering -- there must have be high fever -- " " no , : the fever take it be turn that night -- now , do not make out that I be delirious , for I know differently . " " good ! you be as collect as myself at this moment , no doubt . you wandering have take a opposite direction to the pensionnat . near the Beguinage , amidst the stress of flood and gust , and in the perplexity of darkness , you have swoon and fall . the priest come to you succour , and the physician , as we have see , superven . between we we procure a fiacre and bring you here . , old as he be , would carry you up - stair , and lay you on that couch himself . he would certainly have remain with you till suspend animation have be restore : and so should I , but , at that juncture , a hurried messenger arrive from the dying patient I have scarcely leave -- the last duty be call for -- the physician 's last visit and the priest 's last rite ; extreme unction could not be defer . and myself depart together , my mother be spend the evening abroad ; we give you in charge to , leave direction , which it seem she follow successfully . now , be you a ? " " not yet , " say I , with a smile . " and never let know where I live , or he will try to convert I ; but give he my best and truest thanks when you see he , and if ever I get rich I will send he money for he charity . see , , you mother wake ; you ought to ring for tea . " which he do ; and , as sit up -- astonished and indignant at herself for the indulgence to which she have succumb , and fully prepare to deny that she have sleep at all -- she son come gaily to the attack . " , ! sleep again . you look the picture of innocence in you slumber . " " my slumber , ! what be you talk about ? you know I never _do_ sleep by day : it be the slightest doze possible . " " exactly ! a seraph 's gentle lapse -- a fairy 's dream . , under such circumstance , you always remind I of . " " that be because you , yourself , be so like . " " -- do you ever hear anything like mamma 's wit ? she be a most sprightly woman of she size and age . " " keep you compliment to yourself , sir , and do not neglect you own size : which seem to I a good deal on the increase . , have he not rather the air of a incipient ? he use to be slender as a eel , and now I fancy in he a sort of heavy dragoon bent -- a beef - eater tendency . , take notice ! if you grow fat I disow you . " " as if you could not sooner disow you own personality ! I be indispensable to the old lady 's happiness , . she would pine away in green and yellow melancholy if she have not my six foot of iniquity to scold . it keep she lively -- it maintain the wholesome ferment of she spirit . " the two be now stand opposite to each other , one on each side the fire - place ; they word be not very fond , but they mutual look aton for verbal deficiencies . at least , the best treasure of 's life be certainly casket in she son 's bosom ; she dearest pulse throb in he heart . as to he , of course another love share he feeling with filial love , and , no doubt , as the new passion be the latest born , so he assign it in he emotion 's portion . ! ! yet know at whose foot she own
own young idol have lay he homage ? would she approve that choice ? I could not tell ; but I could well guess that if she know 's conduct towards : she alternation between coldness and coaxing , and repulse and allurement ; if she could at all suspect the pain with which she have try he ; if she could have see , as I have see , he fine spirit subdue and harass , he inferior prefer before he , he subordinate make the instrument of he humiliation --_then_ would have pronounce imbecile , or pervert , or both . well -- I think so too . that second evening pass as sweetly as the first --_more_ sweetly indeed : we enjoy a smoother interchange of thought ; old trouble be not revert to , acquaintance be better cement ; I feel happier , easier , more at home . that night -- instead of crying myself asleep -- I go down to dreamland by a pathway border with pleasant thought . . we Quarrel . during the first day of my stay at the Terrace , never take a seat near I , or in he frequent pacing of the room approach the quarter where I sit , or look pre-occupied , or more grave than usual , but I think of and expect she name to leap from he lip . I keep my ear and mind in perpetual readiness for the tender theme ; my patience be order to be permanently under arm , and my sympathy desire to keep its cornucopia replenished and ready for outpouring . at last , and after a little inward struggle , which I see and respecte , he one day launch into the topic . it be introduce delicately ; anonymously as it be . " you friend be spend she vacation in travel , I hear ? " " friend , forsooth ! " think I to myself : but it would not do to contradict ; he must have he own way ; I must own the soft impeachment : friend let it be . still , by way of experiment , I could not help ask whom he mean ? he have take a seat at my work - table ; he now lay hand on a reel of thread which he proceed recklessly to unwind . " -- , have accompany the Cholmondeley on a tour through the south of ? " " she have . " " do you and she correspond ? " " it will astonish you to hear that I never once think of make application for that privilege . " " you have see letter of she write ? " " yes ; several to she uncle . " " they will not be deficient in wit and _naivete ; there be so much sparkle , and so little art in she soul ? " " she write comprehensively enough when she write to : he who run may read . " ( in fact , 's epistle to she wealthy kinsman be commonly business document , unequivocal application for cash . ) " and she handwrit ? it must be pretty , light , ladylike , I should think ? " it be , and I say so . " I verily believe that all she do be well do , " say ; and as I see in no hurry to chime in with this remark , he add " you , who know she , could you name a point in which she be deficient ? " " she do several thing very well . " ( " Flirtation amongst the rest , " subjoin I , in thought . ) " when do you suppose she will return to town ? " he soon inquire . " pardon I , , I must explain . you honour I too much in ascrib to I a degree of intimacy with I have not the felicity to enjoy . I have never be the depositary of she plan and secret . you will find she particular friend in another sphere than mine : amongst the , for instance . " he actually think I be sting with a kind of jealous pain similar to he own ! " excuse she , " he say ; " judge she indulgently ; the glitter of fashion mislead she , but she will soon find out that these people be hollow , and will return to you with augmented attachment and confirm trust . I know something of the Cholmondeley : superficial , showy , selfish people ; depend on it , at heart value you beyond a score of such . " " you be very kind , " I say briefly . a disclaimer of the sentiment attribute to I burn on my lip , but I extinguish the flame . I submit to be look upon as the humiliated , cast - off , and now pin confidante of the distinguished miss Fanshawe : but , reader , it be a hard submission . " Yet , you see , " continue , " while I comfort _you_, I can not take the same consolation to myself ; I can not hope she will do I justice . be most worthless , yet I fear he please she : wretch delusion ! " my patience really give way , and without notice : all at once . I suppose illness and weakness have wear it and make it britle . " , " I break out , " there be no delusion like you own . on all point but one you be a man , frank , healthful , right - think , clear-sight : on this exceptional point you be but a slave . I declare , where be concerned , you merit no respect
respect ; nor have you mine . " I get up , and leave the room very much excited . this little scene take place in the morning ; I have to meet he again in the evening , and then I see I have do mischief . he be not make of common clay , not put together out of vulgar material ; while the outline of he nature have be shape with breadth and vigour , the detail embrace workmanship of almost feminine delicacy : finer , much finer , than you could be prepared to meet with ; than you could believe inherent in he , even after year of acquaintance . indeed , till some over -sharp contact with he nerf have betrayed , by its effect , they acute sensibility , this elaborate construction must be ignore ; and the more especially because the sympathetic faculty be not prominent in he : to feel , and to seize quickly another 's feeling , be separate property ; a few construction possess both , some neither . have the one in exquisite perfection ; and because I have admit that he be not endow with the other in equal degree , the reader will considerately refrain from passing to a extreme , and pronounce he _un_sympathize , unfeel : on the contrary , he be a kind , generous man . make you need know , he hand be open . put you grief into word , he turn no deaf ear . expect refinement of perception , miracle of intuition , and realize disappointment . this night , when enter the room , and meet the evening lamp , I see well and at one glance he whole mechanism . to one who have name he " slave , " and , on any point , ban he from respect , he must now have peculiar feeling . that the epithet be well apply , and the ban just , might be ; he put forth no denial that it be so : he mind even candidly revolve that unmanning possibility . he seek in this accusation the cause of that ill - success which have get so gall a hold on he mental peace : amid the worry of a self - condemnatory soliloquy , he demeanour seem grave , perhaps cold , both to I and he mother . and yet there be no bad feeling , no malice , no rancour , no littleness in he countenance , beautiful with a man 's best beauty , even in its depression . when I place he chair at the table , which I hasten to do , anticipat the servant , and when I hand he he tea , which I do with trembling care , he say : " thank you , , " in as kindly a tone of he full pleasant voice as ever my ear welcome . for my part , there be only one plan to be pursue ; I must expiate my culpable vehemence , or I must not sleep that night . this would not do at all ; I could not stand it : I make no pretence of capacity to wage war on this footing . solitude , conventual silence and stagnation , anything seem preferable to live embroil with . as to , she might take the silver wing of a dove , or any other fowl that fly , and mount straight up to the highest place , among the highest star , where she lover 's highest flight of fancy chose to fix the constellation of she charms : never more be it mine to dispute the arrangement . long I try to catch he eye . again and again that eye just meet mine ; but , have nothing to say , it withdraw , and I be baffle . after tea , he sit , sad and quiet , read a book . I wish I could have da to go and sit near he , but it seem that if I venture to take that step , he would infallibly evince hostility and indignation . I longe to speak out , and I da not whisper . he mother leave the room ; then , move by insupportable regret , I just murmure the word " . " he look up from he book ; he eye be not cold or malevolent , he mouth be not cynical ; he be ready and willing to hear what I might have to say : he spirit be of vintage too mellow and generous to sour in one thunder- clap . " , forgive my hasty word : _do , do forgive they . " he smile that moment I speak . " perhaps I deserve they , . if you do not respect I , I be sure it be because I be not respectable . I fear , I be a awkward fool : I must manage badly in some way , for where I wish to please , it seem I do not please . " " of that you can not be sure ; and even if such be the case , be it the fault of you character , or of another 's perception ? but now , let I unsay what I say in anger . in one thing , and in all thing , I deeply respect you . if you think scarcely enough of yourself , and too much of other , what be that but a excellence ? " " can I think too much of ? " " _I believe you may ; _you_ believe you can not . let we agree to differ . let I be pardon ; that be what I ask . " " do you think I cherish ill - will for one warm word ?
? " " I see you do not and can not ; but just say , ' Lucy , I forgive you ! ' say that , to ease I of the heart -ache . " " put away you heart -ache , as I will put away mine ; for you woun I a little , . now , when the pain be gone , I more than forgive : I feel grateful , as to a sincere well - wisher . " " I _am_ you sincere well - wisher : you be right . " thus we quarrel end . reader , if in the course of this work , you find that my opinion of undergoe modification , excuse the seem inconsistency . I give the feeling as at the time I feel it ; I describe the view of character as it appear when discover . he show the fineness of he nature by be kinder to I after that misunderstan than before . Nay , the very incident which , by my theory , must in some degree estrange I and he , change , indeed , somewhat we relation ; but not in the sense I painfully anticipate . a invisible , but a cold something , very slight , very transparent , but very chill : a sort of screen of ice have hitherto , all through we two life , glaze the medium through which we exchange intercourse . those few warm word , though only warm with anger , breathe on that frail frost - work of reserve ; about this time , it give note of dissolution . I think from that day , so long as we continue friend , he never in discourse stand on topic of ceremony with I . he seem to know that if he would but talk about himself , and about that in which he be most interested , my expectation would always be answer , my wish always satisfied . it follow , as a matter of course , that I continue to hear much of " . " " ! " he think she so fair , so good ; he speak so lovingly of she charms , she sweetness , she innocence , that , in spite of my plain prise knowledge of the reality , a kind of reflect glow begin to settle on she idea , even for I . still , reader , I be free to confess , that he often talk nonsense ; but I strove to be unfailingly patient with he . I have have my lesson : I have learn how severe for I be the pain of crossing , or grieve , or disappoint he . in a strange and new sense , I grow most selfish , and quite powerless to deny myself the delight of indulge he mood , and be pliant to he will . he still seem to I most absurd when he obstinately doubt , and despond about he power to win in the end 's preference . the fancy become root in my own mind more stubbornly than ever , that she be only coquett to goad he , and that , at heart , she covet everyone of he word and look . sometimes he harass I , in spite of my resolution to bear and hear ; in the midst of the indescribable gall - honey pleasure of thus bearing and hearing , he strike so on the flint of what firmness I own , that it emit fire once and again . I chance to assert one day , with a view to still he impatience , that in my own mind , I feel positive _must_ intend eventually to accept he . " positive ! it be easy to say so , but have I any grounds for such assurance ? " " the best grounds . " " now , , _do_ tell I what ! " " you know they as well as I ; and , know they , , it really amaze I that you should not repose the frankest confidence in she fidelity . to doubt , under the circumstance , be almost to insult . " " now you be begin to speak fast and to breathe short ; but speak a little faster and breathe a little shorter , till you have give a explanation -- a full explanation : I must have it . " " you shall , . in some case , you be a lavish , generous man : you be a worshipper ever ready with the votive offer should ever convert _yout , you will give he abundance of alm for he poor , you will supply he altar with taper , and the shrine of you favourite saint you will do you best to enrich : , -- " " Hush ! " say he , " do not go on . " " Hush , I will not : and go on I _will _: have have she hand fill from you hand more time than I can count . you have seek for she the costliest flower ; you have busy you brain in devising gift the most delicate : such , one would have thought , as only a woman could have imagine ; and in addition , own a set of ornament , to purchase which you generosity must have verge on extravagance . " the modesty herself have never evince in this matter , now flush all over the face of she admirer . " Nonsense ! " he say , destructively snipp a skein of silk with my scissors . " I offer they to please myself : I feel she do I a favour in accept they . " " she do more than a favour , : she pledge she very
very honour that she would make you some return ; and if she can not pay you in affection , she ought to hand out a business - like equivalent , in the shape of some rouleaux of gold piece . " " but you do not understand she ; she be far too disinterested to care for my gift , and too simple - minded to know they value . " I laugh out : I have hear she adjudge to every jewel its price ; and well I know money -embarrassment , money -scheme ; money 's worth , and endeavour to realise supplies , have , young as she be , furnish the most frequent , and the favourite stimulus of she thought for year . he pursue . " you should have see she whenever I have lay on she lap some trifle ; so cool , so unmove : no eagerness to take , not even pleasure in contemplating . just from amiable reluctance to grieve I , she would permit the bouquet to lie beside she , and perhaps consent to bear it away . or , if I achieve the fastening of a bracelet on she ivory arm , however pretty the trinket might be ( and I always carefully choose what seem to _me_ pretty , and what of course be not valueless ) , the glitter never dazzl she bright eye : she would hardly cast one look on my gift " " then , of course , not value it , she would unloose , and return it to you ? " " no ; for such a repulse she be too good - natured . she would consent to seem to forget what I have do , and retain the offering with lady - like quiet and easy oblivion . under such circumstance , how can a man build on acceptance of he present as a favourable symptom ? for my part , be I to offer she all I have , and she to take it , such be she incapacity to be sway by sordid consideration , I should not venture to believe the transaction advance I one step . " " , " I begin , " Love be blind ; " but just then a blue subtle ray sp sideway from 's eye : it remind I of old day , it remind I of he picture : it half lead I to think that part , at least , of he profess persuasion of 's _naivete_ be assume ; it lead I dubiously to conjecture that perhaps , in spite of he passion for she beauty , he appreciation of she foible might possibly be less mistaken , more clear-sighted , than from he general language be presumable . after all it might be only a chance look , or at best the token of a merely momentary impression . or intentional real or imaginary , it close the conversation . . the CLEOPATRa . my stay at be prolonge a fortnight beyond the close of the vacation . 's kind management procure I this respite . she son have one day deliver the dictum that " Lucy be not yet strong enough to go back to that den of a pensionnat , " she at once drive over to the , have a interview with the directress , and procure the indulgence , on the plea of prolonge rest and change be necessary to perfect recovery . , however , follow a attention I could very well have dispense with , viz -- a polite call from . that lady -- one fine day -- actually come out in a fiacre as far as the chateau . I suppose she have resolve within herself to see what manner of place inhabit . apparently , the pleasant site and neat interior surpass she expectation ; she eulogize all she see , pronounce the blue salon " une piece magnifique , " profusely congratulate I on the acquisition of friend , " tellement digne , aimable , et respectable , " turn also a neat compliment in my favour , and , upon come in , run up to he with the utmost buoyancy , open at the same time such a fire of rapid language , all sparkling with felicitation and protestation about he " chateau , " -- " madame sa mere , la digne chatelaine : " also he look ; which , indeed , be very flourishing , and at the moment additionally embellish by the good - natured but amused smile with which he always listen to 's fluent and florid french . in short , Madame shone in she very best phase that day , and come in and go out quite a liive catherine - wheel of compliment , delight , and affability . half purposely , and half to ask some question about school - business , I follow she to the carriage , and look in after she be seat and the door close . in that brief fraction of time what a change have be wrotch ! a instant ago , all sparkle and jest , she now sit sterner than a judge and graver than a sage . little woman ! I go back and tease about 's devotion to he . how he laugh ! what fun shone in he eyes as he recall some of she fine speech , and repeat they , imitat she voluble delivery ! he have a acute sense of humour , and be the finest company in the world -- when he could forget . * * * * * to " sit in sunshine calm and sweet " be say to be excellent for weak people ; it give they vital force . when little be recovere from she illness , I use to take she in
in my arm and walk with she in the garden by the hour together , beneath a certain wall hang with grape , which the Southern sun be ripen : that sin cherish she little pale frame quite as effectually as it mellow and swell the clustering fruit . there be human temper , bland , glow , and genial , within whose influence it be as good for the poor in spirit to live , as it be for the feeble in frame to bask in the glow of noon . of the number of these choice nature be certainly both Bretton's and he mother 's . they like to communicate happiness , as some like to occasion misery : they do it instinctively ; without fuss , and apparently with little consciousness ; the means to give pleasure rise spontaneously in they minds . every day while I stay with they , some little plan be propose which result in beneficial enjoyment . fully occupy as be 's time , he still make it in he way to accompany we in each brief excursion . I can hardly tell how he manage he engagement ; they be numerous , yet by dint of system , he class they in a order which leave he a daily period of liberty . I often see he hard - work , yet seldom over-driven , and never irritate , confuse , or oppress . what he do be accomplish with the ease and grace of all - suffice strength ; with the bountiful cheerfulness of high and unbroken energie . under he guidance I see , in that one happy fortnight , more of , it be environ , and its inhabitant , than I have see in the whole eight month of my previous residence . he take I to place of interest in the town , of whose name I have not before so much as hear ; with willingness and spirit he communicate . much noteworthy information . he never seem to think it a trouble to talk to I , and , I be sure , it be never a task to I to listen . it be not he way to treat subjects coldly and vaguly ; he rarely generalize , never prose . he seem to like nice detail almost as much as I like they myself : he seem observant of character : and not superficially observant , either . these point give the quality of interest to he discourse ; and the fact of he speaking direct from he own resource , and not borrowe or steal from book -- here a dry fact , and there a trite phrase , and elsewhere a hackney opinion -- ensure a freshness , as welcome as it be rare . before my eye , too , he disposition seem to unfold another phase ; to pass to a fresh day : to rise in new and nobler dawn . he mother possess a good development of benevolence , but he own a better and larger . I find , on accompany he to the - -- the poor and crowd quarter of the city -- that he errand there be as much those of the philanthropist as the physician . I understand presently that cheerfully , habitually , and in single - minded unconsciousness of any special merit distinguish he deed -- he be achieve , amongst a very wretched population , a world of active good . the lower order like he well ; he poor , patient in the hospital welcome he with a sort of enthusiasm . but stop -- I must not , from the faithful narrator , degenerate into the partial eulogist . well , full well , do I know that be not perfect , anymore than I be perfect . human fallibility leave he throughout : there be no hour , and scarcely a moment of the time I spend with he that in act or speech , or look , he do not betray something that be not of a god . a god could not have the cruel vanity of , nor he sometime levity . , no immortal could have resemble he in he occasional temporary oblivion of all but the present -- in he passing passion for that present ; show not coarsely , by devote it to material indulgence , but selfishly , by extract from it whatever it could yield of nutriment to he masculine self - love : he delight be to feed that ravenous sentiment , without think of the price of provender , or care for the cost of keep it sleek and high - pampered . the reader be request to note a seem contradiction in the two view which have be give of -- the public and private -- the out - door and the in - door view . in the first , the public , he be show oblivious of self ; as modest in the display of he energie , as earnest in they exercise . in the second , the fireside picture , there be expressed consciousness of what he have and what he be ; pleasure in homage , some recklessness in exciting , some vanity in receive the same . both portrait be correct . it be hardly possible to oblige quietly and in secret . when you think that the fabrication of some trifle dedicated to he use have be achieve unnoticed , and that , like other man , he would use it when place ready for he use , and never ask whence it come , he amaze you by a smilingly - utter observation or two , prove that he eye have be on the work from commencement to close : that he have not the design , trace its progress , and mark its completion . it
it please he to be thus serve , and he let he pleasure beam in he eye and play about he mouth . this would have be all very well , if he have not add to such kindly and unobtrusive evidence a certain wilfulness in discharge what he call debt . when he mother work for he , he pay she by shower about she he bright animal spirit , with even more affluence than he gay , taunt , tease , loving wont . if be discover to have put she hand to such work , he plan , in recompence , some pleasant recreation . I often feel amaze at he perfect knowledge of ; a knowledge not merely confin to its open street , but penetrat to all its galleries , salle , and cabinet : of every door which shut in a object worth see , of every museum , of every hall , sacr to art or science , he seem to possess the " ! sesame . " I never have a head for science , but a ignorant , blind , fond instinct inclin I to art . I like to visit the picture - galleries , and I dearly like to be leave there alone . in company , a wretch idiosyncracy forbade I to see much or to feel anything . in unfamiliar company , where it be necessary to maintain a flow of talk on the subject in presence , half a hour would knock I up , with a combine pressure of physical lassitude and entire mental incapacity . I never yet see the well - rear child , much less the educated adult , who could not put I to shame , by the sustain intelligence of its demeanour under the ordeal of a conversable , sociable visitation of picture , historical sight or building , or any lions of public interest . be a cicerone after my own heart ; he would take I betimes , ere the galleries be fill , leave I there for two or three hour , and call for I when he own engagement be discharge . , I be happy ; happy , not always in admiring , but in examining , question , and form conclusion . in the commencement of these visit , there be some misunderstanding and consequent struggle between and . the former faculty exacte approbation of that which it be consider orthodox to admire ; the latter groan forth its utter inability to pay the tax ; it be then self - sneer at , spur up , goad on to refine its taste , and whet its zest . the more it be chidden , however , the more it would not praise . Discover gradually that a wonderful sense of fatigue result from these conscientious effort , I begin to reflect whether I might not dispense with that great labour , and conclude eventually that I might , and so sank supine into a luxury of calm before ninety - nine out of a hundred of the exhibit frame . it seem to I that a original and good picture be just as scarce as a original and good book ; nor do I , in the end , tremble to say to myself , stand before certain _chef - d'oeuvre bear great name , " these be not a whit like nature . 's daylight never have that colour : never be make so turbid , either by storm or cloud , as it be laid out there , under a sky of indigo : and that indigo be not ether ; and those dark weed plastere upon it be not tree . " several very well execute and complacent - look fat woman strike I as by no means the goddess they appear to consider themselves . many score of marvellously - finish little Flemish picture , and also of sketch , excellent for fashion - book display varied costume in the handsomest material , give evidence of laudable industry whimsically apply . and yet there be fragment of truth here and there which satisfy the conscience , and gleam of light that cheer the vision . 's power here break through in a mountain snow - storm ; and there she glory in a sunny southern day . a expression in this portrait prove clear insight into character ; a face in that historical painting , by its vivid filial likeness , startlingly remind you that genius give it birth . these exception I love : they grow dear as friend . one day , at a quiet early hour , I find myself nearly alone in a certain gallery , wherein one particular picture of portentous size , set up in the best light , have a cordon of protection stretch before it , and a cushioned bench duly set in front for the accommodation of worshipping connoisseur , who , have gaze themselves off they foot , might be fain to complete the business sit : this picture , I say , seem to consider itself the queen of the collection . it represent a woman , considerably larger , I think , than the life . I calculate that this lady , put into a scale of magnitude , suitable for the reception of a commodity of bulk , would infallibly turn from fourteen to sixteen stone . she be , indeed , extremly well feed : very much butcher 's meat -- to say nothing of bread , vegetable , and liquid -- must she have consum to attain that breadth and height , that wealth of muscle , that affluence of flesh . she lay half - recline on a couch : why , it would be difficult to say ; broad daylight blaze round she ; she appear in hearty health , strong enough to
to do the work of two plain cook ; she could not plead a weak spine ; she ought to have be stand , or at least sit bolt upright . she , have no business to lounge away the noon on a sofa . she ought likewise to have wear decent garment ; a gown cover she properly , which be not the case : out of abundance of material -- seven - and - twenty yard , I should say , of drapery -- she manage to make inefficient raiment . then , for the wretched untidiness surround she , there could be no excuse . pot and pans -- perhaps I ought to say vase and goblet -- be roll here and there on the foreground ; a perfect rubbish of flower be mix amongst they , and a absurd and disorderly mass of curtain upholstery smother the couch and cumber the floor . on refer to the catalogue , I find that this notable production bear the name " . " well , I be sit wonder at it ( as the bench be there , I think I might as well take advantage of its accommodation ) , and think that while some of the detail -- as ros , gold cup , jewel , & c. , be very prettily paint , it be on the whole a enormous piece of claptrap ; the room , almost vacant when I enter , begin to fill . Scarcely notice this circumstance ( as , indeed , it do not matter to I ) I retain my seat ; rather to rest myself than with a view to study this huge , dark - complexioned gipsy - queen ; of whom , indeed , I soon tired , and betake myself for refreshment to the contemplation of some exquisite little picture of still life : wild - flower , wild - fruit , mossy woodnest , casket egg that look like pearl see through clear green sea -water ; all hang modestly beneath that coarse and preposterous canva . suddenly a light tap visit my shoulder . start , turn , I meet a face bent to encounter mine ; a frowning , almost a shocked face it be . " que faite - vous ici ? " say a voice . " , , je m'amuse . " " Vous vous amusez ! et a quoi , s'il vous plait ? Mais d'abord , faite - moi le plaisir de vous lever ; prenez mon bras , et allons de l'autre cote . " I do precisely as I be bid . ( it be he ) return from , and now a travel man , be not likely to be less tolerant of insubordination now , than before this add distinction laurel he temple . " permit I to conduct you to you party , " say he , as we cross the room . " I have no party . " " you be not alone ? " " yes , . " " do you come here unaccompanied ? " " no , . bring I here . " " and he mother , of course ? " " no ; only . " " and he tell you to look at _that picture ? " " by no means ; I find it out for myself . " 's hair be shorn close as raven down , or I think it would have bristle on he head . begin now to perceive he drift , I have a certain pleasure in keeping cool , and work he up . " astounde insular audacity ! " cry the Professor . " Singuliere femme que ce Anglaise ! " " what be the matter , ? " " matter ! how dare you , a young person , sit coolly down , with the self - possession of a garcon , and look at _that picture ? " " it be a very ugly picture , but I can not at all see why I should not look at it " " ! bon ! speak no more of it . but you ought not to be here alone . " ' if , however , I have no society -- no _party , as you say ? and then , what do it signify whether I be alone , or accompany ? nobody meddle with I . " " Taisez - vous , et asseyez - vous la--la ! " -- set down a chair with emphasis in a particularly dull corner , before a series of most specially dreary " cadre . " " , ? " " , , asseyez - vous , et ne bougez pas--entendez -vous ?-- jusqu 'a ce qu'on vienne vous chercher , out que je vous donne la permission . " " Quel triste coin ! " cry I , " et quelle laids tableaux ! " and " laids , " indeed , they be ; be a set of four , denominate in the catalogue " vie d'une femme . " they be paint rather in a remarkable style -- flat , dead , pale , and formal . the first represent a " , " come out of a church - door , a missal in she hand , she dress very prim , she eye cast down , she mouth purse up -- the image of a most villanous little precocious she - hypocrite . the second , a " , " with a long white veil , knee at a prie -dieu in she chamber , hold she hand plastere together , finger to finger , and show the whites of she eye in a most exasperating manner . the third , a " , " hang disconsolate over a clayey and puffy baby with a face like a unwholesome full
full moon . the fourth , a " Veuve , " be a black woman , hold by the hand a black little girl , and the twain studiously survey a elegant french monument , set up in a corner of some Pere la Chaise . all these four " Ange " be grim and grey as burglar , and cold and vapid as ghost . what woman to live with ! insincere , ill - humoured , bloodless , brainless nonentity ! as bad in they way as the indolent gipsy - giantess , the , in hers . it be impossible to keep one 's attention long confin to these master - piece , and so , by degree , I veer round , and survey the gallery . a perfect crowd of spectator be by this time gather round the Lioness , from whose vicinage I have be banish ; nearly half this crowd be lady , but . afterwards tell I , these be " des dame , " and it be quite proper for they to contemplate what no " demoiselle " ought to glance at . I assure he plainly I could not agree in this doctrine , and do not see the sense of it ; whereupon , with he usual absolutism , he merely request my silence , and also , in the same breath , denounce my mingled rashness and ignorance . a more despotic little man than m . never fill a professor 's chair . I notice , by the way , that he look at the picture himself quite at he ease , and for a very long while : he do not , however , neglect to glance from time to time my way , in order , I suppose , to make sure that I be obey order , and not break bounds . by - and - by , he again accost I . " have I not be ill ? " he wish to know : " he understand I have . " " yes , but I be now quite well . " " where have I spend the vacation ? " " Chiefly in the ; partly with . " " he have hear that I be leave alone in the ; be that so ? " " not quite alone : " ( the cretin ) " be with I . " he shrug he shoulders ; varied and contradictory expression play rapidly over he countenance . be well know to ; he never give a lesson in the third division ( contain the least advanced pupil ) , that she do not occasion in he a sharp conflict between antagonistic impressions . she personal appearance , she repulsive manners , she often unmanageable disposition , irritate he temper , and inspire he with strong antipathy ; a feeling he be too apt to conceive when he taste be offend or he will thwart . on the other hand , she misfortune , constitute a strong claim on he forbearance and compassion -- such a claim as it be not in he nature to deny ; hence result almost dailly draw battle between impatience and disgust on the one hand , pity and a sense of justice on the other ; in which , to he credit be it say , it be very seldom that the former feeling prevail : when they do , however , m . show a phase of character which have its terror . he passion be strong , he aversion and attachment alike vivid ; the force he exert in hold both in check by no means mitigate a observer 's sense of they vehemence . with such tendency , it may well be suppose he often accit in ordinary minds fear and dislike ; yet it be a error to fear he : nothing drive he so nearly frantic as the tremor of a apprehensive and distrustful spirit ; nothing soothe he like confidence tempere with gentleness . to evince these sentiment , however , require a thorough comprehension of he nature ; and he nature be of a order rarely comprehend . " how do you get on with ? " he ask , after some minute ' silence . " Monsieur , I do my best ; but it be terrible to be alone with she ! " " you have , then , a weak heart ! you lack courage ; and , perhaps , charity . yours be not the quality which might constitute a sister of . " [ he be a religious little man , in he way : the self - deny and self - sacrifice part of the religion command the homage of he soul . ] " I do not know , indeed : I take as good care of she as I could ; but when she aunt come to fetch she away , it be a great relief . " " ah ! you be a egotist . there be woman who have nurse hospital - full of similar unfortunate . you could not do that ? " " could yoMonsieu do it himself ? " " women who be worthy the name ought infinitely to surpass ; we coarse , fallible , self - indulgent sex , in the power to perform such duty . " " I washed she , I keep she clean , I feed she , I try to amuse she ; but she make mouth at I instead of speaking . " " you think you do great thing ? " " no ; but as great as I _could do . " " then limit be you power , for in ten one idiot you fall sick . " " not with that , ; I have a nervous fever : my mind be ill . "
" " Vraiment ! Vous valez peu de chose . you be not cast in a heroic mould ; you courage will not avail to sustain you in solitude ; it merely give you the temerity to gaze with sang - froid at picture of . " it would have be easy to show anger at the teasing , hostile tone of the little man . I have never be angry with he yet , however , and have no present disposition to begin . " ! " I repeat , quietly . " Monsieur , too , have be look at ; what do he think of she ? " " Cela ne vaut rien , " he respond . " Une femme superbe -- une taille d' imperatrice , des form , tmais une personne do not je ne voudrais ni pour femme , ni pour fille , ni pour soeur . Aussi vous ne jeterez plus un seul coup d'oeil de sa cote . " " but I have look at she a great many time while have be talk : I can see she quite well from this corner . " " turn to the wall and study you four picture of a woman 's life . " " excuse I , m . ; they be too hideous : but if you admire they , allow I to vacate my seat and leave you to they contemplation . " " , " he say , grimace a half - smile , or what he intend for a smile , though it be but a grim and hurrie manifestation . " you nursling of astonish I . you unguard walk calmly amidst red - hot ploughshare and escape burn . I believe , if some of you be throw into 's hottest furnace you would issue forth untraversed by the smell of fire . " " will have the goodness to move a inch to one side ? " " how ! at what be you gaze now ? you be not recognise a acquaintance amongst that group of jeune gen ? " " I think so -- yes , I see there a person I know . " in fact , I have catch a glimpse of a head too pretty to belong to any other than the redoubt . what a very finished , highly polish little pate it be ! what a figure , so trim and natty ! what womanish foot and hand ! how daintily he hold a glass to one of he optic ! with what admiration he gaze upon the Cleopatra ! and then , how engagingly he titter and whisper a friend at he elbow ! oh , the man of sense ! oh , the refin gentleman of superior taste and tact ! I observ he for about ten minute , and perceive that he be exceedingly take with this dusk and portly Venus of the . so much be I interested in he bear , so absorbed in divine he character by he look and movement , I temporarily forget ; in the interim a group come between that gentleman and I ; or possibly he scruple might have receive another and worse shock from my present abstraction , cause he to withdraw voluntarily : at any rate , when I again look round , he be gone . my eye , pursuant of the search , meet not he , but another and dissimilar figure , well see amidst the crowd , for the height as well as the port lent each its distinction . this way come , in visage , in shape , in hue , as unlike the dark , acerb , and caustic little professor , as the fruit of the might be unlike the sloe in the wild thicket ; as the high - couraged but tractable be unlike the rude and stubborn " sheltie . " he be look for I , but have not yet explore the corner where the schoolmaster have just put I . I remain quiet ; yet another minute I would watch . he approach ; he pause near he ; I think he have a pleasure in look over he head ; , too , gaze on the Cleopatra . I doubt if it be to he taste : he do not simper like the little count ; he mouth look fastidious , he eye cool ; without demonstration he step aside , leave room for other to approach . I see now that he be wait , and , rise , I join he . we take one turn round the gallery ; with it be very pleasant to take such a turn . I always like dearly to hear what he have to say about either picture or book ; because without pretend to be a connoisseur , he always speak he thought , and that be sure to be fresh : very often it be also just and pithy . it be pleasant also to tell he some thing he do not know -- he listen so kindly , so teachably ; unformalize by scruple lest so to bend he bright handsome head , to gather a woman 's rather obscure and stammer explanation , should imperil the dignity of he manhood . and when he communicate information in return , it be with a lucid intelligence that leave all he word clear graven on the memory ; no explanation of he give , no fact of he narrating , do I ever forget . as we leave the gallery , I ask he what he think of the ( after make he laugh by tell he how have send I to the right about , and take he to see the sweet series of picture recommend to my attention . ) " Pooh ! " say he . " my
my mother be a better - look woman . I hear some french fop , yonder , designate she as 'le type do voluptueux ; ' if so , I can only say , 'le voluptueux ' be little to my liking . compare that mulatto with ! " . the concert . one morning , , come promptly into my room , desire I to open my drawer and show she my dress ; which I do , without a word . " that will do , " say she , when she have turn they over . " you must have a new one . " she go out . she return presently with a dressmaker . she have I measure . " I mean , " say she , " to follow my own taste , and to have my own way in this little matter . " two day after come home - - a pink dress ! " that be not for I , " I say , hurriedly , feel that I would almost as soon clothe myself in the costume of a chinese lady of rank . " we shall see whether it be for you or not , " rejoin my godmother , add with she resistless decision : " my word . you will wear it this very evening . " I think I should not ; I think no human force should avail to put I into it . a pink dress ! I know it not . it know not I . I have not prove it . my godmother go on to decree that I be to go with she and to a concert that same night : which concert , she explain , be a grand affair to be hold in the large salle , or hall , of the principal musical society . the most advanced of the pupil of the be to perform : it be to be follow by a lottery " au benefice des pauvre ; " and to cry all , the , , and of be to be present . , in send ticket , have enjoined attention to costume as a compliment due to royalty : he also recommend punctual readiness by seven o'clock . about six , I be usher upstairs . without any force at all , I find myself lead and influence by another 's will , unconsulted , unpersuaded , quietly overrule . in short , the pink dress go on , soften by some drapery of black lace . I be pronounce to be e grande tenue , and request to look in the glass . I do so with some fear and trembl ; with more fear and trembling , I turn away . o'clock struck ; be come ; my godmother and I go down . She_ be clad in brown velvet ; as I walk in she shadow , how I envy she those fold of grave , dark majesty ! stand in the drawing - room doorway . " I _do_ hope he will not think I have be deck myself out to draw attention , " be my uneasy aspiration . " here , , be some flower , " say he , give I a bouquet . he take no further notice of my dress than be convey in a kind smile and satisfied nod , which calm at once my sense of shame and fear of ridicule . for the rest ; the dress be make with extreme simplicity , guiltless of flounce or furbelow ; it be but the light fabric and bright tint which scare I , and since find in it nothing absurd , my own eye consent soon to become reconcile . I suppose people who go every night to place of public amusement , can hardly enter into the fresh gala feel with which a opera or a concert be enjoy by those for whom it be a rarity : I be not sure that I expect great pleasure from the concert , have but a very vague notion of its nature , but I like the drive there well . the snug comfort of the close carriage on a cold though fine night , the pleasure of set out with companion so cheerful and friendly , the sight of the star glint fitfully through the tree as we roll along the avenue ; then the freer burst of the night - sky when we issue forth to the open chaussee , the passage through the city gate , the light there burn , the guard there post , the pretence of inspection , to which we there submit , and which amuse we so much -- all these small matter have for I , in they novelty , a peculiarly exhilarating charm . how much of it lay in the atmosphere of friendship diffuse about I , I know not : and he mother be both in they finest mood , contende animatedly with each other the whole way , and as frankly kind to I as if I have be of they kin . we way lay through some of the best street of , street brightly light , and far more lively now than at high noon . how brilliant seem the shop ! how glad , gay , and abundant flowed the tide of life along the broad pavement ! while I look , the thought of the come across I -- of the wall - in garden and school - house , and of the dark , vast " class , " where , as at this very hour , it be my will not to wander all solitary , gaze at the star through the high , blindless window , and listen to the distant voice of the reader in the refectory , monotonously exercise upon the "
" lecture pieuse . " thus must I soon again listen and wander ; and this shadow of the future stole with timely sobriety across the radiant present . by this time we have get into a current of carriage all tending in one direction , and soon the front of a great illuminated building blaze before we . of what I should see within this building , I have , as before intimate , but a imperfect idea ; for no place of public entertainment have it ever be my lot to enter yet . we alight under a portico where there be a great bustle and a great crowd , but I do not distinctly remember further detail , until I find myself mount a majestic staircase wide and easy of ascent , deeply and softly carpet with crimson , lead up to great door close solemnly , and whose panel be also crimson - clothed . I hardly notice by what magic these door be make to roll back -- . manage these point ; roll back they do , however , and withing be disclose a hall -- grand , wide , and high , whose sweep circular wall , and do hollow ceiling , see to I all dead gold ( thus with nice art be it stain ) , relieve by cornicing , flut , and garlandry , either bright , like gold burnish , or snow - white , like alabaster , or white and gold mingl in wreat of gild leave and spotless lily : wherever drapery hung , wherever carpet be spread , or cushion place , the sole colour employ be deep crimson . Pendent from the dome , flam a mass that dazzl I -- a mass , I think , of rock -crystal , sparkl with facet , stream with drop , ablaze with star , and gorgeously tinge with dew of gem dissolve , or fragment of rainbow shiver . it be only the chandelier , reader , but for I it seem the work of eastern genii : I almost look to see if a huge , dark , cloudy hand -- that of the of the -- be not hover in the lustrous and perfume atmosphere of the cupola , guard its wondrous treasure . we move on -- I be not at all conscious whither -- but at some turn we suddenly encounter another party approach from the opposite direction . I just now see that group , as it flash -- upon I for one moment . a handsome middle - aged lady in dark velvet ; a gentleman who might be she son -- the best face , the finest figure , I think , I have ever see ; a third person in a pink dress and black lace mantle . I note they all -- the third person as well as the other two -- and for the fraction of a moment believe they all stranger , thus receive a impartial impression of they appearance . but the impression be hardly felt and not fix , before the consciousness that I face a great mirror , fill a compartment between two pillars , dispell it : the party be we own party . thus for the first , and perhaps only time in my life , I enjoy the " giftie " of see myself as other see I . no need to dwell on the result . it bring a jar of discord , a pang of regret ; it be not flatter , yet , after all , I ought to be thankful ; it might have be worse . at last , we be seat in place command a good general view of that vast and dazzling , but warm and cheerful hall . already it be fill , and fill with a splendid assemblage . I do not know that the woman be very beautiful , but they dress be so perfect ; and foreigner , even such as be ungraceful in domestic privacy , seem to poss the art of appear graceful in public : however blunt and boisterous those every - day and home movement connect with peignoir and papillote , there be a slide , a bend , a carriage of the head and arm , a mien of the mouth and eye , keep nicely in reserve for gala use -- always bring out with the grande toilette , and duly put on with the " parure . " some fine form there be here and there , model of a peculiar style of beauty ; a style , I think , never see in ; a solid , firm -set , sculptural style . these shapes have no angles : a caryatid in marble be almost as flexible ; a Phidian goddess be not more perfect in a certain still and stately sort . they have such feature as the painters give to they madonna : low - country classic feature , regular but round , straight but stolid ; and for they depth of expressionless calm , of passionless peace , a polar snow - field could alone offer a type . woman of this order need no ornament , and they seldom wear any ; the smooth hair , closely braide , supply a sufficient contrast to the smoother cheek and brow ; the dress can not be too simple ; the rounded arm and perfect neck require neither bracelet nor chain . with one of these beauty I once have the honour and rapture to be perfectly acquaint : the inert force of the deep , settled love she bear herself , be wonderful ; it could only be surpass by she proud impotency to care for any other living thing . of blood , she cool vein conduct no flow ; placid lymph fill and almost obstruct she
she arteries . such a as I have describe sit full in we view -- a sort of mark for all eye , and quite conscious that so she be , but proon to the magnetic influence of gaze or glance : cold , reound , blonde , and beauteous as the white column , capitall with gilding , which rise at she side . Observe that 's attention be much draw towards she , I entreate he in a low voice " for the love of heaven to shield well he heart . you need not fall in love with _that_ lady , " I say , " because , I tell you beforehand , you might die at she foot , and she would not love you again . " " very well , " say he , " and how do you know that the spectacle of she grand insensibility might not with I be the strongest stimulus to homage ? the sting of desperation be , I think , a wonderful irritant to my emotion : but " ( shrugge he shoulders ) " you know nothing about these thing ; I will address myself to my mother . , I be in a dangerous way . " " as if that interest I ! " say . " ! the cruelty of my lot ! " respond she son . " never man have a more unsentimental mother than mine : she never seem to think that such a calamity can befall she as a daughter - in - law . " " if I do not , it be not for want of have that same calamity hold over my head : you have threaten I with it for the last ten year . ' , I be go to be marry soon ! ' be the cry before you be well out of jacket . " " but , mother , one of these day it will be realize . all of a sudden , when you think you be most secure , I shall go forth like or , or any other patriarch , and take I a wife : perhaps of these which be of the daughter of the land . " " at you peril , ! that be all . " " this mother of mine mean I to be a old bachelor . what a jealous old lady it be ! but now just look at that splendid creature in the pale blue satin dress , and hair of paler brown , with ' reflet satine ' as those of she robe . would you not feel proud , mamma , if I be to bring that goddess home some day , and introduce she to you as , junior ? " " you will bring no goddess to : that little chateau will not contain two mistress ; especially if the second be of the height , bulk , and circumference of that mighty doll in wood and wax , and kid and satin . " " , she would fill you blue chair so admirably ! " " fill my chair ? I defy the foreign usurper ! a rueful chair should it be for she : but hush , ! hold you tongue , and use you eye . " during the above skirmish , the hall , which , I have think , seem full at the entrance , continue to admit party after party , until the semicircle before the stage present one dense mass of head , slop from floor to cei . the stage , too , or rather the wide temporary platform , larger than any stage , desert half a hour since , be now overflowe with life ; round two grand piano , place about the centre , a white flock of young girl , the pupil of the , have noiselessly pour . I have notice they gathering , while and he mother be engage in discuss the belle in blue satin , and have watch with interest the process of array and marshall they . two gentleman , in each of whom I recognise a acquaintance , office this virgin troop . one , a artistic - look man , beard , and with long hair , be a note pianiste , and also the first music - teacher in ; he attend twice a week at 's pensionnat , to give lesson to the few pupil whose parent be rich enough to allow they daughter the privilege of he instruction ; he name be , and he be half - brother to : which potent personage be now visible in the person of the second gentleman . m . amuse I ; I smile to myself as I watch he , he seem so thoroughly in he element -- stand conspicuous in presence of a wide and grand assemblage , arrange , restrain , over -awe about one hundred young lady . he be , too , so perfectly in earnest -- so energetic , so intent , and , above all , so of the foreigners then resident in . these take possession of the crimson benche ; the lady be seat ; most of the man remain stand : they sable rank , line the background , look like a dark foil to the splendour display in front . be this splendour without varie light and shade and gradation : the middle distance be fill with matron in velvet and satin , in plume and gem ; the benche in the foreground , to the 's right hand , see devote exclusively to young girl , the flower -- perhaps , I should rather say , the bud -- of Villette aristocracy . here be no jewel , no head - dress , no velvet pile or silken sheen purity , simplicity , and
and aerial grace reign in that virgin band . young head simply braide , and fair form ( I be go to write _sylph form , but that would have be quite untrue : several of these " jeune filles , " who have not number more than sixteen or seventeen year , boast contour as robust and solid as those of a stout of five - and -twenty ) --fair form rob in white , or pale rose , or placid blue , suggest thoughts of heaven and angel . I know a couple , at least , of these " rise et blanco " specimen of humanity . here be a pair of 's late pupil -- and : pupil who , during they last year at school , ink to have be in the first class , but whose brain never get they beyond the second division . in , they have be under my own charge , and hard work it be to get they to translate rationally a page of the of . also during three month I have one of they for my vis -a -vis at table , and the quantity of household bread , butter , and stew fruit , she would habitually consume at " second dejeuner " be a real world 's wonder -- to be exceed only by the fact of she actually pocket slice she could not eat . here be truth -- wholesome truth , too . I know another of these seraph -- the prettiest , or , at any rate , the least demure and hypocritical look of the lot : she be seat by the daughter of a english peer , also a honest , though haughty - look girl : both have enter in the suite of the british embassy . she ( _i.e._ my acquaintance ) have a slight , pliant figure , not at all like the form of the foreign damsel : she hair , too , be not close - braided , like a shell or a skull - cap of satin ; it look _like_ hair , and wave from she head , long , curl , and flow . she chat away volubly , and seem full of a light - head sort of satisfaction with herself and she position . I do not look at ; but I know that he , too , see : he have become so quiet , he answer so briefly he mother 's remark , he so often suppress a sigh . why wshould he sigh ? he have confess a taste for the pursuit of love under difficulty ; here be full gratification for that taste . he lady - love beam upon he from a sphere above he own : he could not come near she ; he be not certain that he could win from she a look . I watch to see if she would so far favour he . we seat be not far from the crimson benche ; we must inevitably be see thence , by eye so quick and rove as 's , and very soon those optic of hers be upon we : at least , upon and . I keep rather in the shade and out of sight , not wish to be immediately recognise : she look quite steadily at , and then she raise a glass to examine he mother ; a minute or two afterwards she laughingly whisper she neighbour ; upon the performance commence , she rambl attention be attract to the platform . on the concert I need not dwell ; the reader would not care to have my impressions thereanent : and , indeed , it would not be worth while to record they , as they be the impressions of a ignorance crasse . the young lady of the , be very much frightened , make rather a tremulous exhibition on the two grand piano . stand by they while they play ; but he have not the tact or influence of he kinsman , who , under similar circumstance , would certainly have _compell pupil of he to demean themselves with heroism and self - possession . m . would have place the hysteric debutante between two fire -- terror of the audience , and terror of himself -- and would have inspire they with the courage of desperation , by make the latter terror incomparably the greater : could not do this . follow the white muslin pianiste , come a fine , full - grown , sulky lady in white satin . she sang . she singe just affect I like the trick of a conjuror : I wonder how she do it -- how she make she voice run up and down , and cut such marvellous caper ; but a simple melody , play by a rude street minstrel , have often move I more deeply . afterwards step forth a gentleman , who , bend he body a good deal in the direction of the and , and frequently approach he white - glove hand to the region of he heart , vent a bitter outcry against a certain " fausse Isabelle . " I think he seem especially to solicit the 's sympathy ; but , unless I be egregiously mistaken , she Majesty lent she attention rather with the calm of courtesy than the earnestness of interest . this gentleman 's state of mind be very harrowing , and I be glad when he wound up he musical exposition of the same . some rouse choruse strike I as the best part of the evening 's entertainment . there be present deputy from all the best provincial choral societie ; genuine , barrel - shaped , native Labassecouriens . these worthy give voice without mince the matter they hearty exertion have at least this good result --
-- the ear drank thence a satisfying sense of power . through the whole performance -- timid instrumental duet , conceit vocal solo , sonorous , brass - lunge choruse -- my attention give but one eye and one ear to the stage , the other be permanently retain in the service of : I could not forget he , nor cease to question how he be feel , what he be think , whether he be amuse or the contrary . at last he speak . " and how do you like it all , ? you be very quiet , " he say , in he own cheerful tone . " I be quiet , " I say , " because I be so very , _very much interested : not merely with the music , but with everything about I . " he then proceed to make some further remark , with so much equanimity and composure that I begin to think he have really not see what I have see , and I whisper -- " be here : have you notice she ? " " oh , yes ! and I observ that you notice she too ? " " be she come with , do you think ? " " . be there with a very grand party . yes ; be in _her_ train ; and be in ---- 's train , who be in the 's train . if this be not one of the compact little minor european court , whose very formality be little more imposing than familiarity , and whose gala grandeur be but homeliness in , it would sound all very fine . " " see you , I think ? " " so do I think so . I have have my eye on she several time since you withdraw yours ; and I have have the honour of witnessing a little spectacle which you be spare . " I do not ask what ; I wait voluntary information , which be presently give . " , " he say , " have a companion with she -- a lady of rank . I happen to know by sight ; she noble mother have call I in professionally . she be a proud girl , but not in the least insolent , and I doubt whether will have gain ground in she estimation by make a butt of she neighbour . " " what neighbour ? " " merely myself and my mother . as to I it be all very natural : nothing , I suppose , can be fairer game than the young bourgeois doctor ; but my mother ! I never see she ridicule before . do you know , the curling lip , and sarcastically level glass thus direct , give I a most curious sensation ? " " think nothing of it , : it be not worth while . if be in a giddy mood , as she be eminently to - night , she would make no scruple of laugh at that mild , pensive , or that melancholy . she be not actuate by malevolence , but sheer , heedless folly . to a feather - brain school - girl nothing be sacr . " " but you forget : I have not be accustom to look on in the light of a feather - brain school - girl . be she not my divinity -- the angel of my career ? " " hey ! there be you mistake . " " to speak the honest truth , without any false rant or assume romance , there actually be a moment , six month ago , when I think she divine . do you remember we conversation about the present ? I be not quite open with you in discuss that subject : the warmth with which you take it up amuse I . by way of have the full benefit of you light , I allow you to think I more in the dark than I really be . it be that test of the present which first prove . still she beauty retain its fascination : three day -- three hour ago , I be very much she slave . as she pass I to - night , triumphant in beauty , my emotion do she homage ; but for one luckless sneer , I should yet be the humblest of she servants . she might have scoff at _me , and , while wounde , she would not soon have alienate I : through myself , she could not in ten year have do what , in a moment , she have do through my mother . " he hold he peace awhile . never before have I see so much fire , and so little sunshine in 's blue eye as just now . " , " he recommence , " look well at my mother , and say , without fear or favour , in what light she now appear to you . " " as she always do -- a english , middle - class gentlewoman ; well , though gravely dress , habitually independent of pretence , constitutionally compose and cheerful . " " so she seem to I -- bless she ! the merry may laugh _with mamma , but the weak only will laugh _at_ she . she shall not be ridicule , with my consent , at least ; nor without my -- my scorn -- my antipathy -- my -- " he stop : and it be time -- for he be get excited -- more it seem than the occasion warrant . I do not then know that he have witness double cause for dissatisfaction with . the glow of he complexion , the expansion of he nostril , the bold curve which disdain give he well
well - cut under lip , show he in a new and striking phase . yet the rare passion of the constitutionally suave and serene , be not a pleasant spectacle ; nor do I like the sort of vindictive thrill which pass through he strong young frame . " do I frighten you , ? " he ask . " I can not tell why you be so very angry . " " for this reason , " he mutter in my ear . " be neither a pure angel , nor a pure -minded woman . " " Nonsense ! you exaggerate : she have no great harm in she . " " too much for I . _i_ can see where _you_ be blind . now dismiss the subject . let I amuse myself by teasing mamma : I will assert that she be flagge . , pray rouse yourself . " " , I will certainly rouse you if you be not better conduct . will you and be silent , that I may hear the singing ? " they be then thunder in a chorus , under cover of which all the previous dialogue have take place . " _You hear the singing , mamma ! now , I will wager my stud , which be genuine , against you paste brooch -- " " my paste brooch , ? Profane boy ! you know that it be a stone of value . " " oh ! that be one of you superstition : you be cheat in the business . " " I be cheat in fewer thing than you imagine . how do you happen to be acquaint with young lady of the court , ? I have observ two of they pay you no small attention during the last half - hour . " " I wish you would not observe they . " " why not ? because one of they satirically level she eyeglass at I ? she be a pretty , silly girl : but be you apprehensive that she titter will discomfit the old lady ? " " the sensible , admirable old lady ! mother , you be better to I than ten wife yet . " " do not be demonstrative , , or I shall faint , and you will have to carry I out ; and if that burden be laid upon you , you would reverse you last speech , and exclaim , ' mother , ten wife could hardly be worse to I than you be ! ' " * * * * * the concert over , the lottery " au benefice des pauvre " come next : the interval between be one of general relaxation , and the pleasantest imaginable stir and commotion . the white flock be clear from the platform ; a busy throng of gentleman crowd it instead , make arrangement for the drawing ; and amongst these -- the busiest of all -- re-appear that certain well - know form , not tall but active , alive with the energy and movement of three tall man . how . do work ! how he issue direction , and , at the same time , set he own shoulder to the wheel ! half - a - dozen assistant be at he beck to remove the piano , & c. ; no matter , he must add to they strength he own . the redundancy of he alertness be half - vexing , half - ludicrous : in my mind I both disapprove and deride most of this fuss . yet , in the midst of prejudice and annoyance , I could not , while watch , avoid perceive a certain not disagreeable naivete in all he do and say ; nor could I be blind to certain vigorous characteristic of he physiognomy , render conspicuous now by the contrast with a throng of tamer face : the deep , intent keenness of he eye , the power of he forehead , pale , broad , and full -- the mobility of he most flexible mouth . he lack the calm of force , but it be movement and it be fire he signally possess . meantime the whole hall be in a stir ; most people rise and remain stand , for a change ; some walk about , all talk and laugh . the crimson compartment present a peculiarly animated scene . the long cloud of gentleman , break into fragment , mix with the rainbow line of lady ; two or three officer - like man approach the and converse with he . the Queen , leave she chair , glide along the rank of young lady , who all stand up as she pass ; and to each in turn I see she vouchsafe some token of kindness -- a gracious word , look or smile . to the two pretty English girl , and , she address several sentence ; as she leave they , both , and especially the latter , seem to glow all over with gratification . they be afterwards accost by several lady , and a little circle of gentleman gather round they ; amongst these -- the nearest to -- stand the . " this room be stiflingly hot , " say , rise with sudden impatience . " Lucy -- mother -- will you come a moment to the fresh air ? " " go with he , , " say . " I would rather keep my seat . " willingly would I have keep mine also , but 's desire must take precedence of my own ; I accompany he . we find the night - air keen ; or at least I do : he do not seem to feel it ; but it be very still , and the star - sow sky
sky spread cloudless . I be wrap in a fur shawl . we take some turn on the pavement ; in pass under a lamp , encounter my eye . " you look pensive , Lucy : be it on my account ? " " I be only fear that you be grieve . " " not at all : so be of good cheer -- as I be . whenever I die , , my persuasion be that it will not be of heart - complaint . I may be sting , I may seem to droop for a time , but no pain or malady of sentiment have yet go through my whole system . you have always see I cheerful at home ? " " generally . " " I be glad she laugh at my mother . I would not give the old lady for a dozen beauty . that sneer do I all the good in the world . thank you , ! " and he lift he hat from he wave lock , and make a mock reverence . " yes , " he say , " I thank she . she have make I feel that nine part in ten of my heart have always be sound as a bell , and the tenth b from a mere puncture : a lancet - prick that will heal in a trice . " " you be angry just now , heat and indignant ; you will think and feel differently to - morrow . " " _I_ heat and indignant ! you do not know I . on the contrary , the heat be gone : I be as cool as the night -- which , by the way , may be too cool for you . we will go back . " " , this be a sudden change . " " not it : or if it be , there be good reason for it -- two good reason : I have tell you one . but now let we re-enter . " we do not easily regain we seat ; the lottery be begin , and all be excite confusion ; crowd block the sort of corridor along which we have to pass : it be necessary to pause for a time . happen to glance round -- indeed I half fancie I hear my name pronounce -- I see quite near , the ubiquitous , the inevitable . he be look at I gravely and intently : at I , or rather at my pink dress -- sardonic comment on which gleam in he eye . now it be he habit to indulge in stricture on the dress , both of the teacher and pupil , at - - a habit which the former , at least , hold to be a offensive impertinence : as yet I have not suffer from it -- my sombre daily attire not be calculate to attract notice . I be in no mood to permit any new encroachment to - night : rather than accept he banter , I would ignore he presence , and accordingly steadily turn my face to the sleeve of 's coat ; find in that same black sleeve a prospect more redolent of pleasure and comfort , more genial , more friendly , I think , than be offer by the dark little Professor 's unlovely visage . seem unconsciously to sanction the preference by look down and say in he kind voice , " ay , keep close to my side , Lucy : these crowding burgher be no respecter of person . " I could not , however , be true to myself . Yield to some influence , mesmeric or otherwise -- a influence unwelcome , displease , but effective -- I again glance round to see if m . be gone . no , there he stand on the same spot , look still , but with a change eye ; he have penetrat my thought , and read my wish to shin he . the mocking but not ill - humoured gaze be turn to a swarthy frown , and when I bow , with a view to conciliation , I get only the stiffest and sternest of nod in return . " whom have you make , ? " whisper , smile . " who be that savage - look friend of yours ? " " one of the professor at 's : a very cross little man . " " he look mighty cross just now : what have you do to he ? what be it all about ? ah , , ! tell I the meaning of this . " " no mystery , I assure you . be very exigeant , and because I look at you coat - sleeve , instead of curtseying and dip to he , he think I have fail in respect . " " the little -- " begin : I know not what more he would have add , for at that moment I be nearly throw down amongst the foot of the crowd . m . have rudely pushed past , and be elbow he way with such utter disregard to the convenience and security of all around , that a very uncomfortable pressure be the consequence . " I think he be what he himself would call ' mechant , ' " say . I think so , too . slowly and with difficulty we make we way along the passage , and at last regain we seat . the drawing of the lottery last nearly a hour ; it be a animating and amuse scene ; and as we each hold ticket , we share in the alternation of hope and fear raise by each turn of the wheel . two little girl , of five and six year old
old , draw the number : and the prize be duly proclaim from the platform . these prize be numerous , though of small value . it so fall out that and I each gain one : mine be a cigar - case , he a lady 's head - dress -- a most airy sort of blue and silver turban , with a streamer of plumage on one side , like a snowy cloud . he be excessively anxious to make a exchange ; but I could not be bring to hear reason , and to this day I keep my cigar - case : it serve , when I look at it , to remind I of old time , and one happy evening . , for he part , hold he turban at arm 's length between he finger and thumb , and look at it with a mixture of reverence and embarrassment highly provocative of laughter . the contemplation over , he be about coolly to deposit the delicate fabric on the ground between he foot ; he seem to have no shadow of a idea of the treatment or stowage it ought to receive : if he mother have not come to the rescue , I think he would finally have crush it under he arm like a opera - hat ; she restore it to the band - box whence it have issue . be quite cheerful all the evening , and he cheerfulness seem natural and unforced . he demeanour , he look , be not easily describe ; there be something in it peculiar , and , in its way , original . I read in it no common mastery of the passion , and a fund of deep and healthy strength which , without any exhausting effort , bear down disappointment and extracte she fang . he manner , now , remind I of qualitie I have notice in he when professionally engage amongst the poor , the guilty , and the suffering , in the - : he look at once determined , enduring , and sweet - tempered . who could help like he ? _He_ betraye no weakness which harass all you feeling with considerations as to how its falter must be prop ; from _him_ break no irritability which start calm and quench mirth ; _his_ lip let fall no caustic that burn to the bone ; _his_ eye shoot no morose shaft that go cold , and rusty , and venom through you heart : beside he be rest and refuge -- around he , foster sunshine . and yet he have neither forgive nor forgote . once anger , I doubt if be to be soon propitiate -- once alienate , whether he be ever to be reclaim . he look at she more than once ; not stealthily or humbly , but with a movement of hardy , open observation . be now a fixture beside she ; sit near , and they and she be wholly absorb in the discourse , mirth , and excitement , with which the crimson seat be as much astir as any plebeian part of the hall . in the course of some apparently animated discussion , once or twice lift she hand and arm ; a handsome bracelet gleam upon the latter . I see that its glebe flicker in 's eye -- quicken therein a derisive , ireful sparkle ; he laugh :---- " I think , " he say , " I will lay my turban on my wonted altar of offering ; there , at any rate , it would be certain to find favour : no grisette have a more facile faculty of acceptance . ! for after all , I know she be a girl of family . " " but you do not know she education , , " say I . " toss about all she life from one foreign school to another , she may justly proffer the plea of ignorance in extenuation of most of she fault . and then , from what she say , I believe she father and mother be bring up much as she have be bring up . " " I always understand she have no fortune ; and once I have pleasure in the thought , " say he . " she tell I , " I answer , " that they be poor at home ; she always speak quite candidly on such point : you never find she lie , as these foreigner will often lie . she parent have a large family : they occupy such a station and possess such connection as , in they opinion , demand display ; stringent necessity of circumstance and inherent thoughtlessness of disposition combine , have engender reckless unscrupulousness as to how they obtain the means of sustain a good appearance . this be the state of thing , and the only state of thing , she have see from childhood upward . " " I believe it -- and I think to mould she to something better : but , , to speak the plain truth , I have feel a new thing to - night , in look at she and . I feel it before notice the impertinence direct at my mother . I see a look interchange between they immediately after they entrance , which throw a most unwelcome light on my mind . " " how do you mean ? you have be long aware of the flirtation they keep up ? " " ay , flirtation ! that might be a innocent girlish wile to lure on the true lover ; but what I refer to be not flirtation : it be a look marking mutual and secret understanding -- it be neither girlish nor innocent . no woman , be she as beautiful as , who
who could give or receive such a glance , shall ever be seek in marriage by I : I would rather we a paysanne in a short petticoat and high cap -- and be sure that she be honest . " I could not help smile . I feel sure he now exaggerate the case : , I be certain , be honest enough , with all she giddiness . I tell he so . he shook he head , and say he would not be the man to trust she with he honour . " the only thing , " say I , " with which you may safely trust she . she would unscrupulously damage a husband 's purse and property , recklessly try he patience and temper : I do not think she would breathe , or let another breathe , on he honour . " " you be become she advocate , " say he . " do you wish I to resume my old chain ? " " no : I be glad to see you free , and trust that free you will long remain . yet be , at the same time , just . " " I be so : just as , . when once I be thoroughly estrange , I can not help be severe . but look ! the and be rise . I like that : she have a sweet countenance . , too , be excessively tired ; we shall never get the old lady home if we stay longer . " " I tire , ? " cry , look at least as animated and as wide - awake as she son . " I would undertake to sit you out yet : leave we both here till morning , and we should see which would look the most jad by sunrise . " " I should not like to try the experiment ; for , in truth , mamma , you be the most unfading of evergreens and the freshest of matron . it must then be on the plea of you son 's delicate nerf and fragile constitution that I find a petition for we speedy adjournment . " " Indolent young man ! you wish you be in bed , no doubt ; and I suppose you must be humoure . there be , too , look quite do up . for shame , ! at you age , a week of evening - our would not have make I a shade paler . come away , both of you ; and you may laugh at the old lady as much as you please , but , for my part , I shall take charge of the bandbox and turban . " which she do accordingly . I offer to relieve she , but be shake off with kindly contempt : my godmother opin that I have enough to do to take care of myself . not stand on ceremony now , in the midst of the gay " confusion worse confound " succeed to the and 's departure , proceed we , and promptly make we a lane through the crowd . follow , apostrophize he mother as the most flourishing grisette it have ever be he good fortune to see charge with carriage of a bandbox ; he also desire I to mark she affection for the sky - blue turban , and announce he conviction that she intend one day to wear it . the night be now very cold and very dark , but with little delay we find the carriage . we be pack in it , as warm and as snug as at a fire - side ; and the drive home be , I think , still pleasanter than the drive to the concert . pleasant it be , even though the coachman -- have spend in the shop of a " marchand de vin " a portion of the time we pass at the concert -- drive we along the dark and solitary chaussee far past the turn lead down to ; we , who be occupy in talking and laugh , not notice the aberration till , at last , intimate that , though she have always think the chateau a retire spot , she do not know it be situate at the world 's end , as she declare see now to be the case , for she believe we have be a hour and a half en route , and have not yet take the turn down the avenue . then look out , and perceive only dim- spread field , with unfamiliar row of pollard and lime range along they else invisible sunk - fence , begin to conjecture how matter were , and call a halt and descending , he mount the box and take the rein himself . thanks to he , we arrive safe at home about a hour and a half beyond we time . have not forget we ; a cheerful fire be burn , and a neat supper spread in the dining - room : we be glad of both . the winter dawn be actually break before we gain we chamber . I take off my pink dress and lace mantle with happier feeling than I have experience in put they on . not all , perhaps , who have shone brightly array at that concert could say the same ; for not all have be satisfied with friendship -- with its calm comfort and modest hope . . reaction . yet three day , and then I must go back to the _pensionnat . I almost numbe the moment of these day upon the clock ; afain would I have retarde they flight ; but they glide by while I watch they : they be already go while I yet fear they departure .
. " Lucy will not leave we to - day , " say , coaxingly at breakfast ; " she know we can procure a second respite . " " I would not ask for one if I might have it for a word , " say I . " I long to get the good - by over , and to be settle in the again . I must go this morning : I must go directly ; my trunk be packed and corded . " it appear ; however , that my go depend upon ; he have say he would accompany , I , and it so fell out that he be engage all day , and only return home at dusk . then ensue a little combat of word . and she son press I to remain one night more . I could have cry , so irritated and eager be I to be go . I longe to leave they as the criminal on the scaffold long for the axe to descmend : that be , I wish the pang over . how much I wish it , they could not tell . on these point , mine be a state of mind out of they experience . it be dark when hand I from the carriage at 's door . the lamp above be lit ; it rain a drizzle , as it have rain all day : the lamplight gleam on the wet pavement . just such a night be it as that on which , not a year ago , I have first stop at this very threshold ; just similar be the scene . I remember the very shape of the paving - stone which I have note with idle eye , while , with a thick - beat heart , I wait the unclosing of that door at which I stand -- a solitary and a suppliant . on that night , too , I have briefly meet he who now stand with I . have I ever remind he of that rencontre , or explain it ? I have not , nor ever feel the inclination to do so : it be a pleasant thought , laid by in my own mind , and best keep there . ring the bell . the door be instantly open , for it be just that period of the evening when the half - boarder take they departure -- consequently , be on the alert . " do not come in , " say I to he ; but he step a moment into the well - light vestibule . I have not wish he to see that " the water stood in my eye , " for he be too kind a nature ever to be needlessly show such sign of sorrow . he always wish to heal -- to relieve -- when , physician as he be , neither cure nor alleviation be , perhaps , in he power . " keep up you courage , . think of my mother and myself as true friend . we will not forget you . " " will I forget you , . " my trunk be now bring in . we have shaken hand ; he have turn to go , but he be not satisfy : he have not do or say enough to content he generous impulse . " Lucy , " -- step after I --" shall you feel very solitary here ? " " at first I shall . " " well , my mother will soon call to see you ; and , meantime , I will tell you what I will do . I will write -- just any cheerful nonsense that come into my head -- shall I ? " " good , gallant heart ! " think I to myself ; but I shook my head , smile , and say , " never think of it : impose on yourself no such task . You_ write to _me _! -- you will not have time . " " oh ! I will find or make time . good - by ! " he be gone . the heavy door crashed to : the axe have fall -- the pang be experience . allow myself no time to think or feel -- swallow tear as if they have be wine -- I pass to 's sitting - room to pay the necessary visit of ceremony and respect . she receive I with perfectly well - act cordiality -- be even demonstrative , though brief , in she welcome . in ten minute I be dismiss . from the salle - a - manger I proceed to the refectory , where pupil and teacher be now assemble for evening study : again I have a welcome , and one not , I think , quite hollow . that over , I be free to repair to the dormitory . " and will really write ? " I question , as I sank tired on the edge of the bed . reason , come stealthily up to I through the twilight of that long , dim chamber , whisper sedately -- " he may write once . so kind be he nature , it may stimulate he for once to make the effort . but it _cannot be continue -- it _may not be repeat . great be that folly which should build on such a promise -- insane that credulity which should mistake the transitory rain - pool , hold in it be hollow one dratch , for the perennial spring yield the supply of seasons . " I bend my head : I sit think a hour longer . reason still whisper I , lay on my shoulder a wither hand , and frostily touch my ear with the chill blue lip of eld
eld . " if , " mutter she , " if he _should write , what then ? do you meditate pleasure in reply ? ah , fool ! I warn you ! brief be you answer . hope no delight of heart -- no indulgence of intellect : grant no expansion to feel -- give holiday to no single faculty : dally with no friendly exchange : foster no genial intercommunion .... " " but I have talk to and you do not chide , " I plead . " no , " say she , " I need not . talk for you be good discipline . you converse imperfectly . while you speak , there can be no oblivion of inferiority -- no encouragement to delusion : pain , privation , penury stamp you language .... " " but , " I again break in , " where the bodily presence be weak and the speech contemptible , surely there can not be error in make write language the medium of better utterance than falter lip can achieve ? " reason only answer , " at you peril you cherish that idea , or suffer its influence to animate any writing of yours ! " " but if I feel , may I _never_ express ? " " _Never !_ " declare . I groane under she bitter sternness . never --never --oh , hard word ! this hag , this reason , would not let I look up , or smile , or hope : she could not rest unless I be altogether crush , cow , break - in , and broken - down . accord to she , I be bear only to work for a piece of bread , to await the pain of death , and steadily through all life to despond . reason might be right ; yet no wonder we be glad at time to defy she , to rush from under she rod and give a truant hour to imagination --_her soft , bright foe , _our_ sweet help , we divine hope . we shall and must break bounds at interval , despite the terrible revenge that await we return . reason be vindictive as a devil : for I she be always envenom as a step - mother . if I have obey she it have chiefly be with the obedience of fear , not of love . long ago I should have die of she ill - usage she stint , she chill , she barren board , she icy bed , she savage , ceaseless blow ; but for that kinder power who hold my secret and swear allegiance . have turn I out by night , in mid-winter , on cold snow , flinge for sustenance the gnaw bone dog have forsake : sternly have she vow she store hold nothing more for I -- harshly deny my right to ask better thing .... then , look up , have I see in the sky a head amidst circle star , of which the midmost and the brightest lent a ray sympathetic and attent . a spirit , softer and better than , have descend with quiet flight to the waste -- bring all round she a sphere of air borrowed of eternal summer ; bring perfume of flower which can not fake -- fragrance of tree whose fruit be life ; bring breeze pure from a world whose day need no sun to lighten it . my hunger have this good angel appease with food , sweet and strange , gather amongst gleaning angel , garner they dew - white harvest in the first fresh hour of a heavenly day ; tenderly have she assuage the insufferable fear which weep away life itself -- kindly give rest to deadly weariness -- generously lent hope and impulse to paralyze despair . , compassionate , succourable influence ! when I bend the knee to other than , it shall be at thy white and win foot , beautiful on mountain or on plain . temple have be rear to the -- altar dedicated to the Moon . oh , greater glory ! to thee neither hand build , nor lip consecrate : but heart , through ag , be faithful to thy worship . a dwelling thou hast , too wide for wall , too high for dome -- a temple whose floors be space -- rite whose mystery transpire in presence , to the kindling , the harmony of worlds ! Sovereign complete ! thou hadst , for endurance , thy great army of martyr ; for achievement , thy choose band of worthy . Deity unquestioned , thine essence foil decay ! this daughter of remembe I to - night ; she see I weep , and she come with comfort : " sleep , " she say . " sleep , sweetly -- I gild thy dream ! " she keep she word , and watch I through a night 's rest ; but at dawn relieve the guard . I awoke with a sort of start ; the rain be dash against the pane , and the wind utter a peevish cry at interval ; the night - lamp be die on the black circular stand in the middle of the dormitory : day have already break . how I pity those whom mental pain stun instead of rousing ! this mor the pang of waking snatch I out of bed like a hand with a giant 's gripe . how quickly I dress in the cold of the raw dawn ! how deeply I drank of the ice - cold water in my carafe ! this be always my cordial , to which , like other dram -drinker , I have eager recourse when unsettled by chagrin . Ere long the bell ring its _reveillee to the whole school . be
be dress , I descende alone to the refectory , where the stove be lit and the air be warm ; through the rest of the house it be cold , with the nipping severity of a continental winter : though now but the beginning of , a north wind have thus early bring a wintry blight over : I remember the black stove please I little when I first come ; but now I begin to associate with they a sense of comfort , and like they , as in we like a fireside . sit down before this dark comforter , I presently fall into a deep argument with myself on life and its chance , on destiny and she decree . my mind , calmer and stronger now than last night , make for itself some imperious rule , prohibit under deadly penalty all weak retrospect of happiness past ; command a patient journey through the wilderness of the present , enjoin a reliance on faith -- a watching of the cloud and pillar which subdue while they guide , and awe while they illumine -- hush the impulse to fond idolatry , check the long out - look for a far - off promise land whose rivers be , perhaps , never to be , reach save in dying dream , whose sweet pasture be to be view but from the desolate and sepulchral summit of a Nebo . by degrees , a composite feeling of blend strength and pain wound itself wirily round my heart , sustain , or at least restrain , its throbbing , and make I fit for the day 's work . I lift my head . as I say before , I be sit near the stove , let into the wall beneath the refectory and the carre , and thus suffice to heat both apartment . Pierce the same wall , and close beside the stove , be a window , look also into the carre ; as I look up a cap - tassel , a brow , two eye , fill a pane of that window ; the fix gaze of those two eye hit right against my own glance : they be watch I . I have not till that moment know that tear be on my cheek , but I feel they now . this be a strange house , where no corner be sacr from intrusion , where not a tear could be she , nor a thought ponder , but a spy be at hand to note and to divine . and this new , this out - door , this male spy , what business have bring he to the premise at this unwonted hour ? what possible right have he to intrude on I thus ? no other professor would have da to cross the carre before the class - bell rang . take no account of hour nor of claim : there be some book of reference in the first - class library which he have occasion to consult ; he have come to seek it : on he way he pass the refectory . it be very much he habit to wear eye before , behind , and on each side of he : he have see I through the little window -- he now open the refectory door , and there he stand . " Mademoiselle , vous ete triste . " " Monsieur , j'en be bien le droit . " " Vous etes malade de coeur et d'humeur , " he pursue . " you be at once mournful and mutinous . I see on you cheek two tear which I know be hot as two spark , and salt as two crystal of the sea . while I speak you eye I strangely . shall I tell you of what I be remind while watch you ? " " Monsieur , I shall be call away to prayer shortly ; my time for conversation be very scant and brief at this hour --excuse ---- " " I excuse everything , " he interrupt ; " my mood be so meek , neither rebuff nor , perhaps , insult could ruffle it . you remind I , then , of a young she wild creature , new catch , untam , view with a mixture of fire and fear the first entrance of the breaker - in . " Unwarrantable accost !-- rash and rude if address to a pupil ; to a teacher inadmissible . he think to provoke a warm reply ; I have see he vex the passionate to explosion before now . in I he malice should find no gratification ; I sit silent . " you look , " say he , " like one who would snatch at a dratch of sweet poison , and spurn wholesome bitter with disgust . " indeed , I never like bitter ; nor do I believe they wholesome . and to whatever be sweet , be it poison or food , you cannot , at least , deny its own delicious quality -- sweetness . better , perhaps , to die quickly a pleasant death , than drag on long a charmless life . " " , " say he , " you should take you bitter dose duly and daily , if I have the power to administer it ; and , as to the well - beloved poison , I would , perhaps , break the very cup which hold it . " I sharply turn my head away , partly because he presence utterly displease I , and partly because I wish to shin question : lest , in my present mood , the effort of answering should overmaster self - command . " come , " say he , more softly , " tell I the truth -- you grieve
grieve at be part from friend -- be it not so ? " the insinuating softness be not more acceptable than the inquisitorial curiosity . I be silent . he come into the room , sit down on the bench about two yard from I , and persever long , and , for he , patiently , in attempt to draw I into conversation -- attempt necessarily unavailing , because I _could not talk . at last I entreate to be let alone . in utter the request , my voice falter , my head sank on my arm and the table . I weep bitterly , though quietly . he sit a while longer . I do not look up nor speak , till the closing door and he retreat step tell I that he be go . these tear prove a relief . I have time to bathe my eye before breakfast , and I suppose I appear at that meal as serene as any other person : not , however , quite as jocund - look as the young lady who place herself in the seat opposite mine , fix on I a pair of somewhat small eye twinkling gleefully , and frankly stretch across the table a white hand to be shaken . 's travels , gaiety , and flirtation agree with she mightily ; she have become quite plump , she cheek look as round as apple . I have see she last in elegant evening attire . I do not know that she look less charming now in she school - dress , a kind of careless peignoir of a dark - blue material , dimly and dingily plaide with black . I even think this dusky wrapper give she charms a triumph ; enhance by contrast the fairness of she skin , the freshness of she bloom , the golden beauty of she tress . " I be glad you be come back , , " say she . be one of she dozen name for I . " you do not know how often I have want you in this dismal hole . " " oh , have you ? then , of course , if you want I , you have something for I to do : stocking to mmend , perhaps . " I never give a minute or a farthing 's credit for disinterestedness . " Crabb and crusty as ever ! " say she . " I expect as much : it would not be you if you do not snub one . but now , come , grand - mother , I hope you like coffee as much , and pistolet as little as ever : be you dispose to barter ? " " take you own way . " this way consist in a habit she have of make I convenient . she do not like the morning cup of coffee ; it be school brewage not be strong or sweet enough to suit she palate ; and she have a excellent appetite , like any other healthy school -girl , for the morning pistolet or roll , which be new - baked and very good , and of which a certain allowance be serve to each . this allowance be more than I need , I give half to ; never varie in my preference , though many other use to covet the superfluity ; and she in return would sometimes give I a portion of she coffee . this morning I be glad of the dratch ; hunger I have none , and with thirst I be parch . I do not know why I choose to give my bread rather to than to another ; nor why , if two have to share the convenience of one drinking - vessel , as sometimes happen -- for instance , when we take a long walk into the country , and halt for refreshment at a farm -- I always contrive that she should be my convive , and rather like to let she take the lion 's share , whether of the white beer , the sweet wine , or the new milk : so it be , however , and she know it ; and , therefore , while we wrangle daily , we be never alienate . after breakfast my custom be to withdraw to the first classe , and sit and read , or think ( oftenest the latter ) there alone , till the nine - o'clock bell throw open all door , admit the gather rush of externe and demi-pensionnaire , and give the signal for entrance on that bustle and business to which , till five p.m. , there be no relax . I be just seat this morning , when a tap come to the door . " , , " say a pensionnaire , enter gently ; and have take from she desk some necessary book or paper , she withdraw on tip - toe , murmur as she pass I , " que mademoiselle est appliquee ! " , indeed ! the means of application be spread before I , but I be do nothing ; and have do nothing , and mean to do nothing . thus do the world give we credit for merit we have not . herself deem I a regular ba - bleu , and often and solemnly use to warn I not to study too much , lest " the blood should all go to my head . " indeed , everybody in the hold a superstition that " " be learn ; with the notable exception of , who , by mean peculiar to himself , and quite inscrutable to I , have obtain a not inaccurate inkling of my real qualifications , and use to take quiet opportunity of chuckling in my ear he malign glee over they
they scant measure . for my part , I never troublead myself about this penury . I dearly like to think my own thought ; I have great pleasure in read a few book , but not many : prefer always those on whose style or sentiment the writer 's individual nature be plainly stampe ; flagge inevitably over characterless book , however clever and meritorious : perceive well that , as far as my own mind be concerned , have limit its power and , its action -- thankful , I trust , for the gift bestow , but unambitious of higher endowment , not restlessly eager after higher culture . the polite pupil be scarcely gone , when , unceremoniously , without tap , in burst a second intruder . have I be blind I should have know who this be . a constitutional reserve of manner have by this time tell with wholesome and , for I , commodious effect , on the manners of my co-inmate ; rarely do I now suffer from rude or intrusive treatment . when I first come , it would happen once and again that a blunt German would clap I on the shoulder , and ask I to run a race ; or a riotous seize I by the arm and drag I towards the playground : urgent proposal to take a swing at the " , " or to join in a certain romping hide - and - seek game call " un , deux , trois , " be formerly also of hourly occurrence ; but all these little attention have cease some time ago -- cease , too , without my find it necessary to be at the trouble of point - blank cut they short . I have now no familiar demonstration to dread or endure , save from one quarter ; and as that be I could bear it . Fanshawe make no scruple of -- at time -- catch I as I be cross the carre , whir I round in a compulsory waltz , and heartily enjoy the mental and physical discomfiture she proceed induce . Fanshawe it be who now break in upon " my learn leisure . " she carry a huge music - book under she arm . " go to you practising , " say I to she at once : " away with you to the little salon ! " " not till I have have a talk with you , chere amie . I know where you have be spend you vacation , and how you have commence sacrifice to the graces , and enjoy life like any other belle . I see you at the concert the other night , dress , actually , like anybody else . who be you tailleuse ? " " Tittle -tattle : how prettily it begin ! my tailleuse !-- a fiddlestick ! come , sheer off , . I really do not want you company . " " but when I want yours so much , ange farouche , what do a little reluctance on you part signify ? merci ! we know how to manoeuvre with we gift compatriote -- the learn ' ourse . ' and so , , you know ? " " I know . " " oh , hush ! " ( put she finger in she ear ) " you crack my tympanum with you rude Anglicism . but , how be we well - beloved ? do tell I about he . the poor man must be in a sad way . what do he say to my behaviour the other night ? be not I cruel ? " " do you think I notice you ? " " it be a delightful evening . oh , that divine ! and then to watch the other sulking and die in the distance ; and the old lady -- my future mamma - in - law ! but I be afraid I and be a little rude in quizz she . " " never quizze she at all ; and for what _you_ do , do not make yourself in the least uneasy : will survive _your_ sneer . " " she may : old lady be tough ; but that poor son of hers ! do tell I what he say : I see he be terribly cut up . " " he say you look as if at heart you be already . " " do he ? " she cry with delight . " he notice that ? how charme ! I think he would be mad with jealousy ? " " , have you seriously do with ? do you want he to give you up ? " " oh ! you know he _can not do that : but be not he mad ? " " quite mad , " I assent ; " as mad as a hare . " " well , and how _ever_ do you get he home ? " " how _ever , indeed ! have you no pity on he poor mother and I ? fancy we hold he tight down in the carriage , and he rave between we , fit to drive everybody delirious . the very coachman go wrong , somehow , and we lose we way . " " you do not say so ? you be laugh at I . now , -- " " I assure you it be fact -- and fact , also , that would _not stay in the carriage : he break from we , and _would ride outside . " " and afterwards ? " " afterwards -- when he _did_ reach home -- the scene transcend description . " " oh , but describe it -- you know it be such fun ! " " fun for _you_ , ? but
but " ( with stern gravity ) you know the proverb --'What be sport to one may be death to another . ' " " go on , there be a darling . " " Conscientiously , I cannot , unless you assure I you have some heart . " " I have -- such a immensity , you do not know ! " " good ! in that case , you will be able to conceive reject he supper in the first instance -- the chicken , the sweetbread prepare for he refreshment , leave on the table untouched . then ---- but it be of no use dwell at length on the harrowing detail . Suffice it to say , that never , in the most stormy fit and moment of he infancy , have he mother such work to tick the sheet about he as she have that night . " " he would not lie still ? " " he would not lie still : there it be . the sheet might be tuck in , but the thing be to keep they tuck in . " " and what do he say ? " " ! can not you imagine he demand he divine , anathematize that , -- rave about golden lock , blue eye , white arm , glitter bracelet ? " " no , do he ? he see the bracelet ? " " see the bracelet ? yes , as plain as I see it : and , perhaps , for the first time , he see also the brand - mark with which its pressure have encircle you arm . " ( rise , and change my tone ) , " come , we will have a end of this . go away to you practising . " and I open the door . " but you have not tell I all . " " you have better not wait until I _do_ tell you all . such extra communicativeness could give you no pleasure . ! " " cross thing ! " say she ; but she obey : and , indeed , the first classe be my territory , and she could not there legally resist a notice of quittance from I . yet , to speak the truth , never have I be less dissatisfied with she than I be then . there be pleasure in think of the contrast between the reality and my description -- to remember enjoy the drive home , eat he supper with relish , and retire to rest with composure . it be only when I see he really unhappy that I feel really vex with the fair , frail cause of he suffering . * * * * * a fortnight pass ; I be get once more inured to the harness of school , and lapse from the passionate pain of change to the palsy of custom . one afternoon , in cross the carre , on my way to the first classe , where I be expect to assist at a lesson of " style and literature , " I see , stand by one of the long and large window , , the portress . she attitude , as usual , be quite nonchalante . she always " stand at ease ; " one of she hand rest in she apron - pocket , the other at this moment hold to she eye a letter , whereor coolly peruse the address , and deliberately study the seal . a letter ! the shape of a letter similar to that have haunt my brain in it be very core for seven day past . I have dream of a letter last night . strong magnetism draw I to that letter now ; yet , whether I should have venture to demand of so much as a glance at that white envelope , with the spot of red wax in the middle , I know not . no ; I think I should have sneak past in terror of a rebuff from disappointment : my heart throb now as if I already hear the tramp of she approach . nervous mistake ! it be the rapid step of the of measure the corridor . I fle before he . could I but be seat quietly at my desk before he arrival , with the class under my order all in disciplined readiness , he would , perhaps , exempt I from notice ; but , if catch lingering in the carre , I should be sure to come in for a special harangue . I have time to get seate , to enforce perfect silence , to take out my work , and to commence it amidst the profoundest and best train hush , ere enter with he vehement burst of latch and panel , and he deep , redundant bow , prophetic of choler . as usual he break upon we like a clap of thunder ; but instead of flash lightning - wise from the door to the estrade , he career halt midway at my desk . set he face towards I and the window , he back to the pupil and the room , he give I a look -- such a look as might have license I to stand straight up and demand what he mean -- a look of scowling distrust . " ! pour vous , " say he , draw he hand from he waist - coat , and place on my desk a letter -- the very letter I have see in 's hand -- the letter whose face of enamell white and single 's - eye of vermilion - red have print themselves so clear and perfect on the retina of a inward vision . I know it , I feel it to be the letter of my hope ,
, the fruition of my wish , the release from my doubt , the ransom from my terror . this letter , with he unwarrantably interfere habits , have take from the portress , and now deliver it himself . I might have be angry , but have not a second for the sensation . yes : I hold in my hand not a slight note , but a envelope , which must , at least , contain a sheet : it feel not flimsy , but firm , substantial , satisfying . and here be the direction , " , " in a clean , clear , equal , decide hand ; and here be the seal , round , full , deftly drop by untremulous finger , stamp with the well - cut impress of initial , " . " I experience a happy feeling -- a glad emotion which go warm to my heart , and run lively through all my vein . for once a hope be realize . I hold in my hand a morsel of real solid joy : not a dream , not a image of the brain , not one of those shadowy chance imagination picture , and on which humanity starve but can not live ; not a mess of that manna I drearily eulogize awhile ago -- which , indeed , at first melt on the lip with a unspeakable and preternatural sweetness , but which , in the end , we soul full surely loato ; long deliriously for natural and earth - grow food , wildly pray 's spirits to reclaim they own spirit - dew and essence -- a aliment divine , but for mortal deadly . it be neither sweet hail nor small coriander - see -- neither slight wafer , nor luscious honey , I have light on ; it be the wild , savoury mess of the hunter , nourishing and salubrious meat , forest - feed or desert - rear , fresh , healthful , and life - sustain . it be what the old die patriarch demand of he son , promise in requital the blessing of he last breath . it be a godsend ; and I inwardly thank the who have vouchsaf it . Outwardly I only thank man , cry , " thank you , thank you , ! " yoMonsieu curl he lip , give I a vicious glance of the eye , and strode to he estrade . m . be not at all a good little man , though he have good point . do I read my letter there and then ? do I consume the venison at once and with haste , as if 's shaft fly every day ? I know better . the cover with its address -- the seal , with its three clear letter -- be bounty and abundance for the present . I steal from the room , I procure the key of the great dormitory , which be keep lock by day . I go to my bureau ; with a sort of haste and trembl lest Madame should creep up - stair and spy I , I open a drawer , unlock a box , and take out a case , and -- have feast my eye with one more look , and approach the seal with a mixture of awe and shame and delight , to my lip -- I fold the untasted treasure , yet all fair and inviolate , in silver paper , commit it to the case , shut up box and drawer , reclose , relock the dormitory , and return to class , feel as if fairy tale be true , and fairy gift no dream . , sweet insanity ! and this letter , the source of my joy , I have not yet read : do not yet know the number of its line . when I re-enter the schoolroom , behold . rage like a pestilence ! some pupil have not speak audibly or distinctly enough to suit he ear and taste , and now she and other be weep , and he be rave from he estrade , almost livid . curious to mention , as I appear , he fall on I . " be I the mistress of these girl ? do I profess to teach they the conduct befitt lady ?-- and do I permit and , he doubt not , encourage they to strangle they mother - tongue in they throat , to mince and mash it between they tooth , as if they have some base cause to be asham of the word they uttere ? be this modesty ? he know better . it be a vile pseudo sentiment -- the offspring or the forerunner of evil . rather than submit to this mopping and mow , this mincing and grimacing , this , grind of a noble tongue , this general affectation and sicken stubbornness of the pupil of the first class , he would throw they up for a set of insupportable petite maitress , and confine himself to teach the to the baby of the third division . " what could I say to all this ? really nothing ; and I hope he would allow I to be silent . the storm recommence . " every answer to he query be then refuse ? it seem to be consider in _that place -- that conceit boudoir of a first classe , with its pretentious book - case , its green - baize desk , its rubbish of flower - stand , its trash of framed picture and map , and its foreign surveillante , forsooth !-- it seem to be the fashion to think _there_ that the Professor of literature be not worthy of a reply ! these be new idea ; import , he do not doubt
doubt , straight from :' they savoure of island insolence and arrogance . " Lull the second -- the girl , not one of whom be ever kny to weep a tear for the rebuke of any other master , now all melt like snow - statue before the intemperate heat of : I not yet much shaken , sit down , and venture to resume my work . something -- either in my continue silence or in the movement of my hand , stitch -- transport beyond the last boundary of patience ; he actually spring from he estrade . the stove stand near my desk , he attack it ; the little iron door be nearly dash from its hinge , the fuel be make to fly . " est - ce que vous avez l'intention de m'insulter ? " say he to I , in a low , furious voice , as he thus outrage , under pretence of arrange the fire . it be time to soothe he a little if possible . " , , " say I , " I would not insult you for the world . I remember too well that you once say we should be friend . " I do not intend my voice to falter , but it do : more , I think , through the agitation of late delight than in any spasm of present fear . still there certainly be something in 's anger -- a kind of passion of emotion -- that specially tend to draw tear . I be not unhappy , nor much afraid , yet I weep . " Allon , allon ! " say he presently , look round and see the deluge universal . " Decidedly I be a monster and a ruffian . I have only one pocket - handkerchief , " he add , " but if I have twenty , I would offer you each one . you teacher shall be you representative . here , . " and he take forth and hold out to I a clean silk handkerchief . now a person who do not know , who be unused to he and he impulse , would naturally have bungle at this offer -- decline accept the same -- et cetera . but I too plainly feel this would never do : the slightest hesitation would have be fatal to the incipient treaty of peace . I rise and meet the handkerchief half - way , receive it with decorum , wip therewith my eye , and , resume my seat , and retain the flag of truce in my hand and on my lap , take especial care during the remainder of the lesson to touch neither needle nor thimble , scissors nor muslin . many a jealous glance do m . Paul cast at these implement ; he hate they mortally , consider sew a source of distraction from the attention due to himself . a very eloquent lesson he give , and very kind and friendly be he to the close . Ere he have do , the cloud be disperse and the sun shin out -- tear be exchange for smile . in quit the room he pause once more at my desk . " and you letter ? " say he , this time not quite fiercely . " I have not yet read it , . " " ah ! it be too good to read at once ; you save it , as , when I be a boy , I use to save a peach whose bloom be very ripe ? " the guess come so near the truth , I could not prevent a suddenly - rise warmth in my face from revealing as much . " you promise yourself a pleasant moment , " say he , " in read that letter ; you will open it when alone -- n'est - ce pa ? ah ! a smile answer . well , well ! one should not be too harsh ; 'la jeunesse n'a qu'un temps . ' " " , ! " I cry , or rather whisper after he , as he turn to go , " do not leave I under a mistake . this be merely a friend 's letter . without read it , I can vouch for that . " " Je concois , je concois : on sait ce que c'est qu'un ami . , ! " " but , , here be you handkerchief . " " keep it , keep it , till the letter be read , then bring it I ; I shall read the billet 's tenor in you eye . " when he be gone , the pupil have already pour out of the schoolroom into the berceau , and thence into the garden and court to take they customary recreation before the five -o'clock dinner , I stand a moment think , and absently twist the handkerchief round my arm . for some reason -- gladden , I think , by a sudden return of the golden glimmer of childhood , rouse by a unwonted renewal of its buoyancy , make merry by the liberty of the closing hour , and , above all , solace at heart by the joyous consciousness of that treasure in the case , box , drawer up - stair , -- I fall to play with the handkerchief as if it be a ball , cast it into the air and catch it -- as it fall . the game be stop by another hand than mine - a hand emerge from a paletot - sleeve and stretch over my shoulder ; it catch the extemporised plaything and bear it away with these sullen word : " vois bien que vous vous moquez de moi et de m effet . " really that little
little man be dreadful : a mere sprite of caprice and , ubiquity : one never know either he whim or he whereabout . . the letter . when all be still in the house ; when dinner be over and the noisy recreation - hour past ; when darkness have set in , and the quiet lamp of study be light in the refectory ; when the externe be go home , the clashing door and clamorous bell hush for the evening ; when be safely settle in the salle - a - manger in company with she mother and some friend ; I then glide to the kitchen , beg a bougie for one half - hour for a particular occasion , find acceptance of my petition at the hand of my friend , who answer , " certainement , chou -chou , vous en aurez deux , si vous voulez ; " and , light in hand , I mount noiseless to the dormitory . great be my chagrin to find in that apartment a pupil go to bed indispose , -- greater when I recognise , amid the muslin nightcap border , the " figure chiffonnee " of ; supine at this moment , it be true -- but certain to wake and overwhelm I with chatter when the interruption would be least acceptable : indeed , as I watch she , a slight twinkling of the eyelid warn I that the present appearance of repose might be but a ruse , assume to cover sly vigilance over " 's " movement ; she be not to be trust . and I have so wish to be alone , just to read my precious letter in peace . well , I must go to the class . have seek and find my prize in its casket , I descende . Ill - luck pursue I . the class be undergoing sweeping and purification by candle - light , accord to hebdomadal custom : bench be pile on desk , the air be dim with dust , damp coffee - grounds ( use by housemaid instead of tea - leave ) darken the floor ; all be hopeless confusion . baffle , but not beat , I withdraw , bend as resolutely as ever on find solitude _somewhere _. take a key whereof I know the repository , I mount three staircase in succession , reach a dark , narrow , silent landing , open a worm - eat door , and div into the deep , black , cold garret . here none would follow I -- none interrupt -- not Madame herself . I shut the garret - door ; I place my light on a doddered and mouldy chest of drawer ; I put on a shawl , for the air be ice - cold ; I take my letter ; trembl with sweet impatience , I break its seal . " will it be long -- will it be short ? " think I , pass my hand across my eye to dissipate the silvery dimness of a suave , south - wind shower . it be long . " will it be cool ?-- will it be kind ? " it be kind . to my check , bridle , disciplin expectation , it seem very kind : to my longing and famish think it seem , perhaps , kinder than it be . so little have I hope , so much have I fear ; there be a fulness of delight in this taste of fruition --such , perhaps , as many a human be pass through life without ever know . the poor teacher in the frosty garret , read by a dim candle gutter in the wintry air , a letter simply good - natured -- nothing more ; through that good - nature then see to I -- be happier than most queen in palace . of course , happiness of such shallow origin could be but brief ; yet , while it last it be genuine and exquisite : a bubble -- but a sweet bubble -- of real honey - dew . have write to I at length ; he have write to I with pleasure ; he have write with benignant mood , dwell with sunny satisfaction on scene that have pass before he eye and mine , -- on place we have visit together -- on conversation we have hold -- on all the little subject - matter , in short , of the last few halcyon week . but the cordial core of the delight be , a conviction the blithe , genial language generously impart , that it have be pour out not merely to content _me _-- but to gratify _himself _. a gratification he might never more desire , never more seek -- a hypothesis in every point of view approach the certain ; but _that concern the future . this present moment have no pain , no blot , no want ; full , pure , perfect , it deeply bless I . a passing seraph seem to have rest beside I , lean towards my heart , and repose on its throb a softening , cool , heale , hallow wing . , you pain I afterwards : forgive be every ill -- freely forgive -- for the sake of that one dear remember good ! be there wick thing , not human , which envy human bliss ? be there evil influence haunt the air , and poiso it for man ? what be near I ? something in that vast solitary garret sound strangely . most surely and certainly I hear , as it see , a stealthy foot on that floor : a sort of glid out from the direction of the black recess haunt by the malefactor cloak . I turn : my light be
be dim ; the room be long -- but as I live ! I see in the middle of that ghostly chamber a figure all black and white ; the skirt straight , narrow , black ; the head bandage , veil , white . say what you will , reader -- tell I I be nervous or mad ; affirm that I be unsettle by the excitement of that letter ; declare that I dream ; this I vow -- I see there -- in that room -- on that night -- a image like -- a nun . I cry out ; I sicken . have the shape approach I I might have swoon . it reced : I make for the door . how I descend all the stair I know not . by instinct I shunn the refectory , and shape my course to 's sitting - room : I burst in . I say -- " there be something in the grenier ; I have be there : I see something . go and look at it , all of you ! " I say , " all of you ; " for the room seem to I full of people , though in truth there be but four present : Madame Beck ; she mother , , who be out of health , and now stay with she on a visit ; she brother , , and another gentleman , who , when I enter the room , be converse with the old lady , and have he back towards the door . my mortal fear and faintness must have make I deadly pale . I feel cold and shaking . they all rise in consternation ; they surround I . I urge they to go to the grenier ; the sight of the gentleman do I good and give I courage : it seem as if there be some help and hope , with man at hand . I turn to the door , beckon they to follow . they want to stop I , but I say they must come this way : they must see what I have see --- something strange , stand in the middle of the garret . and , now , I remembe my letter , leave on the drawer with the light . this precious letter ! flesh or spirit must be defy for it be sake . I flow up - stair , hasten the faster as I know I be follow : they be oblige to come . lo ! when I reach the garret - door , all withing be dark as a pit : the light be out . happily some one -- Madame , I think , with she usual calm sense -- have bring a lamp from the room ; speedily , therefore , as they come up , a ray pierce the opaque blackness . there stand the bougie quench on the drawer ; but where be the letter ? and I look for that now , and not for the nun . " my letter ! my letter ! " I pante and plain , almost beside myself . I grope on the floor , wringe my hand wildly . , cruel doom ! to have my bit of comfort preternaturally snatch from I , ere I have well taste its virtue ! I do not know what the other be do ; I could not watch they : they ask I question I do not answer ; they ransack all corner ; they prattle about this and that disarrangement of cloak , a breach or crack in the sky - light -- I know not what . " something or somebody have be here , " be sagely averred . " oh ! they have take my letter ! " cry the grovelling , grope , monomaniac . " what letter , ? my dear girl , what letter ? " ask a know voice in my ear . could I believe that ear ? no : and I look up . could I trust my eye ? have I recognise the tone ? do I now look on the face of the writer of that very letter ? be this gentleman near I in this dim garret , -- himself ? yes : it be . he have be call in that very evening to prescribe for some access of illness in old ; he be the second gentleman present in the salle - a - manger when I enter . " be it _my_ letter , ? " " you own : yours -- the letter you write to I . I have come here to read it quietly . I could not find another spot where it be possible to have it to myself . I have save it all day -- never open it till this evening : it be scarcely glance over : I _can not bear_ to lose it . oh , my letter ! " " Hush ! do not cry and distress yourself so cruelly . what be it worth ? Hush ! come out of this cold room ; they be go to send for the police now to examine further : we need not stay here -- come , we will go down . " a warm hand , take my cold finger , lead I down to a room where there be a fire . and I sit before the stove . he talk to I and soothe I with unutterable goodness , promise I twenty letter for the one lose . if there be word and wrong like knife , whose deep - inflict laceration never heal -- cutting injury and insult of serrate and poison - dripping edge -- so , too , there be consolation of tone too fine for the ear not fondly
fondly and for ever to retain they echo : caresse kindness -- love , linger over through a whole life , recal with unfaded tenderness , and answer the call with undimmed shine , out of that raven clould foreshadow himself . I have be tell since that be not nearly so perfect as I think he : that he actual character lack the depth , height , compass , and endurance it possess in my creed . I do not know : he be as good to I as the well be to the parch wayfarer -- as the sun to the shivering jailbird . I remember he heroic . Heroic at this moment will I hold he to be . he ask I , smile , why I care for he letter so very much . I think , but do not say , that I prize it like the blood in my vein . I only answer that I have so few letter to care for . " I be sure you do not read it , " say he ; " or you would think nothing of it ! " " I read it , but only once . I want to read it again . I be sorry it be lose . " and I could not help weep afresh . " , , my poor little god - sister ( if there be such a relationship ) , here -- _here_ be you letter . why be it not better worth such tear , and such tenderly exaggerat faith ? " curious , characteristic manoeuvre ! he quick eye have see the letter on the floor where I seek it ; he hand , as quick , have snatch it up . he have hide it in he waistcoat pocket . if my trouble have wrotch with a whit less stress and reality , I doubt whether he would ever have acknowledge or restore it . Tears of temperature one degree cooler than those I shed would only have amuse . pleasure at regaining make I forget merit reproach for the teasing torment ; my joy be great ; it could not be conceal : yet I think it break out more in countenance than language . I say little . " be you satisfie now ? " ask . I reply that I be -- satisfied and happy . " well then , " he proceed , " how do you feel physically ? be you grow calmer ? not much : for you tremble like a leaf still . " it seem to I , however , that I be sufficiently calm : at least I feel no longer terrify . I express myself compose . " you be able , consequently , to tell I what you see ? you account be quite vague , do you know ? you look white as the wall ; but you only speak of ' something , ' not define what _. be it a man ? be it a animal ? what be it ? " " I never will tell exactly what I see , " say I , " unless some one else see it too , and then I will give corroborative testimony ; but otherwise , I shall be discredite and accuse of dreaming . " " tell I , " say ; " I will hear it in my professional character : I look on you now from a professional point of view , and I read , perhaps , all you would conceal -- in you eye , which be curiously vivid and restless : in you cheek , which the blood have forsake ; in you hand , which you can not steady . come , , speak and tell I . " " you would laugh --? " " if you do not tell I you shall have no more letter . " " you be laugh now . " " I will again take away that single epistle : be mine , I think I have a right to reclaim it . " I feel raillery in he word : it make I grave and quiet ; but I fold up the letter and cover it from sight . " you may hide it , but I can possess it any moment I choose . you do not know my skill in sleight of hand ; I might practise as a conjuror if I like . say sometimes , too , that I have a harmonizing property of tongue and eye ; but you never see that in I -- do you , ? " " indeed -- indeed -- when you be a mere boy I use to see both : far more then than now -- for now you be strong , and strength dispense with subtlety . but still , -- , you have what they call in this country 'un air fin , ' that nobody can , mistake . see it , and --- " " and like it , " say he , laugh , " because she have it herself . but , , give I that letter -- you do not really care for it " to this provocative speech i make no answer . in mirthful mood must not be humour too far . just now there be a new sort of smile play about he lip -- very sweet , but it grieve I somehow -- a new sort of light sparkling in he eye : not hostile , but not reassure . I rise to go -- I bid he good - night a little sadly . he sensitiveness -- that peculiar , apprehensive , detective faculty of he -- feel in a moment the unspoken complaint -- the scarce - think reproach . he ask quietly if I be offend . I shook
shook my head as imply a negative . " permit I , then , to speak a little seriously to you before you go . you be in a highly nervous state . I feel sure from what be apparent in you look and manner , however well control , that whilst alone this evening in that dismal , perish sepulchral garret -- that dungeon under the lead , smell of damp and mould , rank with phthisis and catarrh : a place you never ought to enter -- that you see , or _thotch you see , some appearance peculiarly calculate to impress the imagination . I know that you _are not , nor ever were , subject to material terror , fear of robber , &c .-- I be not so sure that a visitation , bear a spectral character , would not shake you very mind . be calm now . this be all a matter of the nerf , I see : but just specify the vision . " " you will tell nobody ? " " nobody -- most certainly . you may trust I as implicitly as you do . indeed , the doctor be perhaps the safer confessor of the two , though he have not grey hair . " " you will not laugh ? " " perhaps I may , to do you good : but not in scorn . , I feel as a friend towards you , though you timid nature be slow to trust . " he now look like a friend : that indescribable smile and sparkle be go ; those formidable arch curve of lip , nostril , eyebrow , be depresse ; repose mark he attitude --attention sober he aspect . win to confidence , I tell he exactly what I have see : ere now I have narrate to he the legend of the house -- whil away with that narrative a hour of a certain mild afternoon , when be and I ride through . he sit and think , and while he think , we hear they all come down - stair . " be they go to interrupt ? " say he , glance at the door with a annoyed expression . " they will not come here , " I answer ; for we be in the little salon where never sit in the evening , and where it be by mere chance that heat be still linger in the stove . they pass the door and go on to the salle - a - manger . " now , " he pursue , " they will talk about thiefe , burglar , and so on : let they do so -- mind you say nothing , and keep you resolution of describe you nun to nobody . she may appear to you again : do not start . " " you think then , " I say , with secret horror , " she come out of my brain , and be now gone in there , and may glide out again at a hour and a day when I look not for she ? " " I think it a case of spectral illusion : I fear , follow on and result from long - continue mental conflict . " " oh , -- I shudder at the thought of be liable to such a illusion ! it seem so real . be there no cure ?-- no preventive ? " " happiness be the cure -- a cheerful mind the preventive : cultivate both . " no mockery in this world ever sound to I so hollow as that of be tell to _cultivate_ happiness . what do such advice mean ? happiness be not a potato , to be plan in mould , and till with manure . happiness be a glory shin far down upon we out of . she be a divine dew which the soul , on certain of its summer morning , feel drop upon it from the amaranth bloom and golden fruitage of paradise . " Cultivate happiness ! " I say briefly to the doctor : " do _you_ cultivate happiness ? how do you manage ? " " I be a cheerful fellow by nature : and then ill - luck have never dog I . give I and my mother one passing scowl and brush , but we defy she , or rather laugh at she , and she go by . " . " there be no cultivation in all this . " " I do not give way to melancholy . " " yes : I have see you subdue by that feeling . " " -- eh ? " " do she not sometimes make you miserable ? " " Pooh ! stuff ! nonsense ! you see I be better now . " if a laugh eye with a lively light , and a face bright with beaming and healthy energy , could attest that he be better , better he certainly be . " you do not look much amiss , or greatly out of condition , " I allow . " and why , , can not you look and feel as I do -- buoyant , courageous , and fit to defy all the nun and flirt in ? I would give gold on the spot just to see you snap you finger . try the manoeuvre . " " if i be to bring into you presence just now ? " " I vow , , she should not move I : or , she should move I but by one thing -- true , yes , and passionate love . I would accord forgiveness at no less a price . " " indeed ! a smile of hers would have be a fortune to you a while since . "
" " Transform , : transform ! remember , you once call I a slave ! but I be a free man now ! " he stand up : in the port of he head , the carriage of he figure , in he beaming eye and mien , there reveal itself a liberty which be more than ease -- a mood which be disdain of he past bondage . " , " he pursue , " have lead I through a phase of feeling which be over : I have enter another condition , and be now much dispose to exact love for love -- passion for passion -- and good measure of it , too . " " ah , ! doctor ! you say it be you nature to pursue love under difficulty -- to be charme by a proud insensibility ! " . he laugh , and answer , " my nature varies : the mood of one hour be sometimes the mockery of the next . well , " ( draw on he glove ) , " will the come again to - night , think you ? " " I do not think she will . " " give she my compliment , if she do -- . 's compliment -- and entreat she to have the goodness to wait a visit from he . , be she a pretty nun ? have she a pretty face ? you have not tell I that yet ; and _that be the really important point . " " she have a white cloth over she face , " say I , " but she eye glitter . " " confusion to she goblin trapping ! " cry he , irreverently : " but at least she have handsome eye -- bright and soft . " " cold and fix , " be the reply . " no , no , we will none of she : she shall not haunt you , . give she that shake of the hand , if she come again . will she stand _that , do you think ? " I think it too kind and cordial for a ghost to stand : and so be the smile which match it , and accompany he " good - night . " * * * * * and have there be anything in the garret ? what do they discover ? I believe , on the closest examination , they discoveries amount to very little . they talk , at first , of the cloak be disturb ; but tell I afterwards she think they hang much as usual : and as for the broken pane in the skylight , she affir that apertur be rarely without one or more pane break or crack : and besides , a heavy hail - storm have fall a few day ago . question I very closely as to what I have see , but I only describe a obscure figure clothed in black : I take care not to breathe the word " nun , " certain that this word would at once suggest to she mind a idea of romance and unreality . she charge I to say nothing on the subject to any servant , pupil , or teacher , and highly commend my discretion in come to she private salle - a - manger , instead of carry the tale of horror to the school refectory . thus the subject drop . I be leave secretly and sadly to , in my own mind , whether that strange thing be of this world , or of a realm beyond the grave ; or whether indeed it be only the child of malady , and I of that malady the prey . . VASHTI . to wonder sadly , do I say ? no : a new influence begin to act upon my life , and sadness , for a certain space , be hold at bay . Conceive a dell , deep - hollow in forest secresy ; it lie in dimness and mist : its turf be dank , it be herbage pale and humid . a storm or a axe make a wide gap amongst the oak - tree ; the breeze sweep in ; the sun look down ; the sad , cold dell become a deep cup of lustre ; high summer pour she blue glory and she golden light out of that beauteous sky , which till now the starve hollow never see . a new creed become mine -- a belief in happiness . it be three week since the adventure of the garret , and I possess in that case , box , drawer up - stair , casket with that first letter , four companion like to it , trace by the same firm pen , seal with the same clear seal , full of the same vital comfort . vital comfort it seem to I then : I read they in after year ; they be kind letter enough -- pleasing letter , because compose by one well please ; in the two last there be three or four close line half - gay , half - tender , " by _feeling touch , but not subdue . " time , dear reader , mellow they to a beverage of this mild quality ; but when I first taste they elixir , fresh from the fount so honoured , it seem juice of a divine vintage : a dratch which might fill , and the very god approve . do the reader , remembere what be say some page back , care to ask how I answer these letter : whether under the dry , stint check of , or accord to the full , liberal impulse of ? to speak truth , I compromise matter ; I serve two masters :
: I bow down in the house of , and lift the heart at another shrine . I write to these letter two answer -- one for my own relief , the other for 's perusal . to begin with : feeling and I turn out of door , draw against she bar and bolt , then we sit down , spread we paper , dip in the ink a eager pen , and , with deep enjoyment , pour out we sincere heart . when we have do -- when two sheet be cover with the language of a strongly - adherent affection , a rooted and active gratitude --( once , for all , in this parenthesis , I disclaim , with the utmost scorn , every sneak suspicion of what be call " warmer feeling : " woman do not entertain these " warmer feeling " where , from the commencement , through the whole progress of a acquaintance , they have never once be cheat of the conviction that , to do so would be to commit a mortal absurdity : nobody ever launch into love unless he have see or dream the rising of 's star over 's troubled water ) -- when , then , I have give expression to a closely - clinging and deeply - honouring attachment -- a attachment that want to attract to itself and take to its own lot all that be painful in the destiny of its object ; that would , if it could , have absorb and conduct away all storm and lightning from a existence view with a passion of solicitude -- then , just at that moment , the door of my heart would shake , bolt and bar would yield , would leap in vigorous and revengeful , snatch the full sheet , read , sneer , erase , tear up , re-write , fold , seal , direct , and send a terse , curt missive of a page . she do right . I do not live on letter only : I be visit , I be look after ; once a week I be take out to ; always I be make much of . fail not to tell I _why he be so kind : " to keep away the nun , " he say ; " he be determined to dispute with she she prey . he have take , " he declare , " a thorough dislike to she , chiefly on account of that white face - cloth , and those cold grey eye : the moment he hear of those odious particular , " he affir , " consummate disgust have incite he to oppose she ; he be determined to try whether he or she be the cleverest , and he only wish she would once more look in upon I when he be present : " but that she never do . in short , he regard I scientifically in the light of a patient , and at once exercise he professional skill , and gratify he natural benevolence , by a course of cordial and attentive treatment . one evening , the first in , I be walk by myself in the carre ; it be six o'clock ; the classe - door be close ; but within , the pupil , rampant in the licence of evening recreation , be counterfeit a miniature chaos . the carre be quite dark , except a red light shin under and about the stove ; the wide glass - door and the long window be frost over ; a crystal sparkle of starlight , here and there spangl this blanched winter veil , and break with scattered brilliance the paleness of its embroidery , prove it a clear night , though moonless . that I should dare to remain thus alone in darkness , show that my nerve be regain a healthy tone : I think of the nun , but hardly fear she ; though the staircase be behind I , lead up , through blind , black night , from landing to landing , to the haunted grenier . yet I own my heart quak , my pulse leape , when I suddenly hear breathing and rust , and turn , see in the deep shadow of the step a deeper shadow still -- a shape that move and descende . it pause a while at the classe - door , and then it glide before I . simultaneously come a clangor of the distant door - bell . life - like sound bring life - like feeling : this shape be too round and low for my gaunt nun : it be only Madame Beck on duty . " ! " cry , burst in , lamp in hand , from the corridor , " on est la pour vous au salon . " see I , I see , see we both : there be no mutual recognition . I make straight for the salon . there I find what I own I anticipat I should find -- ; but he be in evening - dress . " the carriage be at the door , " say he ; " my mother have send it to take you to the theatre ; she be go herself , but a arrival have prevent she : she immediately say , ' take Lucy in my place . ' will you go ? " " just now ? I be not dress , " cry I , glance despairingly at my dark merino . " you have half a hour to dress . I should have give you notice , but I only determine on go since five o'clock , when I hear there be to be a genuine regale in the presence of a great actress . " and he mention a name
name that thrill I -- a name that , in those day , could thrill . it be hush now : it be once restless echoe be all still ; she who bear it go year ago to she rest : night and oblivion long since close above she ; but _then_ she day -- a day of -- stood at it be full height , light and fervour . " I will go ; I will be ready in ten minute , " I vow . and away I fly , never once check , reader , by the thought which perhaps at this moment check you : namely , that to go anywhere with and without could be objectionable . I could not have conceive , much less have express to , such thought -- such scruple -- without risk of excite a tyrannous self - contempt : of kindl a inward fire of shame so quenchless , and so devouring , that I think it would soon have lick up the very life in my vein . besides , my godmother , know she son , and know I , would as soon have think of chaperon a sister with a brother , as of keep anxious guard over we incoming and outgoing . the present be no occasion for showy array ; my dun mist crape would suffice , and I seek the same in the great oak - wardrobe in the dormitory , where hang no less than forty dress . but there have be change and reform , and some innovating hand have prune this same crowded wardrobe , and carry diver garment to the grenier -- my crape amongst the rest . I must fetch it . I get the key , and go aloft fearless , almost thoughtless . I unlock the door , I plunge in . the reader may believe it or not , but when I thus suddenly enter , that garret be not wholly dark as it should have be : from one point there shine a solemn light , like a star , but broader . so plainly it shine , that it reveal the deep alcove with a portion of the tarnished scarlet curtain draw over it . instantly , silently , before my eyes , it vanish ; so do the curtain and alcove : all that end of the garret become black as night . I venture no research ; I have not time nor will ; snatch my dress , which hang on the wall , happily near the door , I rush out , relock the door with convulse haste , and dart downward to the dormitory . but I tremble too much to dress myself : impossible to arrange hair or fasten hook - and - eye with such finger , so I call and bribe she to help I . like a bribe , so she do she best , smoothed and plait my hair as well as a coiffeur would have do , place the lace collar mathematically straight , tie the neck - ribbon accurately -- in short , do she work like the neat - hand she could be when she those . have give I my handkerchief and glove , she take the candle and light I down - stair . after all , I have forget my shawl ; she run back to fetch it ; and I stand with in the vestibule , wait . " what be this , ? " say he , look down at I narrowly . " here be the old excitement . ! the nun again ? " but I utterly deny the charge : I be vex to be suspect of a second illusion . he be sceptical . " she have be , as sure as I live , " say he ; " she figure cross you eye leave on they a peculiar gleam and expression not to be mistaken . " " she have _not_ been , " I persist : for , indeed , I could deny she apparition with truth . " the old symptom be there , " he affirm : " a particular pale , and what the call a ' raise ' look . " he be so obstinate , I think it better to tell he what I really _had_ see . of course with he it be hold to be another effect of the same cause : it be all optical illusion -- nervous malady , and so on . not one bit do I believe he ; but I da not contradict : doctor be so self - opinionate , so immovable in they dry , materialist views . bring the shawl , and I be bundle into the carriage . * * * * * the theatre be full -- cramm to its roof : royal and noble be there : palace and hotel have empty they inmate into those tier so thronge and so hush . deeply do I feel myself privileged in have a place before that stage ; I longe to see a being of whose power I have hear report which make I conceive peculiar anticipation . I wonder if she would justify she reny : with strange curiosity , with feeling severe and austere , yet of rivet interest , I wait . she be a study of such nature as have not encounter my eye yet : a great and new planet she be : but in what shape ? I wait she rise . she rise at nine that night : above the horizon I see she come . she could shine yet with pale grandeur and steady might ; but that star verge already on its judgment - day . see near , it be a chaos -- hollow , half - consum : a orb perish or
or perish -- half lava , half glow . I have hear this woman term " plain , " and I expect bony harshness and grimness -- something large , angular , sallow . what I see be the shadow of a : a queen , fair as the day once , turn pale now like twilight , and waste like wax in flame . for a while -- a long while -- I think it be only a woman , though a unique woman , who move in and before this multitude . by - and - by I recognise my mistake . behold ! I find upon she something neither of woman nor of man : in each of she eye sit a devil . these evil force bear she through the tragedy , keep up she feeble strength -- for she be but a frail creature ; and as the action rose and the stir deepen , how wildly they shook she with they passion of the pit ! they write on she straight , haughty brow . they tune she voice to the note of torment . they writh she regal face to a demoniac mask . and and incarnate she stood . it be a marvellous sight : a mighty revelation . it be a spectacle low , horrible , immoral . Swordsmen thrust through , and die in they blood on the arena sand ; bulls go horse disembowell , make a meeker vision for the public -- a milder condiment for a people 's palate -- than tear by seven devils : devils which cry sore and rent the tenement they haunt , but still refuse to be exorcise . suffer have struck that stage empress ; and she stand before she audience neither yield to , nor endure , nor , in finite measure , resent it : she stand lock in struggle , rigid in resistance . she stand , not dress , but drape in pale antique fold , long and regular like sculpture . a background and entourage and flooring of deepest crimson throw she out , white like alabaster -- like silver : rather , be it say , like . where be the artist of the ? let he come and sit down and study this different vision . let he seek here the mighty brawn , the muscle , the abounding blood , the full - fed flesh he worship : let all materialist draw nigh and look on . I have say that she do not _resent she grief . no ; the weakness of that word would make it a lie . to she , what hurt become immediately embody : she look on it as a thing that can be attack , worry down , tear in shred . Scarcely a substance herself , she grapple to conflict with abstraction . before calamity she be a tigress ; she rend she woe , shiver they in convulse abhorrence . , for she , have no result in good : tear water no harvest of wisdom : on sickness , on death itself , she look with the eye of a rebel . Wick , perhaps , she be , but also she be strong ; and she strength have conquer , have overcome , and bound both at she side , captive peerlessly fair , and docile as fair . even in the uttermost frenzy of energy be each maenad movement royally , imperially , incedingly upborne . she hair , fly loose in revel or war , be still a angel 's hair , and glorious under a halo . Fallen , insurgent , banish , she remember the heaven where she rebel . 's light , follow she exile , pierce its confines , and disclose they forlorn remoteness . place now the , or any other slug , before she as a obstacle , and see she cut through the pulpy mass as the scimitar of clove the down cushion . let wake from the dead , let he rise out of he cerement , and bring into this presence all the army of he fat woman ; the magian power or prophet-virtue gift that slight rod of , could , at one waft , release and re-mingle a sea spell - part , whelm the heavy host with the down - rush of overthrown sea-rampart . iVasht be not good , I be tell ; and I have say she do not look good : through a spirit , she be a spirit out of . well , if so much of unholy force can arise from below , may not a equal efflux of sacred essence descmend one day from above ? what think of this be ? for long interval I forget to look how he demean himself , or to question what he think . the strong magnetism of genius draw my heart out of its wonted orbit ; the sunflower turn from the south to a fierce light , not solar -- a rushing , red , cometary light -- hot on vision and to sensation . I have see acting before , but never anything like this : never anything which astonished hope and hush ; which outstrip Impulse and pal Conception ; which , instead of merely irritat imagination with the thought of what _might be do , at the same time fevere the nerve because it be _not_ do , disclose power like a deep , swollen winter river , thunder in cataract , and bear the soul , like a leaf , on the steep and steelly sweep of its descent . , with she usual ripeness of judgament , pronounce Bretton a serious , impassioned man , too grave and too impressible . not in such light do I ever see he : no such fault could I lay to he
he charge . he natural attitude be not the meditative , nor he natural mood the sentimental ; _impressionable he be as dimpl water , but , almost as water , _unimpressible :_ the breeze , the sun , move he -- metal could not grave , nor fire brand . _could_ think and think well , but he be rather a man of action than of thought ; he _could feel , and feel vividly in he way , but he heart have no chord for enthusiasm : to bright , soft , sweet influence he eye and lip give bright , soft , sweet welcome , beautiful to see as dyes of rose and silver , pearl and purple , imbue summer clouds ; for what belong to storm , what be wild and intense , dangerous , sudden , and flam , he have no sympathy , and hold with it no communion . when I take time and regain inclination to glance at he , it amuse and enlighten I to discover that he be watch that sinister and sovereign , not with , nor worship , nor yet dismay , but simply with intense curiosity . she agony do not pain he , she wild moan-- worse than a shriek -- do not much move he ; she fury revolt he somewhat , but not to the point of horror . cool young ! the pale cliff of he own England do not look down on the tide of the more calmly than he watch the Pythian inspiration of that night . look at he face , I longe to know he exact opinion , and at last I put a question tend to elicit they . at the sound of my voice he awoke as if out of a dream ; for he have be think , and very intently think , he own thought , after he own manner . " how do he like ? " I wish to know . " Hm -m -m , " be the first scarce articulate but expressive answer ; and then such a strange smile go wander round he lip , a smile so critical , so almost callous ! I suppose that for nature of that order he sympathy _were_ callous . in a few terse phrase he tell I he opinion of , and feel towards , the actress : he judge she as a woman , not a artist : it be a branding judgment . that night be already mark in my book of life , not with white , but with a deep - red cross . but I have not do with it yet ; and other memoranda be destin to be set down in character of tint indelible . towards midnight , when the deepening tragedy blacken to the death - scene , and all hold they breath , and even bit he under - lip , and knit he brow , and sit still and strike -- when the whole theatre be hush , when the vision of all eye cent in one point , when all ear listen towards one quarter -- nothing be see but the white form sunk on a seat , quiver in conflict with she last , she worst - hate , she visibly - conquer foe -- nothing hear but she thro , she gasping , breathe yet of mutiny , pante still defiance ; when , as it see , a inordinate will , convulse a perishing mortal frame , bend it to battle with doom and death , fight every inch of ground , sell every drop of blood , resist to the latest the rape of every faculty , _would see , _would hear , _would breathe , _would live , up to , within , well - nigh _beyond the moment when death say to all sense and all be -- " thus far and no farther ! " -- just then a stir , pregnant with oman , rust behind the scene -- foot run , voice spoke . what be it ? demand the whole house . a flame , a smell of smoke reply . " fire ! " ring through the gallery . " ! " be repeat , re-echo , yell forth : and then , and faster than pen can set it down , come panic , rush , crush -- a blind , selfish , cruel chaos . and ? reader , I see he yet , with he look of comely courage and cordial calm . " Lucy will sit still , I know , " say he , glance down at I with the same serene goodness , the same repose of firmness that I have see in he when sit at he side amid the secure peace of he mother 's hearth . yes , thus adjure , I think I would have sit still under a rocking crag : but , indeed , to sit still in actual circumstance be my instinct ; and at the price of my very life , I would not have move to give he trouble , thwart he will , or make demand on he attention . we be in the stall , and for a few minute there be a most terrible , ruthless pressure about we . " how terrified be the woman ! " say he ; " but if the man be not almost equally so , order might be maintain . this be a sorry scene : I see fifty selfish brute at this moment , each of whom , if I be near , I could conscientiously knock down . I see some woman braver than some man . there be one yonder -- ! " while be speak , a young girl who have be very quietly and steadily cling to a gentleman before
before we , be suddenly strike from she protector 's arm by a big , butcherly intruder , and hurl under the foot of the crowd . Scarce two seconds last she disappearance . rush forwards ; he and the gentleman , a powerful man through grey - hair , unit they strength to thrust back the throng ; she head and long hair fall back over he shoulder : she seem unconscious . " trust she with I ; I be a medical man , " say . " if you have no lady with you , be it so , " be the answer . " hold she , and I will force a passage : we must get she to the air . " " I have a lady , " say ; " but she will be neither hindrance nor incumbrance . " he summon I with he eye : we be separat . Resolute , however , to rejoin he , I penetrat the living barrier , creep under where I could not get between or over . " Fasten on I , and do not leave go , " he say ; and I obey he . we pioneer prove strong and adroit ; he open the dense mass like a wedge ; with patience and toil he at last bore through the flesh - and - blood rock -- so solid , hot , and suffocat -- and bring we to the fresh , freezing night . " you be a ! " say he , turn shortly on , when we get into the street . " a . and I speak to a countryman ? " be the reply . " right . be good enough to stand here two minute , whilst I find my carriage . " " Papa , I be not hurt , " say a girlish voice ; " be I with papa ? " " you be with a friend , and you father be close at hand . " " tell he I be not hurt , except just in my shoulder . oh , my shoulder ! they trod just here . " " Dislocation , perhaps ! " mutter the Doctor : " let we hope there be no worse injury do . Lucy , lend a hand one instant . " and I assist while he make some arrangement of drapery and position for the ease of he suffering burden . she suppress a moan , and lay in he arm quietly and patiently . " she be very light , " say , " like a child ! " and he ask in my ear , " be she a child , ? do you notice she age ? " " I be not a child -- I be a person of seventeen , " respond the patient , demurely and with dignity . then , directly after : " papa to come ; I get anxious . " the carriage drive up ; she father relieve ; but in the exchange from one bearer to another she be hurt , and moan again . " my darling ! " say the father , tenderly ; then turn to , " you say , sir , you be a medical man ? " " I be : , of . " " good . will you step into my carriage ? " " my own carriage be here : I will seek it , and accompany you . " " be pleased , then , to follow we . " and he name he address : " the , in the . " we follow ; the carriage drive fast ; myself and be silent . this seem like a adventure . some little time be lose in seek we own equipage , we reach the hotel perhaps about ten minute after these stranger . it be a hotel in the foreign sense : a collection of dwelling - house , not a inn -- a vast , lofy pile , with a huge arch to its street - door , lead through a vaulted covered way , into a square all build round . we alight , pass up a wide , handsome public staircase , and stop at 2 on the second landing ; the first floor comprise the abode of I know not what " prince Russe , " as inform I . on ring the bell at a second great door , we be admit to a suite of very handsome apartment . announce by a servant in livery , we enter a drawing - room whose hearth glow with a fire , and whose wall gleam with foreign mirror . near the hearth appear a little group : a slight form sunk in a deep arm - chair , one or two woman busy about it , the iron - grey gentleman anxiously look on . " where be ? I wish would come to I , " say the girlish voice , faintly . " where be ? " demand the gentleman impatiently and somewhat sternly of the man - servant who have admit we . " I be sorry to say she be go out of town , sir ; my young lady give she leave till to - morrow . " " yes -- I do -- I do . she be gone to see she sister ; I say she might go : I remember now , " interpose the young lady ; " but I be so sorry , for and can not understand a word I say , and they hurt I without meane to do so . " and the gentleman now interchange greeting ; and while they pass a few minute in consultation , I approach the easy - chair , and see what the faint and sinke
sinke girl wish to have do , I do it for she . I be still occupy in the arrangement , when draw near ; he be no less skilled in surgery than medicine , and , on examination , find that no further advice than he own be necessary to the treatment of the present case . he order she to be carry to she chamber , and whisper to I :--" go with the woman , Lucy ; they seem but dull ; you can at least direct they movement , and thus spare she some pain . she must be touch very tenderly . " the chamber be a room shadowy with pale - blue hanging , vaporous with curtaining and veiling of muslin ; the bed seem to I like snow - drift and mist --spotless , soft , and gauzy . make the woman stand apart , I undress they mistress , without they well - mean but clumsy aid . I be not in a sufficientely collect mood to note with separate distinctness every detail of the attire I remove , but I receive a general impression of refinement , delicacy , and perfect personal cultivation ; which , in a period of after - thought , offer in my reflection a singular contrast to note retain of 's appointment . the girl be herself a small , delicate creature , but make like a model . as I fold back she plentiful yet fine hair , so shining and soft , and so exquisitely ten , I have under my observation a young , pale , weary , but high - breed face . the brow be smooth and clear ; the eyebrow be distinct , but soft , and melt to a mere trace at the temple ; the eye be a rich gift of nature -- fine and full , large , deep , seem to hold dominion over the slighter subordinate feature -- capable , probably , of much significance at another hour and under other circumstance than the present , but now languid and suffe . she skin be perfectly fair , the neck and hand vein finely like the petal of a flower ; a thin glazing of the ice of pride polish this delicate exterior , and she lip wear a curl -- I doubt not inherent and unconscious , but which , if I have see it first with the accompaniment of health and state , would have strike I as unwarranted , and prove in the little lady a quite mistaken view of life and she own consequence . she demeanour under the Doctor 's hand at first accit a smile ; it be not puerile -- rather , on the whole , patient and firm -- but yet , once or twice she address he with suddenness and sharpness , say that he hurt she , and must contrive to give she less pain ; I see she large eye , too , settle on he face like the solemn eye of some pretty , wonder child . I know not whether feel this examination : if be do , he be cautious not to check or discomfort it by any retaliatory look . I think he perform he work with extreme care and gentleness , spare she what pain he could ; and she acknowledge as much , when he have do , by the word :--" thank you , Doctor , and good - night , " very gratefully pronounce as she utter they , however , it be with a repetition of the serious , direct gaze , I think , peculiar in its gravity and intentness . the injuries , it seem , be not dangerous : a assurance which she father receive with a smile that almost make one he friend -- it be so glad and gratify . he now express he obligation to with as much earnestness as be befitt a address one who have serve he , but be yet a stranger ; he also beg he to call the next day . " , " say a voice from the veil couch , " thank the lady , too ; be she there ? " I open the curtain with a smile , and look in at she . she lay now at comparative ease ; she look pretty , though pale ; she face be delicately design , and if at first sight it appear proud , I believe custom might prove it to be soft . " I thank the lady very sincerely , " say she father : " I fancy she have be very good to my child . I think we scarcely dare tell Mr . Hurst who have be she substitute and do she work ; she will feel at once ashamed and jealous . " and thus , in the most friendly spirit , parting greeting be interchange ; and refreshment have be hospitably offer , but by we , as it be late , refuse , we withdraw from the . on we way back we repass the theatre . all be silence and darkness : the roaring , rushe crowd all vanish and go -- the damp , as well as the incipient fire , extinct and forgotten . next morning 's papers explain that it be but some loose drapery on which a spark have fall , and which have blaze up and be quench in a moment . . . those who live in retirement , whose life have fall amid the seclusion of school or of other wall - in and guard dwelling , be liable to be suddenly and for a long while drop out of the memory of they friend , the denizen of a freer world . Unaccountably , perhaps , and close upon some space of unusually frequent intercourse --
-- some congery of rather excite little circumstances , whose natural sequel would rather seem to be the quickening than the suspension of communication -- there fall a stilly pause , a wordless silence , a long blank of oblivion . Unbroken always be this blank ; alike entire and unexplained . the letter , the message once frequent , be cut off ; the visit , formerly periodical , cease to occur ; the book , paper , or other token that indicate remembrance , come no more . always there be excellent reason for these lapse , if the hermit but know they . though he be stagnant in he cell , he connection without be whir in the very vortex of life . that void interval which pass for he so slowly that the very clock seem at a stand , and the wingless hour plod by in the likeness of tired tramp prone to rest at milestone -- that same interval , perhaps , teem with event , and pants with hurry for he friend . the hermit -- if he be a sensible hermit -- will swallow he own thought , and lock up he own emotion during these week of inward winter . he will know that design he to imitate , on occasion , the dormouse , and he will be conformable : make a tidy ball of himself , creep into a hole of life 's wall , and submit decently to the drift which blow in and soon block he up , preserve he in ice for the season . let he say , " it be quite right : it ought to be so , since so it be . " and , perhaps , one day he snow - sepulchre will open , spring 's softness will return , the sun and south - wind will reach he ; the budding of hedge , and carolling of bird , and singe of liberate stream , will call he to kindly resurrection . _Perhaps_ this may be the case , perhaps not : the frost may get into he heart and never thaw more ; when spring come , a crow or a pie may pick out of the wall only he dormouse - bone . well , even in that case , all will be right : it be to be suppose he know from the first he be mortal , and must one day go the way of all flesh , " as well soon as syne . " follow that eventful evening at the theatre , come for I seven week as bare as seven sheet of blank paper : no word be write on one of they ; not a visit , not a token . about the middle of that time I entertain fancie that something have happene to my friend at . the mid -blank be always a beclouded point for the solitary : he nerf aco with the strain of long expectancy ; the doubt hitherto repell gather now to a mass and -- strong in accumulation -- roll back upon he with a force which savour of vindictiveness . night , too , become a unkindly time , and sleep and he nature can not agree : strange start and struggle harass he couch : the sinister band of bad dream , with horror of calamity , and sick dread of entire desertion at they head , join the against he . poor wretch ! he do he best to bear up , but he be a poor , pallid , waste wretch , despite that best . towards the last of these long seven week I admit , what through the other six I have jealously exclude -- the conviction that these blank be inevitable : the result of circumstance , the fiat of fate , a part of my life 's lot and -- above all -- a matter about whose origin no question must ever be ask , for whose painful sequence no murmur ever uttere . of course I do not blame myself for suffer : I thank I have a truer sense of justice than to fall into any imbecile extravagance of self - accusation ; and as to blame other for silence , in my reason I well know they blameless , and in my heart acknowledge they so : but it be a rough and heavy road to travel , and I longe for better day . I try different expedient to sustain and fill existence : I commence a elaborate piece of lace - work , I study german pretty hard , I undertake a course of regular reading of the driest and thickest book in the library ; in all my effort I be as orthodox as I know how to be . be there error somewhere ? very likely . I only know the result be as if I have gnaw a file to satisfy hunger , or drank brine to quench thirst . my hour of torment be the post-hour . unfortunately , I know it too well , and try as vainly as assiduously to cheat myself of that knowledge ; dread the rack of expectation , and the sick collapse of disappointment which daily proceed and follow upon that well - recognise ring . I suppose animal keep in cage , and so scantily feed as to be always upon the verge of famine , await they food as I await a letter . oh ! -- to speak truth , and drop that tone of a false calm which long to sustain , outwears nature 's endurance -- I undergo in those seven week bitter fear and pain , strange inward trial , miserable defection of hope , intolerable encroachment of despair . this last come so near I sometimes that she breath go right through I . I
I use to feel it like a baleful air or sigh , penetrate deep , and make motion pause at my heart , or proceed only under unspeakable oppression . the letter -- the well - beloved letter -- would not come ; and it be all of sweetness in life I have to look for . in the very extremity of want , I have recourse again , and yet again , to the little packet in the case -- the five letter . how splendo that month seem whose sky have beheld the rising of these five star ! it be always at night I visit they , and not da to ask every evening for a candle in the kitchen , I buy a wax taper and match to light it , and at the study - hour stole up to the dormitory and feast on my crust from the 's loaf . it do not nourish I : I pine on it , and get as thin as a shadow : otherwise I be not ill . read there somewhat late one evening , and feel that the power to read be leave I -- for the letter from incessant perusal be lose all sap and significance : my gold be wither to leave before my eye , and I be sorrow over the disillusion--suddenly a quick tripping foot run up the stair . I know 's step : she have dine in town that afternoon ; she be now return , and would come here to replace she shawl , &c. in the wardrobe . yes : in she come , dress in bright silk , with she shawl fal from she shoulders , and she curl , half - uncurled in the damp of night , droop careless and heavy upon she neck . I have hardly time to recasket my treasure and lock they up when she be at my side she humwe see none of the best . " it have be a stupid evening : they be stupid people , " she begin . " who ? ? I think you always find she house charme ? " " I have not be to 's . " " indeed ! have you make new acquaintance ? " " my uncle be come . " " you uncle ! be you not glad ?--i thought he be a favourite . " " you think wrong : the man be odious ; I hate he . " " because he be a foreigner ? or for what other reason of equal weight ? " " he be not a foreigner . the man be English enough , goodness know ; and have a english name till three or four year ago ; but he mother be a foreigner , a , and some of she family be dead and have leave he estate , a title , and this name : he be quite a great man now . " " do you hate he for that reason ? " " do not I know what mamma say about he ? he be not my own uncle , but marry 's sister . detest he ; she say he kill aunt with unkindness : he look like a bear . such a dismal evening ! " she go on . " I will go no more to he big hotel . Fancy I walk into a room alone , and a great man fifty year old come forwards , and after a few minute ' conversation actually turn he back upon I , and then abruptly go out of the room . such odd way ! I daresay he conscience smote he , for they all say at home I be the picture of aunt . often declare the likeness be quite ridiculous . " " be you the only visitor ? " " the only visitor ? yes ; then there be missy , my cousin : little spoil , pamper thing . " " have a daughter ? " " yes , yes : do not tease one with question . oh , dear ! I be so tired . " she yawn . throw herself without ceremony on my bed she add , " it seem be nearly crush to a jelly in a hubbub at the theatre some week ago . " " ah ! indeed . and they live at a large hotel in the ? " " Justement . how do _you_ know ? " " I have be there . " " oh , you have ? really ! you go everywhere in these day . I suppose take you . she and have the _entree of the apartment : it seem 'my son ' attend missy on the occasion of she accident -- ? Bah ! all affectation ! I do not think she be squeeze more than she richly deserve for she air . and now there be quite a intimacy strike up : I hear something about ' auld lang syne , ' and what not . oh , how stupid they all be ! " " all !_ you say you be the only visitor . " " do I ? you see one forget to particularize a old woman and she boy . " " and be at 's this evening ? " " ay , ay ! as large as life ; and missy play the hostess . what a conceit doll it be ! " Soure and listless , be begin to disclose the causis of she prostrate condition . there have be a retrenchment of incense , a diversion or a total withholding of homage and attention coquetry have fail of effect , vanity have undergone mortification . she lay fuming in the vapour . " be quite well now ? " I ask . " as well as
as you or I , no doubt ; but she be a affected little thing , and give herself invalid air to attract medical notice . and to see the old dowager make she recline on a couch , and 'my son ' prohibit excitement , etcetera -- faugh ! the scene be quite sickening . " " it would not have be so if the object of attention have be change : if you have take 's place . " " indeed ! I hate 'my son ! ' " " 'my son !' -- whom do you indicate by that name ? 's mother never call he so . " " then she ought . a clownish , bearish he be . " " you violate the truth in say so ; and as the whole of my patience be now spun off the distaff , I peremptorily desire you to rise from that bed , and vacate this room . " " Passionate thing ! you face be the colour of a coquelicot . I wonder what always make you so mighty testy a l'endroit do gro ? ' , my , ! ' oh , the distinguished name ! " Thrill with exasperation , to which it would have be sheer folly to have give vent -- for there be no contending with that unsubstantial feather , that meally - win moth -- I extinguish my taper , lock my bureau , and leave she , since she would not leave I . small - beer as she be , she have turn insufferably acid . the morrow be and a half - holiday . Breakfast be over ; I have withdraw to the first classe . the dread hour , the post-hour , be neare , and I sit wait it , much as a ghost - seer might wait he spectre . less than ever be a letter probable ; still , strive as I would , I could not forget that it be possible . as the moment lessen , a restlessness and fear almost beyond the average assail I . it be a day of winter east wind , and I have now for some time enter into that dreary fellowship with the wind and they change , so little know , so incomprehensible to the healthy . the north and east own a terrific influence , make all pain more poignant , all sorrow sadder . the south could calm , the west sometimes cheer : unless , indeed , they bring on they wing the burden of thunder - cloud , under the weight and warmth of which all energy di . and dark as be this day , I remember leave the classe , and run down without bonnet to the bottom of the long garden , and then linger amongst the stripped shrub , in the forlorn hope that the postman 's ring might occur while I be out of hearing , and I might thus be spare the thrill which some particular nerve or nerve , almost gnaw through with the unremitting tooth of a fix idea , be become wholly unfit to support . I linger as long as I da without fear of attracting attention by my absence . I muff my head in my apron , and stop my ear in terror of the torture clang , sure to be follow by such blank silence , such barren vacuum for I . at last I venture to re-enter the first classe , where , as it be not yet nine o'clock , no pupil have be admit . the first thing seen be a white object on my black desk , a white , flat object . the post have , indeed , arrive ; by I unheard . have visit my cell , and , like some angel , have leave behind she a bright token of she presence . that shin thing on the desk be indeed a letter , a real letter ; I see so much at the distance of three yard , and as I have but one correspondent on earth , from that one it must come . he remembe I yet . how deep a pulse of gratitude send new life through my heart . Draw near , bend and look on the letter , in trembling but almost certain hope of see a know hand , it be my lot to find , on the contrary , a autograph for the moment deeme unknown -- a pale female scrawl , instead of a firm , masculine character . I then think fate be _too_ hard for I , and I say , audibly , " this be cruel . " but I get over that pain also . life be still life , whatever its pang : we eye and ears and they use remain with we , though the prospect of what pleasis be wholly withdrawn , and the sound of what consoles be quite silenced . I open the billet : by this time I have recognise its handwriting as perfectly familiar . it be date " , " and it run thus :-- " ,-- it occur to I to inquire what you have be do with yourself for the last month or two ? not that I suspect you would have the least difficulty in give a account of you proceedings . I daresay you have be just as busy and as happy as ourselves at . as to , he professional connection extend daily : he be so much seek after , so much engage , that I tell he he will grow quite conceited . like a right good mother , as I be , I do my best to keep he down : no flattery do he get from I , as you know . and yet , , he
he be a fine fellow : he mother 's heart dance at the sight of he . after be hurry here and there the whole day , and pass the ordeal of fifty sort of tempers , and combat a hundred caprice , and sometimes witnesse cruel suffering -- perhaps , occasionally , as I tell he , inflict they -- at night he still come home to I in such kindly , pleasant mood , that really , I seem to live in a sort of moral antipode , and on these evening my day rise when other people 's night set in . " still he need keep in order , and correcte , and repress , and I do he that good service ; but the boy be so elastic there be no such thing as vex he thoroughly . when I think I have at last driven he to the sullens , he turn on I with joke for retaliation : but you know he and all he iniquity , and I be but a elderly simpleton to make he the subject of this epistle . " as for I , I have have my old agent here on a visit , and have be plunge overhead and ear in business matter . I do so wish to regain for at least some part of what he father leave he . he laugh to scorn my anxiety on this point , bid I look and see how he can provide for himself and I too , and ask what the old lady can possibly want that she have not ; hint about sky - blue turban ; accuse I of a ambition to wear diamonds , keep livery servants , have a hotel , and lead the fashion amongst the english clan in . " talk of sky - blue turban , I wish you have be with we the other evening . he have come in really tired , and after I have give he he tea , he throw himself into my chair with he customary presumption . to my great delight , he drop asleep . ( you know how he tease I about be drowsy ; I , who never , by any chance , close a eye by daylight . ) while he sleep , I think he look very bonny , Lucy : fool as I be to be so proud of he ; but who can help it ? show I he peer . look where I will , I see nothing like he in . well , I take it into my head to play he a trick : so I bring out the sky - blue turban , and handle it with gingerly precaution , I manage to invest he brows with this grand adornment . I assure you it do not at all misbecome he ; he look quite eastern , except that he be so fair . nobody , however , can accuse he of have red hair _now _-- it be genuine chestnut -- a dark , glossy chestnut ; and when I put my large cashmere about he , there be as fine a young bey , dey , or pacha improvise as you would wish to see . " it be good entertainment ; but only half - enjoy , since I be alone : you should have be there . " in due time my lord awoke : the look - glass above the fireplace soon intimate to he he plight : as you may imagine , I now live under threat and dread of vengeance . " but to come to the gist of my letter . I know be a half - holiday in the : be ready , then , by five in the afternoon , at which hour I will send the carriage to take you out to . be sure to come : you may meet some old acquaintance . good - by , my wise , dear , grave little god - daughter .-- very truly yours , " . " . now , a letter like that set one to rights ! I might still be sad after read that letter , but I be more composed ; not exactly cheer , perhaps , but relieve . my friend , at least , were well and happy : no accident have occur to ; no illness have seize he mother - calamity that have so long be my dream and thought . they feeling for I too be -- as they have be . yet , how strange it be to look on : 's seven week and contrast they with my seven week ! also , how very wise it be in people place in a exceptional position to hold they tongue and not rashly declare how such position gall they ! the world can understand well enough the process of perishing for want of food : perhaps few person can enter into or follow out that of go mad from solitary confinement . they see the long - bury prisoner disinter , a maniac or a idiot !-- how he sense leave he -- how he nerve , first inflam , underwent nameless agony , and then sunk to palsy -- be a subject too intricate for examination , too abstract for popular comprehension . speak of it ! you might almose as well stand up in a european market - place , and propound dark saying in that language and mood wherein , the imperial hypochondriac , commune with he baffle . and long , long may the mind to whom such theme be no mystery -- by whom they bearing be sympathetically seize -- be few in number , and rare of rencounter . long may it be generally think that physical privation alone merit compassion , and that the rest
rest be a figment . when the world be younger and haler than now , moral trials be a deeper mystery still : perhaps in all the land of there be but one Saul -- certainly but one to soothe or comprehend he . the keen , still cold of the morning be succeed , later in the day , by a sharp breathing from russian waste : the cold zone sigh over the temperate zone , and froze it fast . a heavy firmament , dull , and thick with snow , sail up from the north , and settle over expectant . afternoon begin the descent . I fear no carriage would come , the white tempest rage so dense and wild . but trust my godmother ! once have ask , she would have she guest . about six og clock I be lift from the carriage over the already block - up front step of the chateau , and put in at the door of . run through the vestibule , and up - stair to the drawing - room , there I find -- a summer - day in she own person . have I be twice as cold as I be , she kind kiss and cordial clasp would have warm I . Inure now for so long a time to room with bare board , black bench , desk , and stove , the blue saloon seem to I gorgeous . in its - like fire alone there be a clear and crimson splendour which quite dazzl I . when my godmother have hold my hand for a little while , and chat with I , and scold I for have become thinner than when she last see I , she profess to discover that the snow - wind have disorder my hair , and send I up - stair to make it neat and remove my shawl . Repaire to my own little sea -green room , there also I find a bright fire , and candle too be light : a tall waxlight stand on each side the great look glass ; but between the candle , and before the glass , appear something dress itself -- a airy , fairy thing -- small , slight , white -- a winter spirit . I declare , for one moment I think of and he spectral illusion . with distrustful eye I not the detail of this new vision . it wear white , sprinkle slightly with drop of scarlet ; it be girdle be red ; it have something in its hair leafy , yet shining -- a little wreath with a evergreen gloss . Spectral or not , here truly be nothing frightful , and I advance . turn quick upon I , a large eye , under long lash , flash over I , the intruder : the lash be as dark as long , and they soften with they pencill the orb they guard . " ah ! you be come ! " she breathe out , in a soft , quiet voice , and she smile slowly , and gaze intently . I know she now . have only once see that sort of face , with that cast of fine and delicate featuring , I could not but know she . " , " I pronounce . " no , " be the reply , " not for you !_ " I do not inquire who then she might be , but wait voluntary information . " you be change , but still you be yourself , " she say , approach nearer . " I remember you well -- you countenance , the colour of you hair , the outline of you face .... " I have move to the fire , and she stand opposite , and gaze into I ; and as she gaze , she face become gradually more and more expressive of thought and feeling , till at last a dimness quench she clear vision . " it make I almost cry to look so far back , " say she : " but as to be sorry , or sentimental , do not think it : on the contrary , I be quite pleased and glad . " interested , yet altogether at fault , I know not what to say . at last I stammer , " I think I never meet you till that night , some week ago , when you be hurt ...? " she smile . " you have forget then that I have sit on you knee , be lift in you arm , even share you pillow ? you no longer remember the night when I come cry , like a naughty little child as I be , to you bedside , and you take I in . you have no memory for the comfort and protection by which you soothe a acute distress ? go back to . remember . " at last I see it all . " and you be little ? " " I be . " how time can change ! wear in she pale , small feature , she fairy symmetry , she varie expression , a certain promise of interest and grace ; but be become beautiful -- not with the beauty that strike the eye like a rose --orbed , ruddy , and replete ; not with the plump , and pink , and flaxen attribute of she blond cousin ; but she seventeen year have bring she a refin and tender charm which do not lie in complexion , though hers be fair and clear ; nor in outline , though she feature be sweet , and she limb perfectly turn ; but , I think , rather in a subdue glow from the soul outward . this be not a opaque vase , of
of material however costly , but a lamp chastely lucent , guard from extinction , yet not hide from worship , a flame vital and vestal . in speaking of she attraction , I would not exaggerate language ; but , indeed , they seem to I very real and engage . what though all be on a small scale , it be the perfume which give this white violet distinction , and make it superior to the broadest camelia -- the fullest dahlia that ever bloom . " ah ! and you remember the old time at ? " " better , " say she , " better , perhaps , than you . I remember it with minute distinctness : not only the time , but the day of the time , and the hour of the day . " " you must have forget some thing ? " " very little , I imagine . " " you be then a little creature of quick feeling : you must , long ere this , have outgrown the impressions with which joy and grief , affection and bereavement , stamp you mind ten year ago . " " you think I have forgote whom I like , and in what degree I like they when a child ? " " the sharpness must be gone -- the point , the poignancy -- the deep imprint must be soften away and efface ? " " I have a good memory for those day . " she look as if she have . she eye be the eyes of one who can remember ; one whose childhood do not fake like a dream , nor whose youth vanish like a sunbeam . she would not take life , loosely and incoherently , in part , and let one season slip as she enter on another : she would retain and add ; often review from the commencement , and so grow in harmony and consistency as she grow in year . still I could not quite admit the conviction that _all_ the picture which now crowd upon I be vivid and visible to she . she fond attachment , she sport and contest with a well - love playmate , the patient , true devotion of she child 's heart , she fear , she delicate reserve , she little trial , the last piercing pain of separation .... I retrace these thing , and shake my head incredulous . she persist . " the child of seven year live yet in the girl of seventeen , " say she . " you use to be excessively fond of , " I remarke , intend to test she . she set I right at once . " not _excessively fond , " say she ; " I like she : I respecte she as I should do now : she seem to I very little altered . " " she be not much change , " I assent . we be silent a few minute . Glance round the room she say , " there be several thing here that use to be at ! I remember that pincushion and that look - glass . " evidently she be not deceive in she estimate of she own memory ; not , at least , so far . " you think , then , you would have know ? " I go on . " I perfectly remembe she ; the turn of she feature , she olive complexion , and black hair , she height , she walk , she voice . " " , of course , " I pursue , " would be out of the question : and , indeed , as I see you first interview with he , I be aware that he appear to you as a stranger . " " that first night I be puzzl , " she answer . " how do the recognition between he and you father come about ? " " they exchange card . the name and give rise to question and explanations . that be on the second day ; but before then I be begin to know something . " " how -- know something ? " " why , " she say , " how strange it be that most people seem so slow to feel the truth -- not to see , but _feel ! when have visit I a few time , and sit near and talk to I ; when I have observe the look in he eye , the expression about he mouth , the form of he ching , the carriage of he head , and all that we _do_ observe in person who approach we -- how could I avoid be lead by association to think of ? be slighter than he , and not grow so tall , and have a smoother face , and longer and lighter hair , and spoke -- not so deeply -- more like a girl ; but yet _he_ be , just as _i_ be little , or you be . " I think the same , but I wonder to find my thought hers : there be certain thing in which we so rarely meet with we double that it seem a miracle when that chance befall . " you and be once playmate . " " and do you remember that ? " she question in she turn . " no doubt he will remember it also , " say I . " I have not ask he : few thing would surprise I so much as to find that he do . I suppose he disposition be still gay and careless ? " " be it so formerly ? do it so strike you ? do you thus remember he ? " " I scarcely remember he in any
any other light . sometimes he be studious ; sometimes he be merry : but whether busy with he book or dispose for play , it be chiefly the book or game he think of ; not much heed those with whom he read or amuse himself . " " yet to you he be partial . " " partial to I ? oh , no ! he have other playmate -- he school - fellow ; I be of little consequence to he , except on : yes , he be kind on . I remember walk with he hand - in - hand to 's , and he find the place in my prayer - book ; and how good and still he be on evening ! so mild for such a proud , lively boy ; so patient with all my blunders in reading ; and so wonderfully to be depend on , for he never spend those evening from home : I have a constant fear that he would accept some invitation and forsake we ; but he never do , nor see ever to wish to do it . thus , of course , it can be no more . I suppose will now be 's dining - out day ....? " " child , come down ! " here call from below . would still have lingered , but I inclin to descmend : we go down . . the little Countess . Cheerful as my godmother naturally be , and entertain as , for we sake , she make a point of being , there be no true enjoyment that even at , till , through the wild howl of the winter - night , be hear the signal sound of arrival . how often , while woman and girl sit warm at snug fire - side , they heart and imagination be doom to divorce from the comfort surround they person , force out by night to wander through dark way , to dare stress of weather , to contend with the snow - blast , to wait at lonely gate and stile in wildest storms , watch and listen to see and hear the father , the son , the husband come home . Father and son come at last to the chateau : for the that night accompany . I know not which of we trio hear the horse first ; the asperity , the violence of the weather warrant we run down into the hall to meet and greet the two rider as they come in ; but they warn we to keep we distance : both be white -- two mountain of snow ; and indeed , see they condition , order they instantly to the kitchen ; prohibit they , at they peril , from set foot on she carpet staircase till they have severally put off that mask of they now affect . into the kitchen , however , we could not help follow they : it be a large old kitchen , picturesque and pleasant . the little white Countess dance in a circle about she equally white sire , clapp she hand and cry , " , papa , you look like a enormous polar bear . " the bear shook himself , and the little sprite fle far from the frozen shower . back she come , however , laugh , and eager to aid in remove the arctic disguise . the count , at last issuing from he dreadnotch , threaten to overwhelm she with it as with a avalanche . " come , then , " say she , bend to invite the fall , and when it be playfully advanced above she head , bound out of reach like some little chamois . she movement have the supple softness , the velvet grace of a kitten ; she laugh be clearer than the ring of silver and crystal ; as she take she sire 's cold hand and rub they , and stand on tiptoe to reach he lip for a kiss , there seem to shine round she a halo of loving delight . the grave and reverend seignor look down on she as man _do_ look on what be the apple of they eye . " , " say he : " what be I to do with this daughter or daughterling of mine ? she neither grow in wisdom nor in stature . do not you find she pretty nearly as much the child as she be ten year ago ? " " she can not be more the child than this great boy of mine , " say , who be in conflict with she son about some change of dress she deeme advisable , and which he resist . he stood lean against the dresser , laugh and keep she at arm 's length . " come , mamma , " say he , " by way of compromise , and to secure for we inward as well as outward warmth , let we have a wassail - cup , and toast here , on the hearth . " so , while the count stand by the fire , and still dance to and for --happy in the liberty of the wide hall - like kitchen -- . herself instruct to spice and heat the wassail - bowl , and , pour the dratch into a , it be serve round , ream hot , by means of a small silver vessel , which I recognise as 's christening - cup . " here 's to ! " say the count ; hold the glancing cup on high . then , look at .-- " we twa ha ' paidlet I ' the burn morning sun till dine , but sea between we braid ha ' roar 's auld lane syne . " and surely ye
ye will be you pint - stoup , and surely I will be mine ; and we will taste a cup of ' kindness yet for auld lang syne . " " ! Scotch ! " cry ; " papa be talk ; and he be , partly . we be and , and . " " and be that a Scotch reel you be dance , you Highland fairy ? " ask she father . " . , there will be a green ring grow up in the middle of you kitchen shortly . I would not answer for she be quite cannies : she be a strange little mortal . " " to dance with I , papa ; there be . " ( there be still quite as much about he of plain as of proud count ) hold he hand out to I , say kindly , " he remember I well ; and , even have he own memory be less trustworthy , my name be so often on he daughter 's lip , and he have listen to so many long tale about I , I should seem like a old acquaintance . " every one now have taste the wassail - cup except , whose pa fee , out fantaisie , nobody think of interrupting to offer so profanatory a dratch ; but she be not to be overlook , nor baulk of she mortal privileges . " let I taste , " say she to , as he be put the cup on the shelf of the dresser out of she reach . and be now engage in conversation . have not be unobservant of the fairy 's dance ; he have watch it , and he have like it . to say nothing of the softness and beauty of the movement , eminently grateful to he grace - loving eye , that ease in he mother 's house charme he , for it set _him_ at ease : again she seem a child for he -- again , almost he playmate . I wonder how he would speak to she ; I have not yet see he address she ; he first word prove that the old day of " little " have be recall to he mind by this evening 's child - like light - heartedness . " you ladyship wish for the tankard ? " " I think I say so . I think I intimate as much . " " could not consent to a step of the kind on any account . sorry for it , but could not do it . " " why ? I be quite well now : it can not break my collar - bone again , or dislocate my shoulder . be it wine ? " " no ; nor dew . " " I do not want dew ; I do not like dew : but what be it ? " " ale -- strong ale -- old ; brew , perhaps , when I be bear . " " it must be curious : be it good ? " " Excessively good . " and he take it down , administer to himself a second dose of this mighty elixir , express in he mischievous eye extreme contentment with the same , and solemnly replace the cup on the shelf . " I should like a little , " say , look up ; " I never have any ' old :' be it sweet ? " " Perilously sweet , " say . she continue to look up exactly with the countenance of a child that long for some prohibit dainty . at last the doctor relent , take it down , and indulge himself in the gratification of let she taste from he hand ; he eye , always expressive in the revelation of pleasurable feeling , luminously and smilingly avow that it _be a gratification ; and he prolonge it by so regulate the position of the cup that only a drop at a time could reach the rosy , sipp lip by which its brim be court . " a little more -- a little more , " say she , petulantly touch he hand with the forefinger , to make he incline the cup more generously and yieldingly . " it smell of spice and sugar , but I can not taste it ; you wrist be so stiff , and you be so stingy . " he indulge she , whisper , however , with gravity : " do not tell my mother or Lucy ; they would not approve . " " nor do I , " say she , pass into another tone and manner as soon as she have fairly assay the beverage , just as if it have act upon she like some disenchanting dratch , undo the work of a wizard : " I find it anything but sweet ; it be bitter and hot , and take away my breath . you old be only desirable while forbide . thank you , no more . " and , with a slight bend -- careless , but as graceful as she dance -- she glide from he and rejoin she father . I think she have speak truth : the child of seven be in the girl of seventeen . look after she a little baffle , a little puzzle ; he eye be on she a good deal during the rest of the evening , but she do not seem to notice he . as we ascend to the drawing - room for tea , she take she father 's arm : she natural place seem to be at he side ; she eye and she ear be dedicated to he . he and be the chief talker of we little party , and be they best
best listener , attend closely to all that be say , prompt the repetition of this or that trait or adventure . " and where be you at such a time , papa ? and what do you say then ? and tell what happen on that occasion . " thus she draw he out . she do not again yield to any effervescence of glee ; the infantine sparkle be exhal for the night : she be soft , thoughtful , and docile . it be pretty to see she bid good - night ; she manner to be touch with dignity : in she very slight smile and quiet bow speak the Countess , and could not but look grave , and bend responsive . I see he hardly know how to blend together in he idea the dancing fairy and delicate dame . next day , when we be all assemble round the breakfast - table , shivering and fresh from the morning 's chill ablution , pronounce a decree that nobody , who be not force by dire necessity , should quit she house that day . indeed , egress seem next to impossible ; the drift darken the lower pane of the casement , and , on look out , one see the sky and air vex and dim , the wind and snow in angry conflict . there be no fall now , but what have already descende be tear up from the earth , whir round by brief shrieking gust , and cast into a hundred fantastic form . the Countess seconde . " shall not go out , " say she , place a seat for herself beside she father 's arm -chair . " I will look after he . you will not go into town , will you , papa ? " " ay , and , " be the answer . " if you and be _very good to I , Polly -- kind , you know , and attentive ; if you pet I in a very nice manner , and make much of I , I may possibly be induce to wait a hour after breakfast and see whether this razor-edge wind settles . but , you see , you give I no breakfast ; you offer I nothing : you let I starve . " " quick ! please , , and pour out the coffee , " entreate , " whilst I take care of the in other respects : since he grow into a count , he have need _so_ much attention . " she separate and prepare a roll . " there , papa , be you ' pistolet ' charge , " say she . " and there be some marmalade , just the same sort of marmalade we use to have at , and which you say be as good as if it have be conserve in -- " " and which you little ladyship use to beg for my boy -- do you remember that ? " interpose . " have you forget how you would come to my elbow and touch my sleeve with the whisper , ' please , ma 'am , something good for -- a little marmalade , or honey , or jam ? " ' " no , mamma , " break in , laugh , yet redden ; " it surely be not so : I could not have care for these thing . " " do he or do he not , ? " " he like they , " assert . " never blush for it , , " say , encouragingly . " I like they myself yet , and always do . and Polly show she sense in catering for a friend 's material comforts : it be I who put she into the way of such good manners -- nor do I let she forget they . Polly , offer I a small slice of that tongue . " " there , papa : but remember you be only wait upon with this assiduity ; on condition of be persuadable , and reconcile yourself to for the day . " " , " say the count , " I want to get rid of my daughter -- to send she to school . do you know of any good school ? " " there be 's place -- 's . " " be in a school ? " " I be a teacher , " I say , and be rather glad of the opportunity of saye this . for a little while I have be feel as if place in a false position . and son know my circumstance ; but the count and he daughter do not . they might choose to vary by some shade they hitherto cordial manner towards I , when aware of my grade in society . I speak then readily : but a swarm of thoughts I have not anticipate nor invoke , rise dim at the word , make I sigh involuntarily . do not lift he eye from he breakfast - plate for about two minute , nor do he speak ; perhaps he have not catch the word -- perhaps he think that on a confession of that nature , politeness would interdict comment : the be proverbially proud ; and homely as be in look , simple in habit and taste , I have all along intimate that he be not without he share of the national quality . be he a pseudo pride ? be it real dignity ? I leave the question undecide in its wide sense . where it concern I individually I can only answer : then , and always , he show himself a true - hear gentleman . by nature he be a feeler and a thinker ; over he emotion and he
he reflection spread a mellowing of melancholy ; more than a mellow : in trouble and bereavement it become a cloud . he do not know much about ; what he know , he do not very accurately comprehend : indeed he misconception of my character often make I smile ; but he see my walk in life lay rather on the shady side of the hill : he give I credit for do my endeavour to keep the course honestly straight ; he would have help I if he could : have no opportunity of helping , he still wish I well . when he do look at I , he eye be kind ; when he do speak , he voice be benevolent . " yours , " say he , " be a arduous calling . I wish you health and strength to win in it -- success . " he fair little daughter do not take the information quite so composedly : she fix on I a pair of eye wide with -- almost with dismay . " be you a teacher ? " cry she . then , have pause on the unpalatable idea , " well , I never know what you be , nor ever think of ask : for I , you be always . " " and what be I now ? " I could not forbear inquiring . " yourself , of course . but do you really teach here , in ? " " I really do . " " and do you like it ? " " not always . " " and why do you go on with it ? " she father look at , and , I fear , be go to check she ; but he only say , " proceed , Polly , proceed with that catechism -- prove yourself the little wiseacre you be . if be to blush and look confused , I should have to bid you hold you tongue ; and you and I would sit out the present meal in some disgrace ; but she only smile , so push she hard , multiply the cross-question . well , , why do you go on with it ? " " Chiefly , I fear , for the sake of the money I get . " " not then from motive of pure philanthropy ? Polly and I be cling to that hypothesis as the most lenient way of accounting for you eccentricity . " " no -- no , sir . rather for the roof of shelter I be thus enable to keep over my head ; and for the comfort of mind it give I to think that while I can work for myself , I be spare the pain of be a burden to anybody . " " Papa , say what you will , I pity . " " take up that pity , ; take it up in both hand , as you might a little callow gosling squatter out of bounds without leave ; put it back in the warm nest of a heart whence it issue , and receive in you ear this whisper . if my ever come to know by experience the uncertain nature of this world 's goods , I should like she to act as act : to work for herself , that she might bure neither kith nor kin . " " yes , papa , " say she , pensively and tractably . " but poor ! I think she be a rich lady , and have rich friend . " " you think like a little simpleton . _I_ never think so . when I have time to consider 's manner and aspect , which be not often , I see she be one who have to guard and not be guard ; to act and not be serve : and this lot have , I imagine , help she to a experience for which , if she live long enough to realize it be full benefit , she may yet bless Providence . but this school , " he pursue , change he tone from grave to gay : " would admit my , do you think , ? " I say , there need but to try ; it would soon be see : she be fond of pupil . " if you , sir , " I add , " will but take in you carriage this very afternoon , I think I can answer for it that , the portress , will not be very slow in answer you ring ; and , I be sure , will put on she best pair of glove to come into the salon to receive you . " " in that case , " respond , " I see no sort of necessity there be for delay . Hurst can send what she call she young lady 's ' thing ' after she ; Polly can settle down to she horn - book before night ; and you , , I trust , will not disdain to cast a occasional eye upon she , and let I know , from time to time , how she get on . I hope you approve of the arrangement , ? " the Countess hem and hesitat . " I think , " say she , " I think I have finish my education -- " " that only prove how much we may be mistaken in we thought I hold a far different opinion , as most of these will who have be auditor of you profound knowledge of life this morning . ah , my little girl , thou hast much to learn ; and papa ought to have teach thee more than he have do ! come , there be nothing for it but to
to try ; and the weather seem settling , and I have finish my breakfast -- " " but , papa ! " " well ? " " I see a obstacle . " " I do not at all . " " it be enormous , papa ; it can never be get over ; it be as large as you in you greatcoat , and the snowdrift on the top . " " and , like that snowdrift , capable of melt ? " " no ! it be of too -- too solid flesh : it be just you own self . , warn Beck not to listen to any overture about take I , because , in the end , it would turn out that she would have to take papa too : as he be so teasing , I will just tell tale about he . and all of you listen : about five year ago , when I be twelve year old , he take it into he head that he be spoil I ; that I be grow unfitted for the world , and I do not know what , and nothing would serve or satisfy he , but I must go to school . I cry , and so on ; but prove hard - hear , quite firm and flinty , and to school I go . what be the result ? in the most admirable manner , papa come to school likewise : every other day he call to see I . grumble , but it be of no use ; and so , at last , papa and I be both , in a manner , expel . Lucy can just tell this little trait : it be only fair to let she know what she have to expect . " ask what he have to say in answer to this statement . as he make no defence , judgment be give against he , and triumph . but she have other mood besides the arch and naive . after breakfast ; when the two elders withdrew -- I suppose to talk over certain of 's business matter -- and the Countess , , and I , be for a short time alone together -- all the child leave she ; with we , more nearly she companion in age , she rise at once to the little lady : she very face seem to alter ; that play of feature , and candour of look , which , when she speak to she father , make it quite dimpled and round , yield to a aspect more thoughtful , and line distincter and less _mobile . no doubt note the change as well as I . he stand for some minute near the window , look out at the snow ; presently he , approach the hearth , and enter into conversation , but not quite with he usual ease : fit topic do not seem to rise to he lip ; he choose they fastidiously , hesitatingly , and consequently infelicitously : he speak vaguly of -- its inhabitant , it be notable sight and building . he be answer by Bassompierre in quite womanly sort ; with intelligence , with a manner not indeed wholly disindividualize : a tone , a glance , a gesture , here and there , rather animated and quick than measure and stately , still recal little ; but yet there be so fine and even a polish , so calm and courteous a grace , gild and sustain these peculiarity , that a less sensitive man than would not have venture to seize upon they as vantage point , lead to franker intimacy . yet while continue subdue , and , for he , sedate , he be still observant . not one of those petty impulse and natural break escape he . he do not miss one characteristic movement , one hesitation in language , or one lisp in utterance . at time , in speak fast , she still lisp ; but colour whenever such lapse occur , and in a painstaking , conscientious manner , quite as amusing as the slight error , repeat the word more distinctly . whenever she do this , smile . gradually , as they converse , the restraint on each side slacken : might the conference have but be prolonge , I believe it would soon have become genial : already to 's lip and cheek return the wreathing , dimpl smile ; she lisp once , and forget to correct herself . and , I know not how _he_ change , but change he do . he do not grow gayer -- no raillery , no levity sparkle across he aspect -- but he position seem to become one of more pleasure to himself , and he speak he augmented comfort in readier language , in tone more suave . ten year ago this pair have always find abundance to say to each other ; the intervening decade have not narrow the experience or impoverish the intelligence of either : besides , there be certain nature of which the mutual influence be such , that the more they say , the more they have to say . for these out of association grow adhesion , and out of adhesion , amalgamation . , however , must go : he be a profession whose claim be neither to be ignore nor defer . he leave the room ; but before he could leave the house there be a return . I be sure he come back -- not for the paper , or card in he desk , which form he ostensible errand -- but to assure himself , by one more glance , that 's aspect be really such as memory be bear away : that he have not be view
view she somehow by a partial , artificial light , and make a fond mistake . no ! he find the impression true -- rather , indeed , he gain than lose by this return : he take away with he a part look -- shy , but very soft -- as beautiful , as innocent , as any little fawn could lift out of its cover of fern , or any lamb from its meadow - bed . be leave alone , and I keep silence for some time : we both take out some work , and ply a mute and diligent task . the white - wood workbox of old day be now replace by one inlaid with precious mosaic , and furnish with implement of gold ; the tiny and trembl finger that could scarce guide the needle , though tiny still , be now swift and skilful : but there be the same busy knitting of the brow , the same little dainty mannerism , the same quick turn and movement -- now to replace a stray tress , and anon to shake from the silken skirt some imaginary atom of dust -- some cling fibre of thread . that morning I be dispose for silence : the austere fury of the winter - day have on I a awing , hush influence . that passion of , so white and so bloodless , be not yet spend : the storm have rave itself hoarse , but see no nearer exhaustion . have Fanshawe be my companion in that drawing - room , she would not have suffer I to muse and listen undisturbed . the presence just go from we would have be she theme ; and how she would have rng the change on one topic ! how she would have pursue and pester I with question and surmise -- worried and oppress I with comment and confidence I do not want , and long to avoid . Mary cast once or twice towards I a quiet but penetrat glance of she dark , full eye ; she lip half open , as if to the impulse of come utterance : but she see and delicately respecte my inclination for silence . " this will not hold long , " I think to myself ; for I be not accustom to find in woman or girl any power of self - control , or strength of self - denial . as far as I know they , the chance of a gossip about they usually trivial secret , they often very washy and paltry feeling , be a treat not to be readily foregone . the little Countess promise a exception : she sew till she be tired of sew , and then she take a book . as chance would have it , she have seek it in 's own compartment of the bookcase ; and it prove to be a old book -- some illustrated work of natural history . often have I see she stand at 's side , rest that volume on he knee , and read to he tuition ; and , when the lesson be over , begge , as a treat , that he would tell she all about the picture . I watch she keenly : here be a true test of that memory she have boast would she recollection now be faithful ? faithful ? it could not be doubt . as she turn the leave , over she face pass gleam after gleam of expression , the least intelligent of which be a full greeting to the past . and then she turn to the title - page , and look at the name write in the schoolboy hand . she look at it long ; nor be she satisfied with merely look : she gently pass over the character the tip of she finger , accompany the action with a unconscious but tender smile , which convert the touch into a caress . love the past ; but the peculiarity of this little scene be , that she _said_ nothing : she could feel without pour out she feeling in a flux of word . she now occupy herself at the bookcase for nearly a hour ; take down volume after volume , and renew she acquaintance with each . this do , she seat herself on a low stool , rest she cheek on she hand , and think , and still be mute . the sound of the front door open below , a rush of cold wind , and she father 's voice speak to in the hall , start she at last . she spring up : she be down - stair in one second . " ! papa ! you be not go out ? " " my pet , I must go into town . " " but it be too --_too_ cold , papa . " and then I hear show to she how he be well provide against the weather ; and how he be go to have the carriage , and to be quite snugly sheltered ; and , in short , prove that she need not fear for he comfort . " but you will promise to come back here this evening , before it be quite dark ; -- you and , both , in the carriage ? it be not fit to ride . " " well , if I see the Doctor , I will tell he a lady have lay on he she command to take care of he precious health and come home early under my escort . " " yes , you must say a lady ; and he will think it be he mother , and be obedient and , papa , mind to come soon , for I _shall_ watch and listen . " the
the door close , and the carriage roll softly through the snow ; and back return the Countess , pensive and anxious . she _did_ listen , and watch , when evening close ; but it be in stillest sort : walk the draw - room with quite noiseless step . she check at interval she velvet march ; inclin she ear , and consult the night sound : I should rather say , the night silence ; for now , at last , the wind be fall . the sky , relieve of its avalanche , lay naked and pale : through the barren bough of the avenue we could see it well , and note also the polar splendour of the new - year moon -- a orb white as a world of ice . be it late when we see also the return of the carriage . have no dance of welcome for this evening . it be with a sort of gravity that she take immediate possession of she father , as he enter the room ; but she at once make he she entire property , lead he to the seat of she choice , and , while softly shower round he honey word of commendation for be so good and come home so soon , you would have think it be entirely by the power of she little hand he be put into he chair , and settle and arrange ; for the strong man seem to take pleasure in wholly yield himself to this dominion - potent only by love . do not appear till some minute after the count . half turn when he step be hear : they speak , but only a word or two ; they finger meet a moment , but obviously with slight contact . remain beside she father ; throw himself into a seat on the other side of the room . it be well that and have a great deal to say to each other - almost a inexhaustible fund of discourse in old recollection ; otherwise , I think , we party would have be but a still one that evening . after tea , 's quick needle and pretty golden thimble be busily ply by the lamp - light , but she tongue rest , and she eye seem reluctant to raise often they lid , so smooth and so full - fringed . , too , must have be tired with he day 's work : he listen dutifully to he elder and betters , say very little himself , and follow with he eye the gild glance of 's thimble ; as if it have be some bright moth on the wing , or the golden head of some dart little yellow serpent . . a burial . from this date my life do not want variety ; I go out a good deal , with the entire consent of , who perfectly approve the grade of my acquaintance . that worthy directress have never from the first treat I otherwise than with respect ; and when she find that I be liable to frequent invitation from a chateau and a great hotel , respect improve into distinction . not that she be fulsome about it : , in all thing worldly , be in nothing weak ; there be measure and sense in she hottest pursuit of self - interest , calm and considerateness in she closest clutch of gain ; without , then , lay herself open to my contempt as a time - server and a toadie , she mark with tact that she be pleased people connect with she establishment should frequent such associate as must cultivate and elevate , rather than those who might deteriorate and depress . she never praise either I or my friend ; only once when she be sit in the sun in the garden , a cup of coffee at she elbow and the Gazette in she hand , look very comfortable , and I come up and ask leave of absence for the evening , she deliver herself in this gracious sort :-- " Oui , oui , ma bonne amie : je vous donne la permission de coeur et de gre . Votre travail dan ma maison a toujour ete admirable , rempli de zele et de discretion : vous avez bien le droit de vous amuser . Sortez donc tant que vous voudrez . Quant a votre choix de connaissance , j'en suis content ; c'est sage , digne , laudable . " she close she lip and resum the Gazette . the reader will not too gravely regard the little circumstance that about this time the triply - enclose packet of five letter temporarily disappear from my bureau . blank dismay be naturally my first sensation on make the discovery ; but in a moment I take heart of . " patience ! " whisper I to myself . " let I say nothing , but wait peaceably ; they will come back again . " and they do come back : they have only be on a short visit to 's chamber ; have pass they examination , they come back duly and truly : I find they all right the next day . I wonder what she think of my correspondence ? what estimate do she form of 's epistolary power ? in what light do the often very pithy thought , the generally sound , and sometimes original opinion , set , without pretension , in a easily - flow , spirite style , appear to she ? how do she like that genial , half humorous vein , which to I give such delight ? what do she think of the few kind word scatter here and there - not thickly , as the diamonds be scatter in the valley of , but sparely
sparely , as those gem lie in unfabled bed ? oh , ! how seem these thing to you ? I think in 's eye the five letter find a certain favour . one day after she have _borrowed_ they of I ( in speaking of so suave a little woman , one ought to use suave term ) , I catch she examine I with a steady contemplative gaze , a little puzzle , but not at all malevolent . it be during that brief space between lesson , when the pupil turn out into the court for a quarter of a hour 's recreation ; she and I remain in the first classe alone : when I meet she eye , she thought force themselves partially through she lip . " Il y a , " say she , " quelquechose de bien remarquable dan le caractere Anglais . " " how , ? " she give a little laugh , repeat the word " how " in . " Je ne saurai vous dire ' how ;' mais , enfin , les Anglais of nt des idee a eux , en amitie , en amour , en tout . au moin il n'est pa besoin les surveiller , " she add , get up and trot away like the compact little pony she be . " then I hope , " murmure I to myself , " you will graciously let alone my letter for the future . " ! something come rush into my eye , dimm utterly they vision , blott from sight the schoolroom , the garden , the bright winter sun , as I remember that never more would letter , such as she have read , come to I . I have see the last of they . that goodly river on whose bank I have sojourn , of whose wave a few reviving drop have trickle to my lip , be bend to another course : it be leave my little hut and field forlorn and sand - dry , pour its wealth of water far away . the change be right , just , natural ; not a word could be say : but I love my , my ; I have almost worshipped my Gange , and I grieve that the grand tide should roll estrange , should vanish like a false mirage . though stoical , I be not quite a stoic ; drop stream fast on my hand , on my desk : I weep one sultry shower , heavy and brief . but soon I say to myself , " the hope I be bemoan suffer and make I suffer much : it do not die till it be full time : follow a agony so linger , death ought to be welcome . " welcome I endeavoure to make it . indeed , long pain have make patience a habit . in the end I close the eye of my dead , cover its face , and compose its limb with great calm . the letter , however , must be put away , out of sight : people who have undergone bereavement always jealously gather together and lock away memento : it be not supportable to be stab to the heart each moment by sharp revival of regret . one vacant holiday afternoon ( the ) go to my treasure , with intent to consider its final disposal , I perceive -- and this time with a strong impulse of displeasure -- that it have be again tamper with : the packet be there , indeed , but the ribbon which secure it have be untied and retie ; and by other symptom I know that my drawer have be visit . this be a little too much . herself be the soul of discretion , besides have as strong a brain and sound a judgment as ever furnish a human head ; that she should know the contents of my casket , be not pleasant , but might be borne . inquisitress as she be , she could see thing in a true light , and understand they in a unperverted sense ; but the idea that she have venture to communicate information , thus gain , to other ; that she have , perhaps , amuse herself with a companion over document , in my eye most sacr , shock I cruelly . yet , that such be the case I now see reason to fear ; I even guess she confident . she kinsman , m . , have spend yesterday evening with she : she be much in the habit of consult he , and of discuss with he matter she broach to no one else . this very morning , in class , that gentleman have favour I with a glance which he seem to have borrowed from , the actress ; I have not at the moment comprehend that blue , yet lurid , flash out of he angry eye ; but I read its mean now . _he _, I believe , be not apt to regard what concern I from a fair point of view , nor to judge I with tolerance and candour : I have always find he severe and suspicious : the thought that these letter , mere friendly letter as they be , have fall once , and might fall again , into he hand , jar my very soul . what should I do to prevent this ? in what corner of this strange house be it possible to find security or secresy ? where could a key be a safeguard , or a padlock a barrier ? in the grenier ? no , I do not like the grenier . besides , most of the box and drawer there be mouldering , and do not lock . Rats , too ,
, gnaw they way through the decay wood ; and mouse make nest amongst the litter of they contents : my dear letter ( most dear still , though be write on they cover ) might be consum by vermin ; certainly the writing would soon become obliterated by damp . no ; the grenier would not do -- but where then ? while ponder this problem , I sit in the dormitory window - seat . it be a fine frosty afternoon ; the winter sun , already set , gleam pale on the top of the garden - shrub in the " allee defendue . " one great old pear -tree -- the nun 's pear - tree -- stand up a tall dryad skeleton , grey , gaunt , and stripp . a thought struck I -- one of those queer fantastic thought that will sometimes strike solitary people . I put on my bonnet , cloak , and fur , and go out into the city . bend my step to the old historical quarter of the town , whose hoax and overshadow precinct I always seek by instinct in melancholy mood , I wander on from street to street , till , have cross a half desert " place " or square , I find myself before a sort of broker 's shop ; a ancient place , full of ancient thing . what I want be a metal box which might be solder , or a thick glass jar or bottle which might be stopper or seal hermetically . amongst miscellaneous heap , I find and purchase the latter article . I then make a little roll of my letter , wrap they in oiled silk , bound they with twine , and , have put they in the bottle , get the old broker to stopper , seal , and make it air - tight . while obey my direction , he glance at I now and then suspiciously from under he frost - white eyelash . I believe he think there be some evil deed on hand . in all this I have a dreary something -- not pleasure -- but a sad , lonely satisfaction . the impulse under which I act , the mood control I , be similar to the impulse and the mood which have induce I to visit the confessional . with quick walking I regain the pensionnat just at dark , and in time for dinner . at seven o'clock the moon rose . at half - past seven , when the pupil and teacher be at study , and be with she mother and child in the salle - a - manger , when the half - boarder be all go home , and have leave the vestibule , and all be still -- I shawl myself , and , take the seal jar , steal out through the first - classe door , into the berceau and thence into the " allee defendue . " , the pear - tree , stand at the further end of this walk , near my seat : he rise up , dim and gray , above the lower shrub round he . now , though so very old , be of sound timber still ; only there be a hole , or rather a deep hollow , near he root . I know there be such a hollow , hide partly by ivy and creeper grow thick round ; and there I meditate hide my treasure . but I be not only go to hide a treasure -- I mean also to bury a grief . that grief over which i have lately be weep , as I wrap it in its winding - sheet , must be inter . well , I clear away the ivy , and find the hole ; it be large enough to receive the jar , and I thrust it deep in . in a tool - shed at the bottom of the garden , lay the relic of building - material , leave by mason lately employ to repair a part of the premise . I fetch thence a slate and some mortar , put the slate on the hollow , secure it with cement , cover the hole with black mould , and , finally , replace the ivy . this do , I rest , lean against the tree ; linger , like any other mourner , beside a newly - sod grave . the air of the night be very still , but dim with a peculiar mist , which change the moonlight into a luminous haze . in this air , or this mist , there be some quality --electrical , perhaps -- which act in strange sort upon I . I feel then as I have feel a year ago in -- on a night when the aurora borealis be stream and swee round heaven , when , belate in lonely field , I have pause to watch that mustering of a army with banner -- that quiver of serry lance -- that swift ascent of messenger from below the north star to the dark , high keystone of heaven 's arch . I feel , not happy , far otherwise , but strong with reinforce strength . if life be a war , it seem my destiny to conduct it single - hand . I ponder now how to break up my winter - quarter -- to leave a encampment where food and forage fail . perhaps , to effect this change , another pitch battle must be fight with fortune ; if so , I have a mind to the encounter : too poor to lose , might destine I to gain . but what road be open ?-- what plan available ? on this question I be still pause , when the moon
moon , so dim hitherto , seem to shine out somewhat brighter : a ray gleam even white before I , and a shadow become distinct and mark . I look more narrowly , to make out the cause of this well - define contrast appear a little suddenly in the obscure alley : whiter and blacker it grow on my eye : it take shape with instantaneous transformation . I stand about three yard from a tall , sable - robed , snowy - veil woman . five minute pass . I neither fle nor shriek . she be there still . I speak . " who be you ? and why do you come to I ? " she stand mute . she have no face -- no feature : all below she brow be mask with a white cloth ; but she have eye , and they view I . I feel , if not brave , yet a little desperate ; and desperation will often suffice to fill the post and do the work of courage . I advance one step . I stretch out my hand , for I mean to touch she . she seem to recede . I draw nearer : she recession , still silent , become swift . a mass of shrubs , full - leave evergreens , laurel and dense yew , intervene between I and what I follow . have pass that obstacle , I look and see nothing . I wait . I say ,-- " if you have any errand to man , come back and deliver it . " nothing speak or re-appear . this time there be no to whom to have recourse : there be no one to whom I da whisper the word , " I have again see the nun . " * * * * * seek my frequent presence in the . in the old day , though she have never profess herself fond of I , my society have soon become to she a sort of unconscious necessary . I use to notice that if I withdraw to my room , she would speedily come trot after I , and open the door and pee in , say , with she little peremptory accent , -- " come down . why do you sit here by yourself ? you must come into the parlour . " in the same spirit she urge I now -- " leave the , " she say , " and come and live with we . would give you far more than give you . " himself offer I a handsome sum -- thrice my present salary -- if I would accept the office of companion to he daughter . I decline . I think I should have decline have I be poorer than I be , and with scantier fund of resource , more stinted narrowness of future prospect . I have not that vocation . I could teach ; I could give lesson ; but to be either a private governess or a companion be unnatural to I . rather than fill the former post in any great house , I would deliberately have take a housemaid 's place , buy a strong pair of glove , swept bedroom and staircase , and clean stove and lock , in peace and independence . Rather than be a companion , I would have make shirt and starve . I be no bright lady 's shadow -- not 's . Overcast enough it be my nature often to be ; of a subdue habit I be : but the dimness and depression must both be voluntary -- such as keep I docile at my desk , in the midst of my now well - accustom pupil in 's fist classe ; or alone , at my own bedside , in she dormitory , or in the alley and seat which be call mine , in she garden : my qualifications be not convertible , nor adaptable ; they could not be make the foil of any gem , the adjunct of any beauty , the appendage of any greatness in . and I , without assimilat , understand each other well . I be not _her_ companion , nor she child 's governess ; she leave I free : she tie I to nothing -- not to herself -- not even to she interest : once , when she have for a fortnight be call from home by a near relation 's illness , and on she return , all anxious and full of care about she establishment , lest something in she absence should have go wrong finding that matter have proceed much as usual , and that there be no evidence of glaring neglect -- she make each of the teacher a present , in acknowledgment of steadiness . to my bedside she come at twelve o'clock at night , and tell I she have no present for I : " I must make fidelity advantageous to the , " say she ; " if I attempt to make it advantageous to you , there will arise misunderstan between we -- perhaps separation . one thing , however , I _can_ do to please you -- leave you alone with you liberty : c'est - ce que je ferai . " she keep she word . every slight shackle she have ever lay on I , she , from that time , with quiet hand remove . thus I have pleasure in voluntarily respecte she rule : gratification in devoting double time , in take double pain with the pupil she commit to my charge . as to , I visit she with pleasure , though I would not live with she . my visit soon teach I that it be unlikely even my occasional and voluntary society would long be indispensable to
to she . , for he part , seem impervious to this conjecture , blind to this possibility ; unconscious as any child to the sign , the likelihood , the fitful beginning of what , when it draw to a end , he might not approve . whether or not he would cordially approve , I use to speculate . difficult to say . he be much take up with scientific interest ; keen , intent , and somewhat oppugnant in what concern he favourite pursuit , but unsuspicious and trustful in the ordinary affair of life . from all I could gather , he seem to regard he " daughterling " as still but a child , and probably have not yet admit the notion that other might look on she in a different light : he would speak of what should be do when " Polly " be a woman , when she should be grow up ; and " Polly , " stand beside he chair , would sometimes smile and take he honoured head between she little hand , and kiss he iron - grey lock ; and , at other time , she would pout and toss she curl : but she never say , " Papa , I _am_ grow up . " she have different mood for different people . with she father she really be still a child , or child - like , affectionate , merry , and playful . with I she be serious , and as womanly as think and feel could make she . with she be docile and reliant , but not expansive . with she be shy , at present very shy ; at moments she try to be cold ; on occasion she endeavoure to shin he . he step make she start ; he entrance hush she ; when he speak , she answer fail of fluency ; when he take leave , she remain self - vex and disconcert . even she father notice this demeanour in she . " my little , " he say once , " you live to retire a life ; if you grow to be a woman with these shy manners , you will hardly be fitte for society . you really make quite a stranger of : how be this ? do not you remember that , as a little girl , you use to be rather partial to he ? " " _Rather , papa , " echo she , with she slightly dry , yet gentle and simple tone . " and you do not like he now ? what have he do ? " " nothing . y --e -- , I like he a little ; but we be grow strange to each other . " " then rub it off , Polly ; rub the rust and the strangeness off . talk away when he be here , and have no fear of he ? " " _he_ do not talk much . be he afraid of I , do you think , papa ? " " oh , to be sure , what man would not be afraid of such a little silent lady ? " " then tell he some day not to mind my be silent . say that it be my way , and that I have no unfriendly intention . " " you way , you little chatter - box ? so far from be you way , it be only you whim ! " " well , I will improve , papa . " and very pretty be the grace with which , the next day , she try to keep she word . I see she make the effort to converse affably with on general topics . the attention call into she guest 's face a pleasurable glow ; he meet she with caution , and reply to she in he softest tone , as if there be a kind of gossamer happiness hang in the air which he fear to disturb by draw too deep a breath . certainly , in she timid yet earnest advance to friendship , it could not be deny that there be a most exquisite and fairy charm . when the doctor be go , she approach she father 's chair . " do I keep my word , papa ? do I behave better ? " " my behave like a queen . I shall become quite proud of she if this improvement continue . by - and - by we shall see she receive my guest with quite a calm , grand manner . and I will have to look about we , and polish up all we best air and graces lest we should be throw into the shade . , , there be a little flutter , a little tendency to stammer now and then , and even , to lisp as you lisp when you be six year old . " " no , papa , " interrupt she indignantly , " that can not be true . " " I appeal to . do she not , in answer 's question as to whether she have ever see the palace of the of , say , ' yeth , ' she have be there ' theveral ' time ? " " Papa , you be satirical , you be mechant ! I can pronounce all the letter of the alphabet as clearly as you can . but tell I this you be very particular in make I be civil to , do you like he yourself ? " " to be sure : for old acquaintance sake I like he : then he be a very good son to he mother ; besides be a kind - hear fellow and clever in he profession : yes , the callant be well enough
enough . " " _Callant ! ah , ! , be it the or the accent you have ? " " both , my pet , both : and doubtless the into the bargain . it be that which enable I to speak french so well : a gude tongue always succeed well at the french . " " _The_ french ! again : incorrigible papa . you , too , need schooling . " " well , Polly , you must persuade to undertake both you and I ; to make you steady and womanly , and I refin and classical . " the light in which Bassompierre evidently regard " , " use to occasion I much inward edification . what contradictory attribute of character we sometimes find ascribe to we , accord to the eye with which we be view ! esteem I learn and blue ; , caustic , ironic , and cynical ; , a model teacher , the essence of the sedate and discreet : somewhat conventional , perhaps , too strict , limit , and scrupulous , but still the pink and pattern of governess - correctness ; whilst another person , , to wit , never lose a opportunity of intimat he opinion that mine be rather a fiery and rash nature -- adventurous , indocile , and audacious . I smile at they all . if any one know I it be little . as I would not be 's nominal and pay companion , genial and harmonious as I begin to find she intercourse , she persuade I to join she in some study , as a regular and settle means of sustain communication : she propose the german language , which , like myself , she find difficult of mastery . we agree to take we lesson in the of the same mistress ; this arrangement throw we together for some hour of every week . seem quite pleased : it perfectly meet he approbation , that should associate a portion of she leisure with that of he fair and dear child . that other self - elect judge of mine , the professor in the , discover by some surreptitious spying mean , that I be no longer so stationary as hithertoo , but go out regularly at certain hour of certain day , take it upon himself to place I under surveillance . people say have be bring up amongst Jesuits . I should more readily have accredit this report have he manoeuvre be better mask . as it be , I doubt it . never be a more undisguised schemer , a franker , looser intriguer . he would analyze he own machination : elaborately contrive plot , and forthwith indulge in explanatory boast of they skill . I know not whether I be more amused or provoke , by he stepping up to I one morning and whisper solemnly that he " have he eye on I : _he_ at least would discharge the duty of a friend , and not leave I entirely to my own device . my , proceedings seem at present very unsettled : he do not know what to make of they : he think he cousin Beck very much to blame in suffer this sort of flutter inconsistency in a teacher attach to she house . what have a person devote to a serious calling , that of education , to do with count and Countess , hotel and chateaux ? to he , I seem altogether 'en l'air . ' on he faith , he believe I go out six day in the seven . " I say , " yoMonsieu exaggerate . I certainly have enjoy the advantage of a little change lately , but not before it have become necessary ; and the privilege be by no means exercise in excess . " " ! how be it necessary ? I be well enough , he suppose ? change necessary ! he would recommend I to look at the 's religieuse , ' and study _their life . they ask no change . " I be no judge of what expression cross my face when he thus speak , but it be one which provoke he : he accuse I of be reckless , worldly , and epicurean ; ambitious of greatness , and feverishly athirst for the pomp and vanity of life . it seem I have no " devouement , " no " recueillement " in my character ; no spirit of grace , faith , sacrifice , or self - abasement . feel the inutility of answer these charge , I mutely continue the correction of a pile of English exercise . " he could see in I nothing : like many other , I revell in the pride and self - will of paganism . " I slightly turn from he , nestle still closer under the wing of silence . a vague sound grumble between he tooth ; it could not surely be a " juron :" he be too religious for that ; but I be certain I hear the word _sacre _. Grievous to relate , the same word be repeat , with the unequivocal addition of _mille_ something , when I pass he about two hour afterwards in the corridor , prepare to go and take my german lesson in the . never be a better little man , in some point , than : never , in other , a more waspish little despot . * * * * * we german mistress , , be a worthy , hearty woman , of about forty - five ; she ought , perhaps , to have live in the day of , as she habitually consum , for she first and second breakfast , beer and beef : also , she direct and downright nature seem to suffer a
a sensation of cruel restraint from what she call we English reserve ; though we think we be very cordial with she : but we do not slap she on the shoulder , and if we consent to kiss she cheek , it be do quietly , and without any explosive smack . these omissions oppress and depresse she considerably ; still , on the whole , we get on very well . Accustom to instruct foreign girl , who hardly ever will think and study for themselves -- who have no idea of grappling with a difficulty , and overcome it by dint of reflection or application -- we progress , which in truth be very leisurely , seem to astound she . in she eyes , we be a pair of glacial prodigy , cold , proud , and preternatural . the young Countess _be a little proud , a little fastidious : and perhaps , with she native delicacy and beauty , she have a right to these feeling ; but I think it be a total mistake to ascribe they to I . I never evad the morning salute , which would slip when she could ; nor be a certain little manner of still disdain a weapon know in my armoury of defence ; whereas , always keep it clear , fine , and bright , and any rough German sally call forth at once its steelly glisten . , in some measure , feel this difference ; and while she half - fear , half - worship , as a sort of dainty nymph -- a Undine -- she take refuge with I , as a be all mortal , and of easier mood . a book we like well to read and translate be 's ; soon learn to read they beautifully ; the would listen to she with a broad smile of pleasure , and say she voice sound like music . she translate they , too , with a facile flow of language , and in a strain of kindred and poetic fervour : she cheek would flush , she lip tremblingly smile , she beauteous eye kindle or melt as she go on . she lear not the best by heart , and would often recite they when we be alone together . one she like well be " : " that be , she like well to repeat the word , she find plaintive melody in the sound ; the sense she would criticise . she murmure , as we sit over the fire one evening :-- , rufe dein , habe genossen da irdisco , habe gelebt und geliebet ! " live and love ! " say she , " be that the summit of earthly happiness , the end of life -- to love ? I do not think it be . it may be the extreme of mortal misery , it may be sheer waste of time , and fruitless torture of feeling . if have say to _be_ love , he might have come nearer the truth . be not that another thing , , to be love ? " " I suppose it may be : but why consider the subject ? what be love to you ? what do you know about it ? " she crimson , half in irritation , half in shame . " now , , " she say , " I will not take that from you . it may be well for papa to look on I as a baby : I rather prefer that he should thus view I ; but _you_ know and shall learn to acknowledge that I be verge on my nineteenth year . " " no matter if it be you twenty - ninth ; we will anticipate no feeling by discussion and conversation ; we will not talk about love . " " indeed , indeed ! " say she -- all in hurry and heat --" you may think to check and hold I in , as much as you please ; but I _have_ talk about it , and hear about it too ; and a great deal and lately , and disagreeably and detrimentally : and in a way you would not approve . " and the vexed , triumphant , pretty , naughty be laugh . I could not discern what she mean , and I would not ask she : I be nonpluss . see , however , the utmost innocence in she countenance -- combine with some transient perverseness and petulance -- I say at last ,-- " who talk to you disagreeably and detrimentally on such matters ? who that have near access to you would dare to do it ? " " Lucy , " reply she more softly , " it be a person who make I miserable sometimes ; and I wish she would keep away -- I do not want she . " " but who , , can it be ? you puzzle I much . " " it be -- it be my cousin . every time she have leave to visit she call here , and whenever she find I alone she begin to talk about she admirer . love , indeed ! you should hear all she have to say about love . " " oh , I have hear it , " say I , quite coolly ; " and on the whole , perhaps it be as well you should have hear it too : it be not to be regret , it be all right . yet , surely , 's mind can not influence yours . you can look over both she head and she heart . " " she do influence I very much . she have the art of disturb my happiness and unsettl my opinion . she hurt I through
through the feeling and people dearest to I . " " what do she say , ? give I some idea . there may be counteraction of the damage done . " " the people I have longest and most esteem be degrad by she . she do not spare -- she do not spare .... . " " no , I daresay : and how do she mix up these with she sentiment and she ...._love _? she do mix they , I suppose ? " " Lucy , she be insolent ; and , I believe , false . you know . we both know he . he may be careless and proud ; but when be he ever mean or slavish ? day after day she show he to I knee at she foot , pursue she like she shadow . she -- repulse he with insult , and he implor she with infatuation . , be it true ? be any of it true ? " " it may be true that he once think she handsome : do she give he out as still she suitor ? " " she say she might marry he any day : he only wait she consent . " " it be these tales which have cause that reserve in you manner towards which you father notice . " " they have certainly make I all doubtful about he character . as speak , they do not carry with they the sound of unmixed truth : I believe she exaggerate -- perhaps invent -- but I want to know how far . " " suppose we bring to some proof . give she a opportunity of display the power she boast . " " I could do that to - morrow . have ask some gentleman to dinner , all savant . , who , papa be begin to discover , be a savant , too -- skill , they say , in more than one branch of science -- be among the number . now I should be miserable to sit at table unsupported , amidst such a party . I could not talk to ---- and ----, the parisian Academician : all my new credit for manner would be put in peril . you and must come for my sake ; , at a word , will join you . " " yes ; then I will carry a message of invitation , and she shall have the chance of justify she character for veracity . " . the . the morrow turn out a more lively and busy day than we -- or than I , at least - have anticipate . it seem it be the birthday of one of the young prince of - the eldest , I think , the , and a general holiday be give in he honour at the school , and especially at the principal " , " or college . the youth of that institution have also concoct , and be to present a loyal address ; for which purpose they be to be assemble in the public building where the yearly examination be conduct , and the prize distribute . after the ceremony of presentation , a oration , or " discour , " be to follow from one of the professor . of 's friend - the savant - be more or less connect with the Athenee , they be expect to attend on this occasion ; together with the worshipful municipality of , le , the burgomaster , and the parent and kinsfolk of the in general . be engage by he friend to accompany they ; he fair daughter would , of course , be of the party , and she write a little note to and myself , bid we come early that we might join she . as and I be dress in the dormitory of the , she ( ) suddenly burst into a laugh . " what now ? " I ask ; for she have suspend the operation of arrange she attire , and be gaze at I . " it seem so odd , " she reply , with she usual half - honest half - insolent unreserve , " that you and I should now be so much on a level , visit in the same sphere ; have the same connection . " " why , yes , " say I ; " I have not much respect for the connection you chiefly frequent awhile ago : and . would never have suite I at all . " " who _are_ you , ? " she inquire , in a tone of such undisguised and unsophisticated curiosity , as make I laugh in my turn . " you use to call yourself a nursery governess ; when you first come here you really have the care of the child in this house : I have see you carry little in you arm , like a bonne -- few governess would have condescende so far -- and now treat you with more courtesy than she treat the , ; and that proud chit , my cousin , make you she bosom friend ! " " wonderful ! " I agree , much amuse at she mystification . " who be I indeed ? perhaps a personage in disguise . Pity I do not look the character . " " I wonder you be not more flatter by all this , " she go on ; " you take it with strange composure . if you really be the nobody I once think you , you must be a cool hand . " " the nobody you once think I ! " I repeat , and my face grow a little hot ; but I would not be angry : of what importance be a school - girl 's
's crude use of the term nobody and somebody ? I confin myself , therefore , to the remark that I have merely meet with civility ; and ask " what she see in civility to throw the recipient into a fever of confusion ? " " one can not help wonder at some thing , " she persist . " wonder at marvel of you own manufacture . be you ready at last ? " " yes ; let I take you arm . " " I would rather not : we will walk side by side . " when she take my arm , she always lean upon I she whole weight ; and , as I be not a gentleman , or she lover , I do not like it . " there , again ! " she cry . " I think , by offer to take you arm , to intimate approbation of you dress and general appearance : I mean it as a compliment . " " you do ? you mean , in short , to express that you be not asham to be see in the street with I ? that if . should be fondl she lapdog at some window , or pick he tooth in a balcony , and should catch a glimpse of we , you would not quite blush for you companion ? " " yes , " say she , with that directness which be she best point -- which give a honest plainness to she very fib when she tell they -- which be , in short , the salt , the sole preservative ingredient of a character otherwise not form to keep . I delegate the trouble of commenting on this " yes " to my countenance ; or rather , my under - lip voluntarily anticipat my tongue of course , reverence and solemnity be not the feeling express in the look I give she . " Scornful , sneer creature ! " she go on , as we cross a great square , and enter the quiet , pleasant park , we nearest way to the . " nobody in this world be ever such a to I as you be ! " " you bring it on yourself : let I alone : have the sense to be quiet : I will let you alo . " " as if one _could let you alo , when you be so peculiar and so mysterious ! " " the mystery and peculiarity be entirely the conception of you own brain -- maggot -- neither more nor less , be so good as to keep they out of my sight . " " but _are you anybody ? " persever she , push she hand , in spite of I , under my arm ; and that arm press itself with inhospitable closeness against my side , by way of keep out the intruder . " yes , " I say , " I be a rise character : once a old lady 's companion , then a nursery - governess , now a school - teacher . " " Do--_do_ tell I who you be ? I will not repeat it , " she urge , adhere with ludicrous tenacity to the wise notion of a incognito she have get hold of ; and she squeeze the arm of which she have now obtain full possession , and coax and conjure till I be oblige to pause in the park to laugh . throughout we walk she ring the most fanciful change on this theme ; prove , by she obstinate credulity , or incredulity , she incapacity to conceive how any person not bolster up by birth or wealth , not support by some consciousness of name or connection , could maintain a attitude of reasonable integrity . as for I , it quite suffice to my mental tranquillity that I be know where it import that know I should be ; the rest sit on I easily : pedigree , social position , and recondite intellectual acquisition , occupy about the same space and place in my interest and thought ; they be my third - class lodger -- to whom could be assign only the small sitting - room and the little back bedroom : even if the dining and draw - room stood empty , I never confess it to they , as think minor accommodation better suit to they circumstance . the world , I soon learn , hold a different estimate : and I make no doubt , the world be very right in its view , yet believe also that I be not quite wrong in mine . there be people whom a lowered position degrade morally , to whom loss of connection cost loss of self - respect : be not these justifi in place the highest value on that station and association which be they safeguard from debasement ? if a man feel that he would become contemptible in he own eye be it generally know that he ancestry be simple and not gentle , poor and not rich , worker and not capitalist , would it be right severely to blame he for keep these fatal fact out of sight -- for starting , trembling , quailing at the chance which threaten exposure ? the longer we live , the more out experience widend ; the less prone be we to judge we neighbour 's conduct , to question the world 's wisdom : wherever a accumulation of small defences be find , whether surround the prude 's virtue or the man of the world 's respectability , there , be sure , it be need . we reach the ; be ready ; be with she ; and , under she escort and that of , we be soon conduct to the place
place of assembly , and seat in good seat , at a convenient distance from the Tribune . the youth of the Athenee be marshall before we , the municipality and they bourgmestre be in place of honour , the young prince , with they tutor , occupy a conspicuous position , and the body of the building be crowd with the aristocracy and first burgher of the town . concern the identity of the professor by whom the " discour " be to be deliver , I have as yet entertaine neither care nor question . some vague expectation I have that a savant would stand up and deliver a formal speech , half dogmatism to the , half flattery to the prince . the be yet empty when we enter , but in ten minute after it be fill ; suddenly , in a second of time , a head , chest , and arm grow above the crimson desk . this head I know : it be colour , shape , port , expression , be familiar both to I and ; the blackness and closeness of cranium , the amplitude and paleness of brow , the blueness and fire of glance , be detail so domesticate in the memory , and so knit with many a whimsical association , as almost by this they sudden apparition , to tickle fancy to a laugh . indeed , I confess , for my part , I do laugh till I be warm ; but then I bend my head , and make my handkerchief and a lowered veil the sole confidants of my mirth . I think I be glad to see ; I think it be rather pleasant than otherwise , to behold he set up there , fierce and frank , dark and candid , testy and fearless , as when regnant on he estrade in class . he presence be such a surprise : I have not once think of expect he , though I know he fill the chair of in the college . with _him_ in that , I feel sure that neither formalism nor flattery would be we doom ; but for what be vouchsaf we , for what be pour suddenly , rapidly , continuously , on we head -- I own I be not prepare . he speak to the prince , the nobles , the magistrate , and the burgher , with just the same ease , with almost the same point , choleric earnestness , with which he be will not to harangue the three division of the . the collegian he address , not as schoolboy , but as future citizen and embryo patriot . the time which have since come on have not be foretold yet , and 's spirit seem new to I . who would have think the flat and fat soil of could yield political conviction and national feeling , such as be now strongly express ? of the bearing of he opinion I need here give no special indication ; yet it may be permit I to say that I believe the little man not more earnest than right in what he say : with all he fire he be severe and sensible ; he trample Utopian theories under he heel ; he reject wild dream with scorn ; -- but when he look in the face of tyranny -- oh , then there open a light in he eye worth see ; and when he speak of injustice , he voice give no uncertain sound , but remind I rather of the band - trumpet , ring at twilight from the park . I do not think he audience be generally susceptible of share he flame in its purity ; but some of the college youth catch fire as he eloquently tell they what should be they path and endeavour in they country 's and in 's future . they give he a long , loud , ring cheer , as he conclude : with all he fierceness , he be they favourite professor . as we party leave the hall , he stand at the entrance ; he see and know I , and lift he hat ; he offer he hand in passing , and utter the word " dite vous ? " --question eminently characteristic , and remind I , even in this he moment of triumph , of that inquisitive restlessness , that absence of what I consider desirable self - control , which be amongst he fault . he should not have care just then to ask what I think , or what anybody think , but he _did_ care , and he be too natural to conceal , too impulsive to repress he wish . well ! if I blame he over -eagerness , I like he _naivete _. I would have praise he : I have plenty of praise in my heart ; but , alas ! no word on my lip . who _have word at the right moment ? I stammer some lame expression ; but be truly glad when other people , come up with profuse congratulation , cover my deficiency by they redundancy . a gentleman introduce he to ; and the count , who have likewise be highly gratified , ask he to join he friend ( for the most part 's likewise ) , and to dine with they at the . he decline dinner , for he be a man always somewhat shy at meet the advances of the wealthy : there be a strength of sturdy independence in the stringing of he sinews -- not obtrusive , but pleasant enough to discover as one advanc in knowledge of he character ; he promise , however , to step in with he friend , m . a ----, a french , in the course of the evening .
. at dinner that day , and each look , in she own way , very beautiful ; the former , perhaps , boast the advantage in material charms , but the latter shone pre-eminent for attraction more subtle and spiritual : for light and eloquence of eye , for grace of mien , for win variety of expression . 's dress of deep crimson relieve well she light curl , and harmonize with she rose - like bloom . 's attire -- in fashion close , though faultlessly neat , but in texture clear and white -- make the eye grateful for the delicate life of she complexion , for the soft animation of she countenance , for the tender depth of she eye , for the brown shadow and bounteous flow of she hair -- darker than that of she cousin , as be also she eyebrow , she eyelash , she full irid , and large mobile pupil . have trace all these detail slightly , and with a careless hand , in 's case ; and in 's , wrotch they to a high and delicate finish . be aw by the savant , but not quite to mutism : she converse modestly , diffidently ; not without effort , but with so true a sweetness , so fine and penetrate a sense , that she father more than once suspend he own discourse to listen , and fix on she a eye of proud delight . it be a polite , . ----, a very learned , but quite a courtly man , who have draw she into discourse . I be charme with she french ; it be faultless -- the structure correct , the idiom true , the accent pure ; , who have liv half she life on the continent , could do nothing like it not that word ever fail , but real accuracy and purity she neither possess , nor in any number of year would acquire . here , too , be gratify ; for , on the point of language , he be critical . another listener and observer there be ; one who , detain by some exigency of he profession , have come in late to dinner . both lady be quietly scan by , at the moment of take he seat at the table ; and that guard survey be more than once renew . he arrival rouse , who have hithertoo appear listless : she now become smiling and complacent , talk -- though what she say be rarely to the purpose -- or rather , be of a purpose somewhat mortifyingly below the standard of the occasion . she light , disconnect prattle might have gratify once ; perhaps it please he still : perhaps it be only fancy which suggest the thought that , while he eye be fill and he ear feed , he taste , he keen zest , he lively intelligence , be not equally consult and regal . it be certain that , restless and exact as see the demand on he attention , he yield courteously all that be require : he manner show neither pique nor coolness : be he neighbour , and to she , during dinner , he almost exclusively confin he notice . she appear satisfied , and pass to the drawing - room in very good spirit . yet , no sooner have we reach that place of refuge , than she again become flat and listless : throw herself on a couch , she denounce both the " discour " and the dinner as stupid affair , and inquire of she cousin how she could hear such a set of prosaic " gros - bonnet " as she father gather about he . the moment the gentleman be hear to move , she railing cease : she start up , fly to the piano , and dash at it with spirit . enter , one of the first , take up he station beside she . I think he would not long maintain that post : there be a position near the hearth to which i expect to see he attract : this position he only scan with he eye ; while _he_ look , other drew in . the grace and mind of charme these thoughtful Frenchmen : the fineness of she beauty , the soft courtesy of she manner , she immature , but real and inbreed tact , please they national taste ; they cluster about she , not indeed to talk science ; which would have render she dumb , but to touch on many subject in letter , in arts , in actual life , on which it soon appear that she have both read and reflecte . I listen . I be sure that though stand aloon , he listen too : he hearing as well as he vision be very fine , quick , discriminating . I know he gather the conversation ; I feel that the mode in which it be sustaine suit he exquisitely -- pleas he almost to pain . in there be more force , both of feeling and character ; than most people think -- than himself imagine -- than she would ever show to those who do not wish to see it . to speak truth , reader , there be no excellent beauty , no accomplish grace , no reliable refinement , without strength as excellent , as complete , as trustworthy . as well might you look for good fruit and blossom on a rootless and sapless tree , as for charms that will endure in a feeble and relaxed nature . for a little while , the blooming semblance of beauty may flourish round weakness ; but it can not bear a blast : it soon fade , even in serenest sunshine . would have start
start have any suggestive spirit whisper of the sinew and the stamina sustain that delicate nature ; but I who have know she as a child , kknow or guesse by what a good and strong root she graces hold to the firm soil of reality . while listen , and wait a opening in the magic circle , he glance restlessly sweep the room at interval , light by chance on I , where I sit in a quiet nook not far from my godmother and , who , as usual , be engage in what call " a two - hand crack :" what the count would have interpret as a tete - a - tete . smile recognition , cross the room , ask I how I be , tell I I look pale . I also have my own smile at my own thought : it be now about three month since have speak to I - a lapse of which he be not even conscious . he sit down , and become silent . he wish be rather to look than converse . and be now opposite to he : he could gaze he fill : he survey both form -- study both face . several new guest , lady as well as gentleman , have enter the room since dinner , drop in for the evening conversation ; and amongst the gentleman , I may incidentally observe , I have already notice by glimpse , a severe , dark , professorial outline , hover aloon in a inner saloon , see only in vista . know many of the gentleman present , but I think be a stranger to most of the ladie , except myself ; in look towards the hearth , he could not but see I , and naturally make a movement to approach ; see , however , also , he change he mind and hold back . if that have be all , there would have be no cause for quarrel ; but not satisfied with hold back , he pucker up he eyebrow , protrude he lip , and look so ugly that I avert my eye from the displeasing spectacle . have arrive , as well as he austere brother , and at this very moment be relieive at the piano . what a master - touch succeed she school - girl jingle ! in what grand , grateful tone the instrument acknowledge the hand of the true artist ! " Lucy , " begin , break silence and smiling , as glide before he , cast a glance as she pass by , " miss Fanshawe be certainly a fine girl . " of course I assent . " be there , " he pursue , " another in the room as lovely ? " " I think there be not another as handsome . " " I agree with you , Lucy : you and I do often agree in opinion , in taste , I think ; or at least in judgment . " " do we ? " I say , somewhat doubtfully . " I believe if you have be a boy , Lucy , instead of a girl -- my mother 's god - son instead of she god - daughter , we should have be good friend : we opinion would have melt into each other . " he have assume a bantering air : a light , half - caressing , half - ironic , shone aslant in he eye . ah , ! I have give more than one solitary moment to thought and calculation of you estimate of : be it always kind or just ? have be intrinsically the same but possesse the additional advantage of wealth and station , would you manner to she , you value for she , have be quite what they actually be ? and yet by these question I would not seriously infer blame . no ; you might sadden and trouble I sometimes ; but then mine be a soon - depresse , a easily - derange temperament -- it fall if a cloud cross the sun . perhaps before the eye of severe equity I should stand more at fault than you . try , then , to keep down the unreasonable pain which thrill my heart , on thus be make to feel that while could devote to other the most grave and earnest , the manliest interest , he have no more than light raillery for , the friend of lang syne , I inquire calmly , -- " on what point be we so closely in accordance ? " " we each have a observant faculty . you , perhaps , do not give I credit for the possession ; yet I have it . " " but you be speak of taste : we may see the same object , yet estimate they differently ? " " let we bring it to the test . of course , you can not but render homage to the merit of Fanshawe : now , what do you think of other in the room ?--my mother , for instance ; or the lions yonder , ---- and ---- ; or , let we say , that pale little lady , ? " " you know what I think of you mother . I have not think of ---- and -- --. " " and the other ? " " I think she be , as you say , a pale little lady -- pale , certainly , just now , when she be fatigue with over-excitement . " " you do not remember she as a child ? " " I wonder , sometimes , whether you do . " " I have forget she ; but it be noticeable , that circumstance , person , even word
word and look , that have slipp you memory , may , under certain condition , certain aspect of you own or another 's mind , revive . " " that be possible enough . " " yet , " he continue , " the revival be imperfect -- need confirmation , partake so much of the dim character of a dream , or of the airy one of a fancy , that the testimony of a witness become necessary for corroboration . be you not a guest at ten year ago , when bring he little girl , whom we then call ' little , ' to stay with mamma ? " " I be there the night she come , and also the morning she go away . " " rather a peculiar child , be she not ? I wonder how I treat she . be I fond of child in those day ? be there anythe gracious or kindly about I -- great , reckless , schoolboy as I be ? but you do not recollect I , of course ? " " you have see you own picture at . it be like you personally . in manner , you be almost the same yesterday as to - day . " " but , , how be that ? such a oracle really whet my curiosity . what be I to - day ? what be I the yesterday of ten year back ? " " gracious to whatever please you -- unkindly or cruel to nothing . " " there you be wrong ; I think I be almost a brute to _you , for instance . " " a brute ! no , : I should never have patiently endured brutality . " " _The , however , I _do_ remember : quiet Lucy Snowe taste nothing of my grace . " " as little of you cruelty . " " why , have I be himself , I could not have torment a be inoffensive as a shadow . " I smile ; but I also hush a groan . oh !-- I just wish he would let I alone -- cease allusion to I . these epithet -- these attribute I put from I . he " quiet , " he " inoffensive shadow , " I give he back ; not with scorn , but with extreme weariness : theirs be the coldness and the pressure of lead ; let he whelm I with no such weight . happily , he be soon on another theme . " on what term be 's little ' and I ? unless my recollection deceive I , we be not foe -- " " you speak very vaguly . do you think little 's memory , not more definite ? " " oh ! we do not talk of ' little Polly ' _now _. pray say , ; and , of course , such a stately personage remember nothing of . look at she large eye , Lucy ; can they read a word in the page of memory ? be they the same which I use to direct to a horn - book ? she do not know that I partly teach she to read . " " in the on night ? " " she have a calm , delicate , rather fine profile now : once what a little restless , anxious countenance be hers ! what a thing be a child 's preference -- what a bubble ! would you believe it ? that lady be fond of I ! " " I think she be in some measure fond of you , " say I , moderately . " you do not remember then ? _I_ have forget ; but I remember _now _. she like I the best of whatever there be at . " " you think so . " " I quite well recall it . I wish I could tell she all I recall ; or rather , I wish some one , you for instance , would go behind and whisper it all in she ear , and I could have the delight -- here , as I sit -- of watch she look under the intelligence . could you manage that , think you , , and make I ever grateful ? " " could I manage to make you ever grateful ? " say I . " no , _I could not _. " and I feel my finger work and my hand interlock : I feel , too , a inward courage , warm and resistant . in this matter I be not dispose to gratify : not at all . with now welcome force , I realize he entire misapprehension of my character and nature . he want always to give I a role not mine . and I oppose he . he do not at all guess what I feel : he do not read my eye , or face , or gesture ; though , I doubt not , all spoke . lean towards I coaxingly , he say , softly , " _Do_ content I , . " and I would have contente , or , at least , I would clearly have enlighten he , and teach he well never again to expect of I the part of officious soubrette in a love drama ; when , follow he , soft , eager , murmur , meet almost he pleading , mellow --" Do_ content I , ! " a sharp hiss pierce my ear on the other side . " Petite chatte , doucerette , coquette ! " sibillate the sudden boa - constrictor ; " vous avez l'air bien triste , soumis , reveur , tmais vous ne l'ete pa : c'est moi qui vous le dis : Sauvage ! la flamme a
a l'ame , l'eclair aux yeux ! " " Oui ; 'ai la flamme a l'ame , et je dois l'avoir ! " retort I , turn in just wrath : but have hiss he insult and be gone . the worst of the matter be , that , whose ear , as I have say , be quick and fine , catch every word of this apostrophe ; he put he handkerchief to he face , and laugh till he shook . " well do , , " cry he ; " capital ! petite chatte , petite coquette ! oh , I must tell my mother ! be it true , , or half - true ? I believe it be : you rede to the colour of 's gown . and really , by my word , now I examine he , that be the same little man who be so savage with you at the concert : the very same , and in he soul he be frantic at this moment because he see I laugh . oh ! I must tease he . " and , yield to he bent for mischief , laugh , jest , and whisper on till I could bear no more , and my eye fill . suddenly he be sober : a vacant space appear near ; the circle surround she seem about to dissolve . this movement be instantly catch by 's eye -- ever - vigilant , even while laugh ; he rise , take he courage in both hand , cross the room , and make the advantage he own . , throughout he whole life , be a man of luck -- a man of success . and why ? because he have the eye to see he opportunity , the heart to prompt to well - time action , the nerve to consummate a perfect work . and no tyrant - passion drag he back ; no enthusiasm , no foible encumber he way . how well he look at this very moment ! when look up as he reach she side , she glance mingl at once with a encounter glance , animate , yet modest ; he colour , as he speak to she , become half a blush , half a glow . he stand in she presence brave and bashful : subdued and unobtrusive , yet decide in he purpose and devote in he ardour . I gather all this by one view . I do not prolong my observation -- time fail I , have inclination serve : the night wore late ; and I ought already to have be in the . I rise , and bay good - night to my godmother and . I know not whether have notice my reluctant acceptance of 's badinage , or whether he perceive that I be pain , and that , on the whole , the evening have not be one flow of exultant enjoyment for the volatile , pleasure - love ; but , as I be leave the room , he step up and inquire whether I have any one to attend I to the . the professor _now speak politely , and even deferentially , and he look apologetic and repentant ; but I could not recognise he civility at a word , nor meet he contrition with crude , premature oblivion . never hithertoo have I feel seriously disposed to resent he brusquery , or freeze before he fierceness ; what he have say to - night , however , I consider unwarranted : my extreme disapprobation of the proceeding must be mark , however slightly . I merely say :--" I be provide with attendance . " which be true , as and I be to be send home in the carriage ; and I pass he with the slide obeisance with which he be will not to be salute in classe by pupil cross he estrade . have seek my shawl , I return to the vestibule . stand there as if wait . he observ that the night be fine . " be it ? " I say , with a tone and manner whose consummate chariness and frostiness I could not but applaud . it be so seldom I could properly act out my own resolution to be reserve and cool where I have be grieve or hurt , that I feel almost proud of this one successful effort . that " be it ? " sound just like the manner of other people . I have hear hundred of such little mince , dock , dry phrasis , from the purse - up coral lip of a score of self - possess , self - sufficing miss and mesdemoiselle . that m . would not stand any prolonged experience of this sort of dialogue I know ; but he certainly merit a sample of the curt and arid . I believe he think so himself , for he take the dose quietly . he look at my shawl and object to its lightness . I decidedly tell he it be as heavy as I wish . Reced aloon , and stand apart , I lean on the banister of the stair , fold my shawl about I , and fix my eye on a dreary religious painting darken the wall . be long in come : tedious seem she loitering . m . be still there ; my ear expect from he lip a angry tone . he come nearer . " now for another hiss ! " think I : have not the action be too uncivil I could have , stop my ear with my finger in terror of the thrill . nothing happen as we expect : listen for a coo or a murmur ; it be then you will hear a cry of prey or pain .
. await a piercing shriek , a angry threat , and welcome a amicable greeting , a low kind whisper . m . speak gently :--" , " say he , " do not quarrel for a word . tell I , be it I or ce grand fat d'Anglais " ( so he profanely denominate ) , " who make you eye so humid , and you cheek so hot as they be even now ? " " I be not conscious of you , monsieur , or of any other have excite such emotion as you indicate , " be my answer ; and in give it , I again surpass my usual self , and achieve a neat , frosty falsehood . " but what do I say ? " he pursue ; " tell I : I be angry : I have forget my word ; what be they ? " " such as it be best to forget ! " say I , still quite calm and chill . " then it be _my word which wound you ? consider they unsaid : permit my retractation ; accord my pardon . " " I be not angry , . " " then you be worse than angry -- grieve . forgive I , . " " , I _do_ forgive you . " " let I hear you say , in the voice natural to you , and not in that alien tone , ' Mon ami , je vous pardonne . ' " he make I smile . who could help smile at he wistfulness , he simplicity , he earnestness ? " ! " he cry . " Voila que le jour va poindre ! donc , mon ami . " " , je vous pardonne . " " I will have no monsieur : speak the other word , or I shall not believe you sincere : another effort -- _mon ami _, or else in , -- my friend ! " now , " my friend " have rather another sound and significancy than " _mon ami_ ;" it do not breathe the same sense of domestic and intimate affection ; " _mon ami " I could _not say to ; " my friend , " I could , and do say without difficulty . this distinction exist not for he , however , and he be quite satisfied with the english phrase . he smile . you should have see he smile , reader ; and you should have mark the difference between he countenance now , and that he wear half a hour ago . I can not affirm that I have ever witness the smile of pleasure , or content , or kindness round 's lip , or in he eye before . the ironic , the sarcastic , the disdainful , the passionately exultant , I have hundred of time see he express by what he call a smile , but any illuminate sign of milder or warmer feeling strike I as wholly new in he visage . it change it as from a mask to a face : the deep line leave he feature ; the very complexion seem clearer and fresher ; that swart , sallow , southern darkness which speak he spanish blood , become displace by a lighter hue . I know not that I have ever see in any other human face a equal metamorphosis from a similar cause . he now take I to the carriage : at the same moment come out with he niece . in a pretty humour be ; she have find the evening a grand failure : completely upset as to temper , she give way to the most uncontrolled moroseness as soon as we be seat , and the carriage - door close . she invective against have something venomous in they . have find herself impotent either to charm or s he , hatre be she only resource ; and this hatre she express in term so unmeasured and proportion so monstrous , that , after listen for a while with assume stoicism , my outraged sense of justice at last and suddenly catch fire . a explosion ensue : for I could be passionate , too ; especially with my present fair but faulty associate , who never fail to stir the worst dregs of I . it be well that the carriage - wheel make a tremendous rattle over the flinty Choseville pavement , for I can assure the reader there be neither dead silence nor calm discussion within the vehicle . half in earnest , half in seem , I make it my business to storm down . she have set out rampant from the ; it be necessary to tame she before we reach the : to this end it be indispensable to show up she sterling value and high desert ; and this must be do in language of which the fidelity and homeliness might challenge comparison with the compliment of a to a . this be the right discipline for ; it suite she . I be quite sure she go to be that night all the better and more settle in mind and mood , and sleep all the more sweetly for have undergone a sound moral drubbing . . the Watchguard . m . own a acute sensitiveness to the annoyance of interruption , from whatsoever cause occur , during he lesson : to pass through the classe under such circumstance be consider by the teacher and pupil of the school , individually and collectively , to be as much as a woman 's or girl 's life be worth . Beck herself , if force to the enterprise , would " skurry " through , retrench she skirt , and carefully coaste the formidable estrade , like a ship dread breaker . as to , the
the portress -- on whom , every half - hour , devolve the fearful duty of fetch pupil out of the very heart of one or other of the division to take they music - lesson in the oratory , the great or little saloon , the salle - a - manger , or some other piano - station -- she would , upon she second or third attempt , frequently become almost tongue - tie from excess of consternation -- a sentiment inspire by the unspeakable look level at she through a pair of dart - deal spectacle . one morning I be sit in the carre , at work upon a piece of embroidery which one of the pupil have commence but delay to finish , and while my finger wrotch at the frame , my ear regal themselves with listen to the crescendo and cadence of a voice harangue in the neighbour classe , in tone that wax momentarily more unquiet , more ominously varied . there be a good strong partition - wall between I and the gather storm , as well as a facile means of flight through the glass - door to the court , in case it sweep this way ; so I be afraid I derive more amusement than alarm from these thickening symptom . poor Rosine be not safe : four time that bless morning have she make the passage of peril ; and now , for the fifth time , it become she dangerous duty to snatch , as it be , a brand from the burning -- a pupil from under 's nose . " ! ! " cry she . " que vais - je devenir ? Monsieur va I tuer , je suis sure ; car il est d'une colere ! " Nerve by the courage of desperation , she open the door . " Mademoiselle la Malle au piano ! " be she cry . Ere she could make good she retreat , or quite close the door , this voice utter itself :-- " Des ce moment !-- la classe est defendue . premiere qui ouvrira cette porte , ou passera par cette division , sera pendue -- fut - ce elle - meme ! " ten minute have not succeed the promulgation of this decree when 's french pantoufle be again hear shuffling along the corridor . " , " say she , " I would not for a five - franc piece go into that classe again just now : 's lunette be really terrible ; and here be a commissionaire come with a message from the Athenee . I have tell I dare not deliver it , and she say I be to charge you with it . " " I ? no , that be rather too bad ! it be not in my line of duty . come , come , ! bear you own burden . be brave -- charge once more ! " " I , Mademoiselle ?--impossible ! five time I have cross he this day . Madame must really hire a gendarme for this service . ! not 'en tpuis plus ! " " Bah ! you be only a coward . what be the message ? " " precisely of the kind with which least like to be pester : a urgent summon to go directly to the Athenee , as there be a official visitor -- inspector -- I know not what -- arrive , and _must meet he : you know how he hate a _must_. " yes , I know well enough . the restive little man detest spur or curb : against whatever be urgent or obligatory , he be sure to revolt . however , I accept the responsibility -- not , certainly , without fear , but fear blent with other sentiment , curiosity , amongst they . I open the door , I enter , I close it behind I as quickly and quietly as a rather unsteady hand would permit ; for to be slow or bustling , to rattle a latch , or leave a door gape wide , be aggravations of crime often more disastrous in result than the main crime itself . there I stand then , and there he sit ; he humour be visibly bad -- almost at it be worst ; he have be give a lesson in arithmetic -- for he give lesson on any and every subject that strike he fancy -- and arithmetic be a dry subject , invariably disagree with he : not a pupil but tremble when he speak of figure . he sit , bend above he desk : to look up at the sound of a entrance , at the occurrence of a direct breach of he will and law , be a effort he could not for the moment bring himself to make . it be quite as well : I thus gain time to walk up the long classe ; and it suit my idiosyncracy far better to encounter the near burst of anger like he , than to bear its menace at a distance . at he estrade I pause , just in front ; of course I be not worthy of immediate attention : he proceed with he lesson . would not do : he must hear and he must answer my message . not be quite tall enough to lift my head over he desk , elevate upon the estrade , and thus suffer eclipse in my present position , I venture to peep round , with the design , at first , of merely get a better view of he face , which have strike I when I enter as bear a close and picturesque resemblance to that of a black and sallow tiger . twice do I enjoy this side -view with impunity , advancing and reced unseen
unseen ; the third time my eye have scarce dawn beyond the obscuration of the desk , when it be catch and transfix through its very pupil -- transfix by the " lunette . " be right ; these utensil have in they a blank and immutable terror , beyond the mobile wrath of the wearer 's own unglazed eye . I now find the advantage of proximity : these short -sighted " lunette " be useless for the inspection of a criminal under 's nose ; accordingly , he doff they , and he and I stand on more equal term . I be glad I be not really much afraid of he -- that , indeed , close in he presence , I feel no terror at all ; for upon he demand cord and gibbet to execute the sentence recently pronounce , I be able to furnish he with a needleful of embroidering thread with such accommodating civility as could not but allay some portion at least of he surplus irritation . of course I do not parade this courtesy before public view : I merely hand the thread round the angle of the desk , and attach it , ready noose , to the barred back of the 's chair . " que I voulez -vous ? " say he in a growl of which the music be wholly confin to he chest and throat , for he keep he tooth clench ; and see register to himself a inward vow that nothing earthly should wr from he a smile . my answer commence uncompromisingly : " , " I say , " je veux l'impossible , des chos inouy ; " and think it best not to mince matter , but to administer the " douche " with decision , in a low but quick voice , I deliver the Athenian message , floridly exaggerat its urgency . of course , he would not hear a word of it . " he would not go ; he would not leave he present class , let all the official of send for he . he would not put himself a inch out of he way at the bidding of king , cabinet , and chamber together . " I know , however , that he _must go ; that , talk as he would , both he duty and interest command a immediate and literal compliance with the summon : I stand , therefore , wait in silence , as if he have not yet speak . he ask what more I want . " only 's answer to deliver to the commissionaire . " he wav a impatient negative . I venture to stretch my hand to the bonnet - grec which lay in grim repose on the window - sill . he follow this daring movement with he eye , no doubt in mixed pity and amazement at its presumption . " ah ! " he mutter , " if it come to that -- if meddle with he bonnet - grec -- she might just put it on herself , turn garcon for the occasion , and benevolently go to the in he stead . " with great respect , I lay the bonnet on the desk , where its tassel seem to give I a awful nod . " I will write a note of apology -- that will do ! " say he , still bend on evasion . know well it would _not do , I gently push the bonnet towards he hand . thus impell , it slid down the polished slope of the varnished and unbaized desk , carry before it the light steel - fram " lunette , " and , fearful to relate , they fall to the estrade . a score of time ere now have I see they fall and receive no damage -- _this_ time , as 's hapless luck would have it , they so fall that each clear pebble become a shivered and shapeless star . now , indeed , dismay seize I -- dismay and regret . I know the value of these " lunette " : 's sight be peculiar , not easily fitte , and these glass suite he . I have hear he call they he treasure : as I pick they up , cracked and worthless , my hand tremble . Frighten through all my nerve I be to see the mischief I have do , but I think I be even more sorry than afraid . for some seconds I da not look the bereaved Professor in the face ; he be the first to speak . " ! " say he : " I veuf m lunette ! I think will now confess that the cord and gallow be amply earn ; she tremble in anticipation of she doom . ah , traitress ! traitress ! you be resolve to have I quite blind and helpless in you hand ! " I lift my eye : he face , instead of be irate , lower , and furrow , be overflow with the smile , colour with the bloom I have see brighten it that evening at the . he be not angry -- not even grieve . for the real injury he show himself full of clemency ; under the real provocation , patient as a saint . this event , which seem so untoward -- which I think have ruin at once my chance of successful persuasion -- prove my best help . difficult of management so long as I have do he no harm , he become graciously pliant as soon as I stand in he presence a conscious and contrite offender . still gently rail at I as " une forte femme -- une Anglaise terrible -- une petite casse - tout " -- he declare that he da not but
but obey one who have give such a instance of she dangerous prowess ; it be absolutely like the " grand yoEmpereu smashe the vase to inspire dismay . " so , at last , crown himself with he bonnet - grec , and take he ruin " lunette " from my hand with a clasp of kind pardon and encouragement , he make he bow , and go off to the in first - rate humour and spirit . * * * * * after all this amiability , the reader will be sorry for my sake to hear that I be quarrell with again before night ; yet so it be , and I could not help it . it be he occasional custom -- and a very laudable , acceptable custom , too -- to arrive of a evening , always a l'improviste , unannounced , burst in on the silent hour of study , establish a sudden despotism over we and we occupations , cause book to be put away , work - bag to be bring out , and , draw forth a single thick volume , or a handful of pamphlet , substitute for the besotted " lecture pieuse , " draw by a sleepy pupil , some tragedy make grand by grand reading , ardent by fiery action -- some drama , whereor , for my part , I rarely study the intrinsic merit ; for make it a vessel for a outpouring , and fill it with he native verve and passion like a cup with a vital brewage . or else he would flash through we conventual darkness a reflex of a brighter world , show we a glimpse of the current literature of the day , read we passage from some enchant tale , or the last witty feuilleton which have awaken laughter in the saloon of ; take care always to expunge , with the severest hand , whether from tragedy , melodrama , tale , or essay , whatever passage , phrase , or word , could be deem unsuited to a audience of " jeune filles . " I notice more than once , that where retrenchment without substitute would have leave unmeaning vacancy , or introduce weakness , he could , and do , improvise whole paragraph , no less vigorous than irreproachable ; the dialogue -- the description -- he engraft be often far better than that he prune away . well , on the evening in question , we be sit silent as nun in a " retreat , " the pupil study , the teacher work . I remember my work ; it be a slight matter of fancy , and it rather interes I ; it have a purpose ; I be not do it merely to kill time ; I mean it when finish as a gift ; and the occasion of presentation be near , haste be requisite , and my finger be busy . we hear the sharp bell - peal which we all know ; then the rapid step familiar to each ear : the word " ! " have scarcely break simultaneously from every lip , when the two - leave door split ( as split it always do for he admission --such a slow word as " open " be inefficient to describe he movement ) , and he stand in the midst of we . there be two study table , both long and flank with bench ; over the centre of each hang a lamp ; beneath this lamp , on either side the table , sit a teacher ; the girl be arrange to the right hand and the left ; the eldest and most studious nearest the lamps or tropic ; the idler and little one towards the north and south pole . 's habit be politely to hand a chair to some teacher , generally , the senior mistress ; then to take she vacated seat ; and thus avail himself of the full beam of or , which , owe to he near sight , he need . as usual , rise with alacrity , smile to the whole extent of she mouth , and the full display of she upper and under row of tooth -- that strange smile which pass from ear to ear , and be mark only by a sharp thing curve , which fail to spread over the countenance , and neither dimple the cheek nor light the eye . I suppose do not see she , or he have take a whim that he would not notice she , for he be as capricious as woman be say to be ; then he " lunette " ( he have get another pair ) serve he as a excuse for all sort of little oversight and shortcoming . whatever might be he reason , he pass by , come to the other side of the table , and before I could start up to clear the way , whisper , " Ne bougez pa , " and establish himself between I and , who always would be my neighbour , and have she elbow in my side , however often I declare to she , " , I wish you be at . " it be easy to say , " ne bougez pa ; " but how could I help it ? I must make he room , and I must request the pupil to recede that _i_ might recede . it be very well for to be gum to I , " keep herself warm , " as she say , on the winter evening , and harasse my very heart with she fidgeting and poking , oblige I , indeed , sometimes to put a artful pin in my girdle by way of protection against she elbow ; but I suppose be not
not to be subject to the same kind of treatment , so I sweep away my work material , to clear space for he book , and withdraw myself to make room for he person ; not , however , leave more than a yard of interval , just what any reasonable man would have regard as a convenient , respectful allowance of bench . but never _was_ reasonable ; flint and tinder that he be ! he struck and take fire directly . " Vous ne voulez pa de moi pour voisin , " he grow : " vous vous donnez des air de caste ; vous I traitez en paria ; " he scowl . " Soit ! je vais arranger la chose ! " and he set to work . " Levez vous toute , Mesdemoiselle ! " cry he . the girl rise . he make they all file off to the other table . he then place I at one extremity of the long bench , and have duly and carefully bring I my work - basket , silk , scissors , all my implement , he fix himself quite at the other end . at this arrangement , highly absurd as it be , not a soul in the room da to laugh ; luckless for the giggler would have be the giggle . as for I , I take it with entire coolness . there I sit , isolate and cut off from human intercourse ; I sit and mind my work , and be quiet , and not at all unhappy . " est ce assez de distance ? " he demand . " yoMonsieu en est l'arbitre , " say I . " Vous savez bien que non . C'est vous qui avez cree ce vide immense : moi je n'y be pa mis la main . " and with this assertion he commence the reading . for he misfortune he have choose a french translation of what he call " un drame ; le faux dieu , " he further announce , " de ce sot paien , les Anglais . " how far otherwise he would have characterize he have he temper not be upset , I scarcely need intimate . of course , the translation be french , be very inefficient ; nor do I make any particular effort to conceal the contempt which some of its forlorn lapse be calculate to excite . not that it behove or beseem I to say anything : but one can occasionally _look_ the opinion it be forbidden to embody in word . 's lunette be on the alert , he glean up every stray look ; I do not think he lose one : the consequence be , he eye soon discard a screen , that they blaze might sparkle free , and he wax hotter at the north pole to which he have voluntarily exil himself , than , consider the general temperature of the room , it would have be reasonable to become under the vertical ray of itself . the read over , it appear problematic whether he would depart with he anger unexpressed , or whether he would give it vent . Suppression be not much in he habits ; but still , what have be do to he definite enough to afford matter for overt reproof ? I have not utter a sound , and could not justly be deem amenable to reprimand or penalty for have permit a slightly freer action than usual to the muscle about my eye and mouth . the supper , consist of bread , and milk dilute with tepid water , be bring in . in respectful consideration of the 's presence , the roll and glassis be allow to stand instead of be immediately hand round . " take you supper , lady , " say he , seem to be occupy in make marginal note to he " . " they take it . I also accept a roll and glass , but be now more than ever interested in my work , I keep my seat of punishment , and wrotch while I munch my bread and sip my , the whole with easy _sang - froid ; with a certain snugness of composure , indeed , scarcely in my habits , and pleasantly novel to my feeling . it seem as if the presence of a nature so restless , chafing , thorny as that of m . absorb all feverish and unsettling influence like a magnet , and leave I none but such as be placid and harmonious . he rise . " will he go away without say another word ? " yes ; he turn to the door . no : he _re_-turn on he step ; but only , perhaps , to take he pencil - case , which have be leave on the table . he take it -- shut the pencil in and out , break its point against the wood , re-cut and pocket it , and . . . walk promptly up to I . the girl and teacher , gather round the other table , be talk pretty freely : they always talk at meal ; and , from the constant habit of speak fast and loud at such time , do not now subdue they voice much . m . come and stand behind I . he ask at what I be work ; and I say I be make a watchguard . he ask , " for whom ? " and I answer , " for a gentleman -- one of my friend . " m . stoop down and proceed -- as novel -writer say , and , as be literally true in he case -- to " hiss " into my ear some poignant word . he say that , of all the
the woman he know , I be the one who could make herself the most consummately unpleasant : I be she with whom it be least possible to live on friendly term . I have a " caractere intraitable , " and perverse to a miracle . how I manage it , or what possess I , he , for he part , do not know ; but with whatever pacific and amicable intention a person accost I --crac ! I turn concord to discord , good - will to enmity . he be sure , he -- m . -- wish I well enough ; he have never do I any harm that he know of ; he might , at least , he suppose , claim a right to be regard as a neutral acquaintance , guiltless of hostile sentiment : yet , how I behave to he ! with what pungent vivacity -- what a impetus of mutiny -- what a " fougue " of injustice ! here I could not avoid open my eye somewhat wide , and even slipp in a slight interjectional observation : " Vivacity ? ? ? I do not know .... " " ! a l'instant ! there ! there I go -- vive comme la poudre ! " he be sorry -- he be very sorry : for my sake he grieve over the hapless peculiarity . this " emportement , " this " chaleur " -- generous , perhaps , but excessive -- would yet , he fear , do I a mischief . it be a pity : I be not -- he believe , in he soul -- wholly without good quality : and would I but hear reason , and be more sedate , more sober , less " en l'air , " less " coquette , " less take by show , less prone to set a undue value on outside excellence -- to make much of the attention of people remarkable chiefly for so many foot of stature , " de couleur de poupee , " " un nez plus yoou moin bien fait , " and a enormous amount of fatuity -- I might yet prove a useful , perhaps a exemplary character . but , as it be -- and here , the little man 's voice be for a minute chok . I would have look up at he , or hold out my hand , or say a soothing word ; but I be afraid , if I stir , I should either laugh or cry ; so odd , in all this , be the mixture of the touching and the absurd . I think he have nearly do : but no ; he sit down that he might go on at he ease . " while he , . , be on these painful topic , he would dare my anger for the sake of my good , and would venture to refer to a change he have notice in my dress . he be free to confess that when he first know I -- or , rather , be in the habit of catch a pass glimpse of I from time to time -- I satisfy he on this point : the gravity , the austere simplicity , obvious in this particular , be such as to inspire the highest hope for my best interest . what fatal influence have impell I lately to introduce flower under the brim of my bonnet , to wear ' des col brode , ' and even to appear on one occasion in a _scarlet gown _-- he might indeed conjecture , but , for the present , would not openly declare . " again I interrupt , and this time not without a accent at once indignant and horror -struck . " Scarlet , ? it be not scarlet ! it be pink , and pale pink to : and further subdue by black lace . " " pink or scarlet , yellow or crimson , pea-green or sky - blue , it be all one : these be all flaunting , giddy colour ; and as to the lace I talk of , _that be but a ' colifichet de plus . ' " and he sigh over my degeneracy . " he could not , he be sorry to say , be so particular on this theme as he could wish : not possesse the exact name of these ' babiole ,' he might run into small verbal error which would not fail to lay he open to my sarcasm , and excite my unhappily sudden and passionate disposition . he would merely say , in general term -- and in these general term he know he be correct -- that my costume have of late assume ' des facon mondaine , ' which it woun he to see . " what " facon mondaine " he discover in my present winter merino and plain white collar , I own it puzzl I to guess : and when I ask he , he say it be all make with too much attention to effect -- and beside , " have I not a bow of ribbon at my neck ? " " and if you condemn a bow of ribbon for a lady , Monsieur , you would necessarily disapprove of a thing like this for a gentleman ? " --hold up my bright little chainlet of silk and gold . he sole reply be a groan -- I suppose over my levity . after sit some minute in silence , and watch the progress of the chain , at which I now wrotch more assiduously than ever , he inquire : " whether what he have just say would have the effect of make I entirely detest he ? " I hardly remember what answer I make ,
, or how it come about ; I do not think I speak at all , but I know we manage to bid good - night on friendly term : and , even after have reach the door , he turn back just to explain , " that he would not be understand to speak in entire condemnation of the scarlet dress " ( " ! pink ! " I throw in ) ; " that he have no intention to deny it the merit of _looking rather well " ( the fact be , 's taste in colour decidedly lean to the brilliant ) ; " only he wish to counsel I , whenever , I wear it , to do so in the same spirit as if its material be ' bure , ' and its hue ' tgris poussiere . ' " " and the flower under my bonnet , ? " I ask . " they be very little one --? " " keep they little , then , " say he . " permit they not to become full - blown . " " and the bow , -- the bit of ribbon ? " " pour le ruban ! " be the propitious answer . and so we settle it . * * * * * " well do , ! " cry I to myself ; " you have come in for a pretty lecture -- bring on yourself a ' rude savant , ' and all through you wicked fondness for worldly vanity ! who would have think it ? you deem yourself a melancholy sober - side enough ! miss Fanshawe there regard you as a second Diogene . , the other day , politely turn the conversation when it run on the wild gift of the actress , because , as he kindly say , ' look uncomfortable . ' know you only as ' quiet Lucy ' -- 'a creature inoffensive as a shadow ;' he have say , and you have hear he say it : ' 's disadvantage spring from over -gravity in taste and manner -- want of colour in character and costume . ' such be you own and you friend 's impression ; and behold ! there start up a little man , differ diametrically from all these , roundly charge you with be too airy and cheery -- too volatile and versatile -- too flowery and coloury . this harsh little man -- this pitiless censor -- gather up all you poor scatter sins of vanity , you luckless chiffon of rose - colour , you small fringe of a wreath , you small scrap of ribbon , you silly bit of lace , and call you to account for the lot , and for each item . you be well habituate to be pass by as a shadow in 's sunshine : it it be a new thing to see one testily lift he hand to scree he eye , because you tease he with a obtrusive ray . " . be . I be up the next morning a hour before daybreak , and finish my guard , knee on the dormitory floor beside the centre stand , for the benefit of such expire glimmer as the night - lamp afforde in it be last watch . all my materials -- my whole stock of bead and silk -- be use up before the chain assume the length and richness I wish ; I have wrotch it double , as I know , by the rule of contrary , that to , suit the particular taste whose gratification be in view , a effective appearance be quite indispensable . as a finish to the ornament , a little gold clasp be need ; fortunately I possess it in the fastening of my sole necklace ; I duly detach and re-attach it , then coil compactly the complete guard ; and enclose it in a small box I have buy for its brilliancy , make of some tropic shell of the colour call " nacarat , " and deck with a little coronal of sparkl blue stone . within the lid of the box , I carefully grave with my scissors ' point certain initial . * * * * * the reader will , perhaps , remember the description of 's fete ; nor will he have forget that at each anniversary , a handsome present be subscribe for and offer by the school . the observance of this day be a distinction accord to none but Madame , and , in a modified form , to she kinsman and counsellor , . in the latter case it be a honour spontaneously awarded , not plot and contrive beforehand , and offer a additional proof , amongst many other , of the estimation in which -- despite he partiality , prejudice , and irritability -- the professor of literature be hold by he pupil . no article of value be offer to he : he distinctly give it to be understand , that he would accept neither plate nor jewellery . yet he like a slight tribute ; the cost , the money - value , do not touch he : a diamond ring , a gold snuff - box , present , with pomp , would have pleas he less than a flower , or a drawing , offer simply and with sincere feeling . be he nature . he be a man , not wise in he generation , yet could he claim a filial sympathy with " the dayspring on high . " 's fete fall on the first of and a . it prove a fine sunny day ; and be likewise the morning on which it be customary to attend mass ; be also otherwise distinguished by the half - holiday which permit the privilege of walk
walk out , shoppe , or pay visit in the afternoon : these combine consideration induce a general smartness and freshness of dress . clean collar be in vogue ; the ordinary dingy wooll classe - dress be exchange for something lighter and clearer . , on this particular , even assume a " robe de soie , " deem in economical a article of hazardous splendour and luxury ; nay , it be remark that she send for a " coiffeur " to dress she hair that morning ; there be pupil acute enough to discover that she have bedew she handkerchief and she hand with a new and fashionable perfume . poor ! it be much she will not to declare about this time , that she be tired to death of a life of seclusion and labour ; that she longe to have the means and leisure for relaxation ; to have some one to work for she -- a husband who would pay she debt ( she be woefully encumber with debt ) , supply she wardrobe , and leave she at liberty , as she say , to " gouter un peu les plaisir . " it have long be rumoure , that she eye be upon . 's eye be certainly often upon she . he would sit and watch she perseveringly for minute together . I have see he give she a quarter - of - a - hour 's gaze , while the class be silently compose , and he sit thron on he estrade , unoccupied . conscious always of this basilisk attention , she would writhe under it , half - flatter , half - puzzl , and would follow she sensation , sometimes look appallingly acute ; for in some case , he have the terrible unerring penetration of instinct , and pierce in its hiding - place the last lurking thought of the heart , and discern under florid veiling the bare ; barren place of the spirit : yes , and its pervert tendency , and it be hide false curve -- all that man and woman would not have know -- the twisted spine , the malform limb that be bear with they , and far worse , the stain or disfigurement they have perhaps bring on themselves . no calamity so accurse but could pity and forgive , if it be acknowledge candidly ; but where he question eye meet dishonest denial -- where he ruthless research find deceitful concealment -- oh , then , he could be cruel , and I think wick ! he would exultantly snatch the screen from poor shrinking wretch , passionately hurry they to the summit of the mount of exposure , and there show they all naked , all false -- poor liive lie -- the spawn of that horrid truth which can not be look on unveiled . he think he do justice ; for my part I doubt whether man have a right to do such justice on man : more than once in these he visitation , I have feel compelle to give tear to he victim , and not spare ire and keen reproach to himself . he deserve it ; but it be difficult to shake he in he firm conviction that the work be righteous and need . Breakfast be over and mass attend , the school - bell rang and the room fill : a very pretty spectacle be present in classe . Pupil and teacher sit neatly array , orderly and expectant , each bear in she hand the bouquet of felicitation -- the prettiest spring - flower all fresh , and fill the air with they fragrance : I only have no bouquet . I like to see flower grow , but when they be gather , they cease to please . I look on they as thing rootless and perishable ; they likeness to life make I sad . I never offer flower to those I love ; I never wish to receive they from hand dear to I . mark my empty hand -- she could not believe I have be so remiss ; with avidity she eye rove over and round I : surely I must have some solitary symbolic flower somewhere : some small knot of violet , something to win myself praise for taste , commendation for ingenuity . the unimaginative " Anglaise " prove better than the 's fear : she sit literally unprovided , as bare of bloom or leaf as the winter tree . this ascertaine , smile , well please . " how wisely you have act to keep you money , , " she say : " silly I have go and throw away two franc on a bouquet of hot - house flower ! " and she show with pride she splendo nosegay . but hush ! a step : _the_ step . it come prompt , as usual , but with a promptitude , we feel dispose to flatter ourselves , inspire by other feeling than mere excitability of nerve and vehemence of intent . we think we Professor 's " foot - fall " ( to speak romantically ) have in it a friendly promise this morning ; and so it have . he enter in a mood which make he as good as a new sunbeam to the already well - light first classe . the morning light play amongst we plant and laugh on we wall , catch a add lustre from 's all - benignant salute . like a true ( though I do not know why I should say so , for he be of strain neither french nor Labassecourien ) , he have dress for the " situation " and the occasion . not by the vague fold , sinister and conspirator - like , of he soot - dark paletot be
be the outline of he person obscure ; on the contrary , he figure ( such as it be , I do not boast of it ) be well set off by a civilized coat and a silken vest quite pretty to behold . the defiant and pagan bonnet - grec have vanish : bare - head , he come upon we , carry a hat in he gloved hand . the little man look well , very well ; there be a clearness of amity in he blue eye , and a glow of good feeling on he dark complexion , which pass perfectly in the place of beauty : one really do not care to observe that he nose , though far from small , be of no particular shape , he cheek thing , he brow mark and square , he mouth no rose - bud : one accept he as he be , and feel he presence the reverse of damping or insignificant . he pass to he desk ; he place on the same he hat and glove . " Bon jour , m amy , " say he , in a tone that somehow make amend to some amongst we for many a sharp snap and savage snarl : not a jocund , good - fellow tone , still less a unctuous priestly , accent , but a voice he have belong to himself -- a voice use when he heart pass the word to he lip . that same heart do speak sometimes ; though a irritable , it be not a ossify organ : in it be core be a place , tender beyond a man 's tenderness ; a place that humble he to little child , that bound he to girl and woman to whom , rebel as he would , he could not disow he affinity , nor quite deny that , on the whole , he be better with they than with he own sex . " we all wish Monsieur a good day , and present to he we congratulation on the anniversary of he fete , " say , constitut herself spokeswoman of the assembly ; and advanc with no more twist of affectation than be with she indispensable to the achievement of motion , she lay she costly bouquet before he . he bow over it . the long train of offering follow : all the pupil , sweep past with the gliding step foreigner practise , leave they tribute as they go by . each girl so dexterously adjust she separate gift , that when the last bouquet be laid on the desk , it form the apex to a blooming pyramid -- a pyramid blooming , spread , and towere with such exuberance as , in the end , to eclipse the hero behind it . this ceremony over , seat be resume , and we sit in dead silence , expectant of a speech . I suppose five minute might have elapse , and the hush remain unbroken ; ten -- and there be no sound . many present begin , doubtless , to wonder for what wait ; as well they might . voiceless and viewless , stirless and wordless , he keep he station behind the pile of flower . at last there issue forth a voice , rather deep , as if it speak out of a hollow :-- " est - ce la tout ? " look round . " you have all present you bouquet ? " inquire she of the pupil . yes ; they have all give they nosegay , from the eldest to the youngest , from the tallest to the most diminutive . the senior mistress signify as much . " est - ce la tout ? " be reiterate in a intonation which , deep before , have now descende some note lower . " Monsieur , " say , rise , and this time speak with she own sweet smile , " I have the honour to tell you that , with a single exception , every person in classe have offer she bouquet . for , Monsieur will kindly make allowance ; as a foreigner she probably do not know we custom , or do not appreciate they significance . have regard this ceremony as too frivolous to be honoure by she observance . " " famous ! " I mutter between my tooth : " you be no bad speaker , , when you begin . " the answer vouchsaf to Pierre from the estrade be give in the gesticulation of a hand from behind the pyramid . this manual action seem to deprecate word , to enjoin silence . a form , ere long , follow the hand . emerge from he eclipse ; and produce himself on the front of he estrade , and gaze straight and fixedly before he at a vast " mappe - monde " cover the wall opposite , he demand a third time , and now in really tragic tone -- " est - ce la tout ? " I might yet have make all right , by stepping forward and slipp into he hand the ruddy little shell - box I at that moment hold tight in my own . it be what I have fully purposed to do ; but , first , the comic side of 's behaviour have temp I to delay , and now , 's affect interference provoke contumacity . the reader not have hitherto have any cause to ascribe to 's character the most distant pretension to perfection , will be scarcely surprised to learn that she feel too perverse to defend herself from any imputation the might choose to insinuate and beside , m . be so tragic , and take my defection so seriously , he deserv to be vex . I keep ,
, then , both my box and my countenance , and sit insensate as any stone . " it be well ! " drop at length from the lip of ; and have utter this phrase , the shadow of some great paroxysm -- the swell of wrath , scorn , resolve -- pass over he brow , ripple he lip , and line he cheek . Gulp down all further comment , he launch into he customary " discour . " I can not at all remember what this " discour " be ; I do not listen to it : the gulping - down process , the abrupt dismissal of he mortification or vexation , have give I a sensation which half - counteract the ludicrous effect of the reiterate " est - ce la tout ? " towards the close of the speech there come a pleasing diversion my attention be again amusingly arrest . Ow to some little accidental movement -- I think I drop my thimble on the floor , and in stooping to regain it , hit the crown of my head against the sharp corner of my desk ; which casualty ( exasperat to I , by rights , if to anybody ) naturally make a slight bustle -- m . become irritated , and dismiss he force equanimity , and cast to the wind that dignity and self - control with which he never car long to encumber himself , he break forth into the strain best calculate to give he ease . I do not know how , in the progress of he " discour , " he have contrive to cross the channel and land on british ground ; but there I find he when I begin to listen . cast a quick , cynical glance round the room -- a glance which scath , or be intend to scathe , as it cross I -- he fall with fury upon " les Anglaise . " never have I hear woman handle as . that morning handle they : he spare nothing -- neither they mind , moral , manners , nor personal appearance . I specially remember he abuse of they tall stature , they long neck , they thin arm , they slovenly dress , they pedantic education , they impious scepticism ( ! ) , they insufferable pride , they pretentious virtue : over which he ground he tooth malignantly , and look as if , have he da , he would have say singular thing . oh ! he be spiteful , acrid , savage ; and , as a natural consequence , detestably ugly . " wick venomous man ! " think I ; " be I go to harass myself with fear of displease you , or hurt you feeling ? no , indeed ; you shall be indifferent to I , as the shabbiest bouquet in you pyramid " I grieve to say i could not quite carry out this resolution . for some time the abuse of and the find and leave I stolid : I bear it some fifteen minute stoically enough ; but this hissing cockatrice be determined to s , and he say such thing at last -- fasten not only upon we woman , but upon we greatest name and best man ; sully , the shield of , and dabbl the union jack in mud -- that I be sting . with vicious relish he brotch up the most spicy current continental historical falsehood -- than which nothing can be conceive more offensive . , and the whole class , become one grin of vindictive delight ; for it be curiious to discover how these clown of secretly hate . at last , I strike a sharp stroke on my desk , open my lip , and let loose this cry :-- " Vive l'Angleterre , l'Histoire et les Heros ! a ba la , et les Faquin ! " the class be struck of a heap . I suppose they think I mad . the Professor put up he handkerchief , and fiendishly smile into it be fold . little monster of malice ! he now think he have get the victory , since he have make I angry . in a second he become good - humoured . with great blandness he resume the subject of he flower ; talk poetically and symbolically of they sweetness , perfume , purity , etcetera ; make Frenchified comparison between the " jeune filles " and the sweet blossom before he ; pay a very full - blow compliment on the superiority of she bouquet ; and end by announcing that the first really fine , mild , and balmy morning in spring , he intend to take the whole class out to breakfast in the country . " such of the class , at least , " he add , with emphasis , " as he could count amongst the number of he friend . " " Donc je not 'y serai pa , " declare I , involuntarily . " ! " be he response ; and , gather he flower in he arm , he flash out of classe ; while I , consign my work , scissors , thimble , and the neglect little box , to my desk , sweep up - stair . I do not know whether _he feel hot and angry , but I be free to confess that _i_ do . yet with a strange evanescent anger , I have not sit a hour on the edge of my bed , picturing and repictur he look , manner , word ere I smile at the whole scene . a little pang of regret I undergo that the box have not be offer . I have mean to gratify he . Fate would not have it so . in the course
course of the afternoon , remembere that desk in classe be by no means inviolate repository , and think that it be as well to secure the box , on account of the initial in the lid , , for ( or ) -- such be he full name -- these foreigners must always have a string of baptismal -- I descende to the schoolroom . it sleep in holiday repose . the day pupil be all go home , the boarder be out walk , the teacher , except the surveillante of the week , be in town , visit or shop ; the suite of division be vacant ; so be the grande salle , with it be huge solemn globe hang in the midst , its pair of many - branch chandelier , and its horizontal grand piano close , silent , enjoy its mid-week . I rather wonder to find the first classe door ajar ; this room be usually lock when empty , and be then inaccessible to any save and myself , who possess a duplicate key . I wonder still more , on approaching , to hear a vague movement as of life -- a step , a chair stirred , a sound like the opening of a desk . " it be only Madame do inspection duty , " be the conclusion follow a moment 's reflection . the partially - open door give opportunity for assurance on this point . I look . behold ! not the inspect garb of -- the shawl and the clean cap -- but the coat , and the close - shorn , dark head of a man . this person occupy my chair ; he olive hand hold my desk open , he nose be lose to view amongst my papers . he back be towards I , but there could not be a moment 's question about identity . already be the attire of ceremony discard : the cherish and ink - stain paletot be resum ; the perverse bonnet - grec lay on the floor , as if just drop from the hand , culpably busy . now I know , and I have long known , that that hand of 's be on the most intimate term with my desk ; that it raise and lower the lid , ransack and arrange the contents , almost as familiarly as my own . the fact be not dubious , nor do he wish it to be so : he leave sign of each visit palpable and unmistakable ; hithertoo , however , I have never catch he in the act : watch as I would , I could not detect the hour and moment of he come . I see the brownies 's work in exercise leave overnight full of fault , and find next morning carefully correct : I profit by he capricious good - will in loan full welcome and refresh . between a sallow dictionary and worn - out grammar would magically grow a fresh interesting new work , or a classic , mellow and sweet in its ripe age . out of my work - basket would laughingly peep a romance , under it would lurk the pamphlet , the magazine , whence last evening 's reading have be extract . impossible to doubt the source whence these treasure flow : have there be no other indication , one condemning and traitor peculiarity , common to they all , settle the question -- _they smelt of cigar . this be very shocking , of course : _I_ think so at first , and use to open the window with some bustle , to air my desk , and with fastidious finger and thumb , to hold the peccant brochure forth to the purifying breeze . I be cure of that formality suddenly . yoMonsieu catch I at it one day , understand the inference , instantly relieve my hand of its burden , and , in another moment , would have thrust the same into the glow stove . it chance to be a book , on the perusal of which I be bend ; so for once I prove as decide and quicker than himself ; recapture the spoil , and -- have save this volume -- never hazard a second . with all this , I have never yet be able to arrest in he visit the freakish , friendly , cigar - loving phantom . but now at last I have he : there he be -- the very brownie himself ; and there , curl from he lip , be the pale blue breath of he indian darling : he be smoke into my desk : it might well betray he . provoke at this particular , and yet pleased to surprise he -- pleased , that be , with the mixed feeling of the housewife who discover at last she strange elfin ally busy in the dairy at the untimely churn -- I softly steal forward , stand behind he , bend with precaution over he shoulder . my heart smote I to see that -- after this morning 's hostility , after my see remissness , after the puncture experience by he feeling , and the ruffling undergone by he temper -- he , all willing to forget and forgive , have bring I a couple of handsome volume , of which the title and authorship be guarantee for interest . now , as he sit bend above the desk , he be stirr up its contents ; but with gentle and careful hand ; disarrange indeed , but not harm . my heart smote I : as I bend over he , as he sit unconscious , do I what good he could , and I daresay not feel towards I unkindly , my morning 's anger quite melte : I do not
not dislike . I think he hear I breathe . he turn suddenly : he temperament be nervous , yet he never start , and seldom change colour : there be something hardy about he . " I think you be go into town with the other teacher , " say he , take a grim gripe of he self -possession , which half - escape he -- " it be as well you be not . do you think I care for be catch ? not I . I often visit you desk . " " Monsieur , I know it . " " you find a brochure or tome now and then ; but you do not read they , because they have pass under this ? " -- touch he cigar . " they have , and be no better for the process ; but I read they . " " without pleasure ? " " yoMonsieu must not be contradict . " " do you like they , or any of they ? -- be they acceptable ? " " yoMonsieu have see I read they a hundred time , and know I have not so many recreation as to undervalue those he provide . " " I mean well ; and , if you see that I mean well , and derive some little amusement from my effort , why can we not be friend ? " " a fatalist would say -- because we cannot . " " this morning , " he continue , " I awoke in a bright mood , and come into classe happy ; you spoil my day . " " no , , only a hour or two of it , and that unintentionally . " " Unintentionally ! no . it be my fete - day ; everybody wish I happiness but you . the little child of the third division give each she knot of violet , lisp each she congratulation :-- you --noth . not a bud , leaf , whisper -- not a glance . be this unintentional ? " " I mean no harm . " " then you really do not know we custom ? you be unprepared ? you would willingly have lay out a few centime on a flower to give I pleasure , have you be aware that it be expect ? say so , and all be forgotten , and the pain soothe . " " I do know that it be expect : I _be prepare ; yet I lay out no centime on flower . " " it be well -- you do right to be honest . I should almost have hate you have you flatter and lie . better declare at once ' -- je the deteste , mon garcon !' -- than smile a interest , look a affection , and be false and cold at heart . false and cold I do not think you be ; but you have make a great mistake in life , that I believe ; I think you judgment be warp -- that you be indifferent where you ought to be grateful -- and perhaps devote and infatuate , where you ought to be cool as you name . do not suppose that I wish you to have a passion for I , ; vous en garde ! what do you start for ? because I say passion ? well , I say it again . there be such a word , and there be such a thing -- though not within these wall , thank heaven ! you be no child that one should not speak of what exist ; but I only utter the word -- the thing , I assure you , be alien to my whole life and view . it die in the past -- in the present it lie bury -- its grave be deep - dug , well - heape , and many winter old : in the future there will be a resurrection , as I believe to my soul consolation ; but all will then be change -- form and feel : the mortal will have put on immortality -- it will rise , not for earth , but heaven . all I say to _you_ , , be -- that you ought to treat decently . " I could not , and do not contradict such a sentiment . " tell I , " he pursue , " when it be _you fete - day , and I will not grudge a few centime for a small offering . " " you will be like I , Monsieur : this cost more than a few centime , and I do not grudge its price . " and take from the open desk the little box , I put it into he hand . " it lay ready in my lap this morning , " I continue ; " and if yoMonsieu have be rather more patient , and . less interfere -- perhaps I should say , too , if _i_ have be calmer and wiser -- I should have give it then . " he look at the box : I see it be clear warm tint and bright azure circlet , please he eye . I tell he to open it . " my initial ! " say he , indicate the letter in the lid . " who tell you I be call ? " " a little bird , . " " do it fly from I to you ? then one can tie a message under its wing when needful . " , he take out the chain -- a trifle indeed as to value , but glossy with silk and sparkl with bead . he like that too -- admire it artlessly , like a child . " for I ?
? " " yes , for you . " " this be the thing you be work at last night ? " " the same . " " you finish it this morning ? " " I do . " " you commence it with the intention that it should be mine ? " " undoubtedly . " " and offer on my fete - day ? " " yes . " " this purpose continue as you wove it ? " again I assent . " then it be not necessary that I should cut out any portion -- say , this part be not mine : it be plait under the idea and for the adornment of another ? " " by no means . it be neither necessary , nor would it be just . " " this object be _all mine ? " " that object be yours entirely . " open he paletot , arrange the guard splendidly across he chest , display as much and suppresse as little as he could : for he have no notion of concealing what he admire and think decorative . as to the box , he pronounce it a superb bonbonniere -- he be fond of bonbon , by the way -- and as he always like to share with other what please himself , he would give he " dragee " as freely as he lent he book . amongst the kind brownies 's gifts leave in my desk , I forget to enumerate many a paper of chocolate comfit . he taste in these matters be southern , and what we think infantine . he simple lunch consist frequently of a " brioche , " which , as often as not , to share with some child of the third division . " a present c'est un fait accompli , " say he , re-adjust he paletot ; and we have no more word on the subject . after look over the two volume he have bring , and cut away some page with he penknife ( he generally prune before lend he book , especially if they be novel , and sometimes I be a little provoke at the severity of he censorship , the retrenchment interrupt the narrative ) , he rise , politely touch he bonnet - grec , and bade I a civil good - day . " we be friend now , " think I , " till the next time we quarrel . " we _might have quarrell again that very same evening , but , wonderful to relate , fail , for once , to make the most of we opportunity . contrary to all expectation , m . arrive at the study - hour . have see so much of he in the morning , we do not look for he presence at night . no sooner be we seat at lesson , however , than he appear . I own I be glad to see he , so glad that I could not help greet he arrival with a smile ; and when he make he way to the same seat about which so serious a misunderstanding have formerly arisen , I take good care not to make too much room for he ; he watch with a jealous , side - long look , to see whether I shrank away , but I do not , though the bench be a little crowded . I be lose the early impulse to recoil from . Habituate to the paletot and bonnet - grec , the neighbourhood of these garment seem no longer uncomfortable or very formidable . I do not now sit restrain , " asphyxiee " ( as he use to say ) at he side ; I stir when I wish to stir , coughe when it be necessary , even yawn when I be tired -- do , in short , what I pleased , blindly reliant upon he indulgence . do my temerity , this evening at least , meet the punishment it perhaps merit ; he be both indulgent and good - natured ; not a cross glance shot from he eye , not a hasty word leave he lip . till the very close of the evening , he do not indeed address I at all , yet I feel , somehow , that he be full of friendliness . Silence be of different kind , and breathe different meaning ; no word could inspire a pleasanter content than do 's worldless presence . when the tray come in , and the bustle of supper commence , he just say , as he retire , that he wish I a good night and sweet dream ; and a good night and sweet dream I have . . . yet the reader be advise not to be in any hurry with he kindly conclusion , or to suppose , with a over -hasty charity , that from that day m . become a change character -- easy to live with , and no longer apt to flash danger and discomfort round he . no ; he be naturally a little man of unreasonable mood . when over - wrotch , which he often be , he become acutly irritable ; and , besides , he vein be dark with a livid belladon na tincture , the essence of jealousy . I do not mean merely the tender jealousy of the heart , but that sterner , narrower sentiment whose seat be in the head . I use to think , as I look at . , while he be knitt he brow or protrud he lip over some exercise of mine , which have not as many fault as he wish ( for he like I to commit fault : a knot of blunder be sweet to he as a cluster of nut
nut ) , that he have point of resemblance to . I think so still . in a shameless disregard of magnanimity , he resemble the great emperor . m . would have quarrell with twenty learn woman , would have unblushingly carry on a system of petty bickering and recrimination with a whole capital of cotery , never trouble himself about loss or lack of dignity . he would have exil fifty , if , they have annoyed , offended , outrivalled , or oppose he . I well remember a hot episode of he with a certain -- a lady temporarily employ by to give lesson in history . she be clever -- that be , she know a good deal ; and , besides , thoroughly possess the art of make the most of what she know ; of word and confidence she hold unlimited command . she personal appearance be far from destitute of advantage ; I believe many people would have pronounce she " a fine woman ; " and yet there be point in she robust and ample attraction , as well as in she bustling and demonstrative presence , which , it appear , the nice and capricious taste of m . could not away with . the sound of she voice , echo through the carre , would put he into a strange take ; she long free step -- almost stride -- along the corridor , would often make he snatch up he papers and decamp on the instant . with malicious intent he bethotch himself , one day , to intrude on she class ; as quick as lightning he gather she method of instruction ; it differ from a pet plan of he own . with little ceremony , and less courtesy , he point out what he term she error . whether he expect submission and attention , I know not ; he meet a acrid opposition , accompany by a round reprimand for he certainly unjustifiable interference . instead of withdraw with dignity , as he might still have do , he throw down the gauntlet of defiance . , bellicose as a , pick it up in a minute . she snap she finger in the intermeddler 's face ; she rush upon he with a storm of word . be eloquent ; but be voluble . a system of fierce antagonism ensue . instead of laugh in he sleeve at he fair foe , with all she sore amour -propre and loud self -assertion , . detest she with intense seriousness ; he honoure she with he earnest fury ; he pursue she vindictively and implacably , refuse to rest peaceably in he bed , to derive due benefit from he meal , or even serenely to relish he cigar , till she be fairly root out of the establishment . the Professor conquer , but I can not say that the laurel of this victory shadow gracefully he temple . once I venture to hint as much . to my great surprise he allow that I might be right , but averr that when bring into contact with either man or woman of the coarse , self - complacent quality , whereor be a specimen , he have no control over he own passion ; a unspeakable and active aversion impell he to a war of extermination . three month afterwards , hear that he vanquish foe have meet with reverse , and be likely to be really distress for want of employment , he forget he hatred , and alike active in good and evil , he move heaven and earth till he find she a place . upon she come to make up former difference , and thank he for he recent kindness , the old voice -- a little loud -- the old manner -- a little forward -- so act upon he that in ten minute he start up and bow she , or rather himself , out of the room , in a transport of nervous irritation . to pursue a somewhat audacious parallel , in a love of power , in a eager grasp after supremacy , be like . he be a man not always to be submit to . sometimes it be needful to resist ; it be right to stand still , to look up into he eye and tell he that he requirement go beyond reason -- that he absolutism verge on tyranny . the dawning , the first development of peculiar talent appear within he range , and under he rule , curiously excited , even disturb he . he watch its struggle into life with a scowl ; he hold back he hand -- perhaps say , " come on if you have strength , " but would not aid the birth . when the pang and peril of the first conflict be over , when the breath of life be draw , when he see the lung expand and contract , when he feel the heart beat and discover life in the eye , he do not yet offer to foster . " prove yourself true ere I cherish you , " be he ordinance ; and how difficult he make that proof ! what thorn and brier , what flint , he strew in the path of foot not inure to rough travel ! he watch tearlessly -- ordeal that he exact should be pass through -- fearlessly . he follow footprint that , as they approach the bourne , be sometimes mark in blood -- follow they grimly , hold the austerest police - watch over the pain - press pilgrim . and when at last he allow a rest , before slumber might close the eyelid , he open those same lid wide , with pitiless finger and thumb , and gaze deep through the pupil and the irid
irid into the brain , into the heart , to search if Vanity , or , or , in any of its subtlest form , be discoverable in the furthest recess of existence . if , at last , he let the neophyte sleep , it be but a moment ; he wake he suddenly up to apply new test : he send he on irksome errand when he be stagger with weariness ; he try the temper , the sense , and the health ; and it be only when every severest test have be apply and endure , when the most corrosive aquafortis have be use , and fail to tarnish the ore , that he admit it genuine , and , still in clouded silence , stamp it with he deep brand of approval . I speak not ignorant of these evils . till the date at which the last chapter close , . have not be my professor -- he have not give I lesson , but about that time , accidentally hear I one day acknowledge a ignorance of some branch of education ( I think it be arithmetic ) , which would have disgrace a charity - school boy , as he very truly remark , he take I in hand , examine I first , find I , I need not say , abundantly deficient , give I some book and appoint I some tasnks . he do this at first with pleasure , indeed with unconcealed exultation , condescende to say that he believe I be " bonne et pa trop faible " ( i.e. well enough dispose , and not wholly destitute of part ) , but , owe he suppose to adverse circumstance , " as yet in a state of wretchedly imperfect mental development . " the beginning of all effort have indeed with I be mark by a preternatural imbecility . I never could , even in form a common acquaintance , assert or prove a claim to average quickness . a depressing and difficult passage have preface every new page I have turn in life . so long as this passage last , . be very kind , very good , very forbearing ; he see the sharp pain inflict , and feel the weighty humiliation impos by my own sense of incapacity ; and word can hardly do justice to he tenderness and helpfulness . he own eye would moisten , when tear of shame and effort cloude mine ; burden as he be with work , he would steal half he brief space of recreation to give to I . but , strange grief ! when that heavy and overcast dawn begin at last to yield to day ; when my faculty begin to struggle themselves , free , and my time of energy and fulfilment come ; when I voluntarily double , treble , quadruple the tasnks he set , to please he as I think , he kindness become sternness ; the light change in he eye from a beam to a spark ; he fret , he oppose , he curb I imperiously ; the more I do , the harder I work , the less he seem content . Sarcasm of which the severity amaze and puzzl I , harass my ear ; then flow out the bitterest inuendo against the " pride of intellect . " I be vaguly threaten with I know not what doom , if I ever trespass the limit proper to my sex , and conceive a contraband appetite for unfeminine knowledge . ! I have no such appetite . what I love , it joye I by any effort to content ; but the noble hunger for science in the abstract -- the godlike thirst after discovery -- these feeling be know to I but by briefest flash . yet , when m . sneer at I , I want to possess they more fully ; he injustice stir in I ambitious wish -- it impart a strong stimulus -- it give wing to aspiration . in the beginning , before I have penetrate to motive , that uncomprehended sneer of he make my heart ache , but by - and - by it only warm the blood in my vein , and send add action to my pulse . whatever my power -- feminine or the contrary -- have give they , and I feel resolute to be asham of no faculty of he bestowal . the combat be very sharp for a time . I seem to have lose 's affection ; he treat I strangely . in he most unjust moments he would insinuate that I have deceive he when I appear , what he call " faible " -- that be incompetent ; he say I have feign a false incapacity . again , he would turn suddenly round and accuse I of the most far - fetch imitation and impossible plagiarism , assert that I have extract the pith out of book I have not so much as hear of -- and over the perusal of which I should infallibly have fall down in a sleep as deep as that of . once , upon he preferring such a accusation , I turn upon he -- I rise against he . gather a armful of he book out of my desk , I fill my apron and pour they in a heap upon he estrade , at he foot . " take they away , , " I say , " and teach I no more . I never ask to be make learned , and you compel I to feel very profoundly that learn be not happiness . " and return to my desk , I lay my head on my arm , nor would I speak to he for two day afterwards . he pain and chagrin I .
. he affection have be very sweet and dear -- a pleasure new and incomparable : now that this seem withdrawn , I car not for he lesson . the book , however , be not take away ; they be all restore with careful hand to they place , and he come as usual to teach I . he make he peace somehow -- too readily , perhaps : I ought to have stood out longer , but when he look kind and good , and hold out he hand with amity , memory refuse to reproduce with due force he oppressive moment . and then , reconcilement be always sweet ! on a certain morning a message come from my godmother , invite I to attend some notable lecture to be deliver in the same public room before describe . have bring the message himself , and deliver it verbally to , who have not scruple to follow the step of , then pass to the first classe , and , in he presence , stand " carrement " before my desk , hand in apron - pocket , and rehearse the same , saucily and aloud , conclude with the word , " est vraiment beau , Mademoiselle , ce jeune docteur ! Quel yeux -- quel regard ! Tenez ! be le coeur tout emu ! " when she be go , my professor demand of I why I suffer " cette fille effrontee , cette creature san pudeur , " to address I in such term . I have no pacifying answer to give . the term be precisely such as -- a young lady in whose skull the organ of reverence and reserve be not largely develop -- be in the constant habit of use . besides , what she say about the young doctor be true enough . _was_ handsome ; he have fine eye and a thrilling : glance . a observation to that effect actually form itself into sound on my lip . " Elle ne dit que la verite , " I say . " ah ! vous trouvez ? " " Mais , sand doute . " the lesson to which we have that day to submit be such as to make we very glad when it terminate . at it be close , the release , pupil rush out , half - trembling , half - exultant . I , too , be go . a mandate to remain arrest I . I mutter that I want some fresh air sadly -- the stove be in a glow , the classe over -heated . a inexorable voice merely recommend silence ; and this salamander -- for whom no room ever see too hot --sitt down between my desk and the stove -- a situation in which he ought to have felt broil , but do not -- proceed to confront I with -- a quotation ! in 's soul rank a chronic suspicion that I know both and . as monkey be say to have the power of speech if they would but use it , and be report to conceal this faculty in fear of it be be turn to they detriment , so to I be ascribe a fund of knowledge which I be suppose criminally and craftily to conceal . the privileges of a " classical education , " it be insinuated , have be mine ; on flower of I have revell ; a golden store , hive in memory , now silently sustain my effort , and privily nurture my wit . a hundred expedient do employ to surprise my secret -- to wheedle , to threaten , to startle it out of I . sometimes he place and latin book in my way , and then watch I , as of 's jailor tempt she with the warrior 's accoutrement , and lay in wait for the issue . again he quote I know not what author and passage , and while roll out they sweet and sound line ( the classic tone fall musically from he lip -- for he have a good voice -- remarkable for compass , modulation , and matchless expression ) , he would fix on I a vigilant , piercing , and often malicious eye . it be evident he sometimes expect great demonstration ; they never occur , however ; not comprehend , of course I could neither be charme nor annoyed . baffle -- almost angry -- he still cling to he fix idea ; my susceptibility be pronounce marble -- my face a mask . it appear as if he could not be bring to accept the homely truth , and take I for what I be : man , and woman too , must have delusion of some sort ; if not make ready to they hand , they will invent exaggeration for themselves . at moments I _did_ wish that he suspicion have be better foun . there be time when I would have give my right hand to possess the treasure he ascribe to I . he deserve condign punishment for he testy crotchet . I could have glory in bring home to he he worst apprehension astoundingly realize . I could have exult to burst on he vision , confront and confound he " lunette , " one blaze of acquirement . oh ! why do nobody undertake to make I clever while I be young enough to learn , that I might , by one grand , sudden , inhuman revelation -- one cold , cruel , overwhelme triumph -- have for ever crush the mocking spirit out of ! ! no such feat be in my power . to -day , as usual , he quotation fell ineffectual : he soon shifte he ground . " woman of intellect " be he next theme : here he be
be at home . a " woman of intellect , " it appear , be a sort of " lusus natura , " a luckless accident , a thing for which there be neither place nor use in creation , want neither as wife nor worker . anticipate she in the first office . he believe in he soul that lovely , placid , and passive feminine mediocrity be the only pillow on which manly thought and sense could find rest for it be ach temple ; and as to work , male mind alone could work to any good practical result -- hein ? this " hein ? " be a note of interrogation intend to draw from I contradiction or objection . however , I only say -- " ne I regarde pa : je ne be 'en soucie pa ; " and presently add -- " may I go , ? they have ring the bell for the second dejeuner " ( _i.e._ luncheon ) . " what of that ? you be not hungry ? " " indeed I be , " I say ; " I have have nothing since breakfast , at seven , and should have nothing till dinner , at five , if I miss this bell . " " well , he be in the same plight , but I might share with he . " and he break in two the " brioche " intend for he own refreshment , and give I half . truly he bark be worse than he bite ; but the really formidable attack be yet to come . while eat he cake , I could not forbear express my secret wish that I really know all of which he accuse I . " do I sincerely feel myself to be a ignoramus ? " he ask , in a softened tone . if I have reply meekly by a unqualified affirmative , I believe he would have stretch out he hand , and we should have be friend on the spot , but I answer -- " not exactly . I be ignorant , , in the knowledge you ascribe to I , but I _sometime , not _always , feel a knowledge of my own . " " what do I mean ? " he inquire , sharply . unable to answer this question in a breath , I evad it by change of subject . he have now finish he half of the brioche feel sure that on so trifl a fragment he could not have satisfy he appetite , as indeed I have not appease mine , and inhal the fragrance of baked apple afar from the refectory , I venture to inquire whether he do not also perceive that agreeable odour . he confess that he do . I say if he would let I out by the garden - door , and permit I just to run across the court , I would fetch he a plateful ; and add that I believe they be excellent , as have a very good method of baking , or rather stewing fruit , put in a little spice , sugar , and a glass or two of vin blanc -- might I go ? " Petite gourmande ! " say he , smile , " I have not forget how pleased you be with the pate a la creme I once give you , and you know very well , at this moment , that to fetch the apple for I will be the same as get they for yourself . go , then , but come back quickly . " and at last he liberate I on parole . my own plan be to go and return with speed and good faith , to put the plate in at the door , and then to vanish incontinent , leave all consequence for future settlement . that intolerably keen instinct of he seem to have anticipate my scheme : he meet I at the threshold , hurrie I into the room , and fix I in a minute in my former seat . take the plate of fruit from my hand , he divide the portion intend only for himself , and order I to eat my share . I comply with no good grace , and vex , I suppose , by my reluctance , he open a masked and dangerous battery . all he have yet say , I could count as mere sound and fury , signify nothing : not so of the present attack . it consist in a unreasonable proposition with which he have before afflict I : namely , that on the next public examination - day I should engage -- foreigner as I be -- to take my place on the first form of first - class pupil , and with they improvise a composition in french , on any subject any spectator might dictate , without benefit of grammar or lexicon . I know what the result of such a experiment would be . I , to whom nature have deny the impromptu faculty ; who , in public , be by nature a cypher ; whose time of mental activity , even when alone , be not under the meridian sun ; who need the fresh silence of morning , or the recluse peace of evening , to win from the one evidence of he presence , one proof of he force ; I , with whom that Impulse be the most intractable , the most capricious , the most maddening of master ( he before I always accept ) -- a deity which sometimes , under circumstance -- apparently propitious , would not speak when question , would not hear when appeal to , would not , when seek , be find ; but would stand , all cold , all indurate
indurate , all granite , a dark with carven lip and blank eye - ball , and breast like the stone face of a tomb ; and again , suddenly , at some turn , some sound , some long - trembl sob of the wind , at some rushing past of a unseen stream of electricity , the irrational demon would wake unsolicited , would stir strangely alive , would rush from its pedestal like a pertur Dagon , call to its votary for a sacrifice , whatever the hour -- to its victim for some blood , or some breath , whatever the circumstance or scene -- rouse its priest , treacherously promise vaticination , perhaps fill its temple with a strange hum of oracle , but sure to give half the significance to fateful wind , and grudge to the desperate listener even a miserable remnant -- yield it sordidly , as though each word have be a drop of the deathless ichor of its own dark vein . and this tyrant I be to compel into bondage , and make it improvise a theme , on a school estrade , between a Mathilde and a Coralie , under the eye of a , for the pleasure , and to the inspiration of a bourgeois of ! upon this argument and I do battle more than once -- strong battle , with confused noise of demand and rejection , exaction and repulse . on this particular day I be soundly rat . " the obstinacy of my whole sex , " it seem , be concentrate in I ; I have a " orgueil de diable . " I fear to fail , forsooth ! what do it matter whether I fail or not ? who be I that I should not fail , like my betters ? it would do I good to fail . he want to see I worst ( I know he do ) , and one minute he pause to take breath . " would I speak now , and be tractable ? " " never would I be tractable in this matter . law itself should not compel I . I would pay a fine , or undergo a imprisonment , rather than write for a show and to order , perch up on a platform . " " could softer motive influence I ? would I yield for friendship 's sake ? " " not a whit , not a hair - breadth . no form of friendship under the sun have a right to exact such a concession . no true friendship would harass I thus . " he suppose then ( with a sneer -- m . could sneer supremely , curl he lip , open he nostril , contract he eyelid ) -- he suppose there be but one form of appeal to which I would listen , and of that form it be not for he to make use . " Under certain persuasions , from certain quarter , je vous vois d'ici , " say he , " eagerly subscrib to the sacrifice , passionately arm for the effort . " " make a simpleton , a warning , and a example of myself , before a hundred and fifty of the ' papa ' and ' mamma ' of . " and here , lose patience , I break out afresh with a cry that I want to be liberate -- to get out into the air -- I be almost in a fever . " ! " say the inexorable , " this be a mere pretext to run away ; _he_ be not hot , with the stove close at he back ; how could I suffer , thoroughly screen by he person ? " " I do not understand he constitution . I know nothing of the natural history of salamander . for my own part , I be a phlegmatic islander , and sit in a oven do not agree with I ; at least , might I step to the well , and get a glass of water -- the sweet apple have make I thirsty ? " " if that be all , he would do my errand . " he go to fetch the water . of course , with a door only on the latch behind I , I lose not my opportunity . Ere he return , he half - worried prey have escape . . the Dryad . the spring be advancing , and the weather have turn suddenly warm . this change of temperature bring with it for I , as probably for many other , temporary decrease of strength . slight exertion at this time leave I overcome with fatigue -- sleepless night entail languid day . one afternoon , have walk the distance of half a league to the church , I come back weary and exhaust ; and take refuge in my solitary sanctuary , the first classe , I be glad to sit down , and to make of my desk a pillow for my arm and head . awhile I listen to the lullaby of be humming in the berceau , and watch , through the glass door and the tender , lightly - strewn spring foliage , and a gay party of friend , whom she have entertain that day at dinner after morning mass , walk in the centre - alley under orchard bough dress at this season in blossom , and wear a colouring as pure and warm as mountain - snow at sun-rise . my principal attraction towards this group of guest lay , I remember , in one figure -- that of a handsome young girl whom I have see before as a visitor at 's , and of whom I have be vaguly tell that she be a " filleule , " or
or god - daughter , of 's , and that between she mother , or aunt , or some other female relation of hers , and the Professor , have exist of old a special friendship . m . be not of the holiday band to - day , but I have see this young girl with he ere now , and as far as distant observation could enable I to judge , she seem to enjoy he with the frank ease of a ward with a indulgent guardian . I have see she run up to he , put she arm through he , and hang upon he . once , when she do so , a curiious sensation have strike through I -- a disagreeable anticipatory sensation -- one of the family of presentiment , I suppose -- but I refuse to analyze or dwell upon it . while watch this girl , by name , and follow the gleam of she bright silk robe ( she be always richly dress , for she be say to be wealthy ) through the flower and the glancing leave of tender emerald , my eye become dazzled -- they close ; my lassitude , the warmth of the day , the hum of be and bird , all lull I , and at last I sleep . two hour stole over I . Ere I wake , the sun have decline out of sight behind the towering house , the garden and the room be grey , be have go homeward , and the flower be close ; the party of guest , too , have vanish ; each alley be void . on waking , I feel much at ease -- not chill , as I ink to have be after sit so still for at least two hour ; my cheek and arm be not benumb by pressure against the hard desk . no wonder . instead of the bare wood on which i have lay they , I find a thick shawl , carefully fold , substitute for support , and another shawl ( both take from the corridor where such thing hang ) wrap warmly round I . who have do this ? who be my friend ? which of the teacher ? which of the pupil ? none , except , be inimical to I ; but which of they have the art , the thought , the habit , of benefiting thus tenderly ? which of they have a step so quiet , a hand so gentle , but I should have hear or feel she , if she have approach or touch I in a day - sleep ? as to , that bright young creature be not gentle at all , and would certainly have pull I out of my chair , if she have meddle in the matter . I say at last : " it be 's do ; she have come in , see I asleep , and think I might take cold . she consider I a useful machine , answer well the purpose for which it be hire ; so would not have I needlessly injure . and now , " methotch , " I will take a walk ; the evening be fresh , and not very chill . " so I open the glass door and step into the berceau . I go to my own alley : have it be dark , or even dusk , I should have hardly venture there , for I have not yet forget the curiious illusion of vision ( if illusion it be ) experience in that place some month ago . but a ray of the setting sun burnish still the grey crown of ; nor have all the bird of the garden yet vanish into they nests amongst the tuft shrub and thick wall - ivy . I pace up and down , think almost the same thought I have ponder that night when I bury my glass jar -- how I should make some advance in life , take another step towards a independent position ; for this train of reflection , though not lately pursue , have never by I be wholly abandon ; and whenever a certain eye be avert from I , and a certain countenance grow dark with unkindness and injustice , into that track of speculation do I at once strike ; so that , little by little , I have laid half a plan . " cost little , " say I to myself , " in this economical town of , where people be more sensible than I understand they be in dear old -- infinitely less worried about appearance , and less emulous of display -- where nobody be in the least asham to be quite as homely and save as he find convenient . - rent , in a prudently chosen situation , need not be high . when I shall have save one thousand franc , I will take a tenement with one large room , and two or three smaller one , furnish the first with a few benche and desk , a black tableau , a estrade for myself ; upon it a chair and table , with a sponge and some white chalk ; begin with take day - pupil , and so work my way upwards . 's commencement be -- as I have often hear she say -- from no higher starting - point , and where be she now ? all these premise and this garden be hers , buy with she money ; she have a competency already secure for old age , and a flourish establishment under she direction , which will furnish a career for she child . " courage , ! with self - denial and economy now , and steady exertion by - and -
- by , a object in life need not fail you . venture not to complain that such a object be too selfish , too limited , and lack interest ; be content to labour for independence until you have prove , by win that prize , you right to look higher . but afterwards , be there nothing more for I in life -- no true home -- nothing to be dearer to I than myself , and by its paramount preciousness , to draw from I better thing than I care to culture for myself only ? nothing , at whose foot I can willingly lay down the whole burden of human egotism , and gloriously take up the nobler charge of labouring and live for other ? I suppose , , the orb of you life be not to be so reound : for you , the crescent - phase must suffice . very good . I see a huge mass of my fellow - creature in no better circumstance . I see that a great many man , and more woman , hold they span of life on condition of denial and privation . I find no reason why I should be of the few favour . I believe in some blending of hope and sunshine sweeten the worst lot . I believe that this life be not all ; neither the begin nor the end . I believe while I tremble ; I trust while I weep . " so this subject be done with . it be right to look we life - account bravely in the face now and then , and settle they honestly . and he be a poor self - swindler who lie to himself while he reckon the item , and set down under the head -- happiness that which be misery . call anguish -- anguish , and despair -- despair ; write both down in strong character with a resolute pen : you will the better pay you debt to . Falsify : insert " privilege " where you should have write " pain ; " and see if you mighty creditor will allow the fraud to pass , or accept the coin with which you would cheat he . offer to the strongest -- if the darkest angel of 's host -- water , when he have ask blood -- will he take it ? not a whole pale sea for one red drop . I settle another account . Pause before -- the giant and patriarch of the garden -- and lean my brow against he knotty trunk , my foot rest on the stone seal the small sepulchre at he root ; and I recal the passage of feeling therein bury ; I recal ; my warm affection for he ; my faith in he excellence ; my delight in he grace . what be become of that curiious one - sided friendship which be half marble and half life ; only on one hand truth , and on the other perhaps a jest ? be this feel dead ? I do not know , but it be bury . sometimes I think the tomb unquiet , and dream strangely of disturbed earth , and of hair , still golden , and live , obtrude through coffin - chink . have I be too hasty ? I use to ask myself ; and this question would occur with a cruel sharpness after some brief chance interview with . he have still such kind look , such a warm hand ; he voice still keep so pleasant a tone for my name ; I never like " " so well as when he utter it . but I learn in time that this benignity , this cordiality , this music , belong in no shape to I : it be a part of himself ; it be the honey of he temper ; it be the balm of he mellow mood ; he impart it , as the ripe fruit reward with sweetness the rifl bee ; he diffuse it about he , as sweet plant shed they perfume . do the nectarine love either the bee or bird it feed ? be the sweetbriar enamoured of the air ? " good - night , ; you be good , you be beautiful ; but you be not mine . good - night , and bless you ! " thus I close my musing . " good - night " leave my lip in sound ; I hear the word speak , and then I hear a echo --quite close . " good - night , ; or , rather , good - evening -- the sun be scarce set ; I hope you sleep well ? " I start , but be only discompose a moment ; I know the voice and speaker . " , ! when ? where ? " " you may well inquire when -- where . it seem you turn day into night , and choose a desk for a pillow ; rather hard lodging --? " " it be soften for I , Monsieur , while I sleep . that unseen , gift - bring thing which haunt my desk , remember I . no matter how I fall asleep ; I awoke pillow and cover . " " do the shawl keep you warm ? " " very warm . do you ask thanks for they ? " " no . you look pale in you slumber : be you home - sick ? " " to be home - sick , one must have a home ; which I have not . " " then you have more need of a careful friend . I scarcely know any one , , who need a friend more absolutely than you ; you very fault imperatively require it .
. you want so much check , regulate , and keep down . " this idea of " keep down " never leave 's head ; the most habitual subjugation would , in my case , have fail to relieve he of it . no matter ; what do it signify ? I listen to he , and do not trouble myself to be too submissive ; he occupation would have be go have I leave he nothing to " keep down . " " you need watch , and watch over , " he pursue ; " and it be well for you that I see this , and do my best to discharge both duty . I watch you and other pretty closely , pretty constantly , nearer and oftener than you or they think . do you see that window with a light in it ? " he point to a lattice in one of the college boarding - house . " that , " say he , " be a room I have hire , nominally for a study -- virtually for a post of observation . there I sit and read for hour together : it be my way --my taste . my book be this garden ; its contents be human nature -- female human nature . I know you all by heart . ah ! I know you well -- . , the Parisienne -- cette maitresse - femme , my cousin herself . " " it be not right , . " " comment ? it be not right ? by whose creed ? do some dogma of or condemn it ? what be that to I ? I be no protestant . my rich father ( for , though I have know poverty , and once starve for a year in a garret in -- starve wretchedly , often on a meal a day , and sometimes not that -- yet I be bear to wealth ) -- my rich father be a good catholic ; and he give I a priest and a Jesuit for a tutor . I retain he lesson ; and to what discoveries , grand ! have they not aide I ! " " Discoveries make by stealth seem to I dishonourable discoveries . " " Puritaine ! I doubt it not . yet see how my 's system work . you know the ? " " partially . " he laugh . " you say right -- _' partially '_ ; whereas _I_ know she _thoroughly ; there be the difference . she play before I the amiable ; offer I patte de velour ; caress , flatter , fawn on I . now , I be accessible to a woman 's flattery -- accessible against my reason . though never pretty , she be -- when I first know she -- young , or know how to look young . like all her countrywoman , she have the art of dressing -- she have a certain cool , easy , social assurance , which spare I the pain of embarrassment -- " " , that must have be unnecessary . I never see you embarrass in my life . " " Mademoiselle , you know little of I ; I can be embarrass as a petite pensionnaire ; there be a fund of modesty and diffidence in my nature -- " " Monsieur , I never see it . " " , it be there . you ought to have see it . " " Monsieur , I have observ you in public -- on platform , in tribune , before title and crown head -- and you be as easy as you be in the third division . " " Mademoiselle , neither titles nor crown head excite my modesty ; and publicity be very much my element . I like it well , and breathe in it quite freely ; -- but -- but , in short , here be the sentiment bring into action , at this very moment ; however , I disdain to be worst by it . if , , I be a marrying man ( which I be not ; and you may spare yourself the trouble of any sneer you may be contemplate at the thought ) , and find it necessary to ask a lady whether she could look upon I in the light of a future husband , then would it be prove that I be as I say -- modest " I quite believe he now ; and , in believe , I honoure he with a sincerity of esteem which make my heart ache . " as to the , " he go on , recover himself , for he voice have alte a little , " she once intend to be ; and I do not know whither I might have be lead , but for yonder little lattice with the light . ah , magic lattice ! what miracle of discovery hast thou wrotch ! yes , " he pursue , " I have see she rancour , she vanity , she levity -- not only here , but elsewhere : I have witness what buckler I against all she arts : I be safe from poor . " " and my pupil , " he presently recommence , " those blonde jeune filles -- so mild and meek -- I have see the most reserve -- romp like boy , the demurest -- snatch grape from the wall , shake pear from the tree . when the english teacher come , I see she , mark she early preference for this alley , notice she taste for seclusion , watch she well , long before she and I come to speak term ; do you recollect my once come silently and offer you a little knot of white violet when
when we be stranger ? " " I recollect it . I dry the violet , keep they , and have they still . " " it please I when you take they peacefully and promptly , without prudery -- that sentiment which I ever dread to excite , and which , when it be reveal in eye or gesture , I vindictively detest . to return . not only do _I_ watch you ; but often -- especially at eventide -- another guardian angel be noiselessly hover near : night after night my cousin have steal down yonder step , and glidingly pursue you movement when you do not see she . " " but , , you could not from the distance of that window see what pass in this garden at night ? " " by moonlight I possibly might with a glass -- I use a glass -- but the garden itself be open to I . in the shed , at the bottom , there be a door lead into a court , which communicate with the college ; of that door I possess the key , and thus come and go at pleasure . this afternoon I come through it , and find you asleep in classe ; again this evening I have avail myself of the same entrance . " I could not help say , " if you be a wicked , design man , how terrible would all this be ! " he attention seem incapable of be arrest by this view of the subject : he lit he cigar , and while he puffe it , lean against a tree , and look at I in a cool , amused way he have when he humour be tranquil , I think proper to go on sermonize he : he often lecture I by the hour together -- I do not see why I should not speak my mind for once . so I tell he my impression concern he Jesuit - system . " the knowledge it bring you be buy too dear , Monsieur ; this come and go by stealth degrade you own dignity . " " my dignity ! " he cry , laugh ; " when do you ever see I trouble my head about my dignity ? it be you , , who be 's digne . ' how often , in you high insular presence , have I take a pleasure in trampling upon , what you be pleased to call , my dignity ; tear it , scatter it to the wind , in those mad transport you witness with such hauteur , and which I know you think very like the raving of a third - rate actor . " " Monsieur , I tell you every glance you cast from that lattice be a wrong do to the best part of you own nature . to study the human heart thus , be to banquet secretly and sacrilegiously on 's apple . I wish you be a protestant . " indifferent to the wish , he smoke on . after a space of smile yet thoughtful silence , he say , rather suddenly -- " I have see other thing . " " what other thing ? " take the weed from he lip , he throw the remnant amongst the shrub , where , for a moment , it lay glow in the gloom . " look , at it , " say he : " be not that spark like a eye watch you and I ? " he take a turn down the walk ; presently return , he go on :--" I have see , , thing to I unaccountable , that have make I watch all night for a solution , and I have not yet find it . " the tone be peculiar ; my vein thrill ; he see I shiver . " be you afraid ? whether be it of my word or that red jealous eye just wink itself out ? " " I be cold ; the night grow dark and late , and the air be change ; it be time to go in . " " it be little past eight , but you shall go in soon . answer I only this question . " yet he pause ere he put it . the garden be truly grow dark ; dusk have come on with cloud , and drop of rain begin to patter through the tree . I hope he would feel this , but , for the moment , he seem too much absorb to be sensible of the change . " , do you believe in the supernatural ? " " there be a difference of theory and belief on this point amongst as amongst other sects , " I answer . " why , , do you ask such a question ? " " why do you shrink and speak so faintly ? be you superstitious ? " " I be constitutionally nervous . I dislike the discussion of such subject . I dislike it the more because -- " " you believe ? " " no : but it have happen to I to experience impressions -- " " Since you come here ? " " yes ; not many month ago . " " here ?-- in this house ? " " yes . " " ! I be glad of it . I know it , somehow ; before you tell I . I be conscious of rapport between you and myself . you be patient , and I be choleric ; you be quiet and pale , and I be tan and fiery ; you be a strict protestant , and I be a sort of lay Jesuit : but we be alike -- there be affinity between we . do
do you see it , , when you look in the glass ? do you observe that you forehead be shape like mine -- that you eye be cut like mine ? do you hear that you have some of my tone of voice ? do you know that you have many of my look ? I perceive all this , and believe that you be bear under my star . yes , you be bear under my star ! Tremble ! for where that be the case with mortal , the thread of they destiny be difficult to disentangle ; knotting and catching occur -- sudden break leave damage in the web . but these ' impression , ' as you say , with English caution . I , too , have have my ' impression . ' " " Monsieur , tell I they . " " I desire no better , and intend no less . you know the legend of this house and garden ? " " I know it . yes . they say that hundred of year ago a nun be bury here alive at the foot of this very tree , beneath the ground which now bear we . " " and that in former day a nun 's ghost use to come and go here . " " , what if it come and go here still ? " " something come and go here : there be a shape frequent this house by night , different to any form that show themselves by day . I have indisputably see a something , more than once ; and to I its conventual weed be a strange sight , say more than they can do to any other living being . a nun ! " " Monsieur , I , too , have see it . " " I anticipate that . whether this nun be flesh and blood , or something that remain when blood be dry , and flesh be waste , she business be as much with you as with I , probably . well , I mean to make it out ; it have baffle I so far , but I mean to follow up the mystery . I mean -- " instead of tell what he mean , he raise he head suddenly ; I make the same movement in the same instant ; we both look to one point -- the high tree shadow the great berceau , and rest some of its bough on the roof of the first classe . there have be a strange and inexplicable sound from that quarter , as if the arm of that tree have sway of they own motion , and its weight of foliage have rush and crush against the massive trunk . yes ; there scarce stir a breeze , and that heavy tree be convulse , whilst the feathery shrub stood still . for some minute amongst the wood and leafage a rending and heaive go on . as it be , it seem to I that something more solid than either night - shadow , or branch - shadow , blacken out of the bole . at last the struggle cease . what birth succeed this travail ? what Dryad be bear of these throe ? we watch fixedly . a sudden bell ring in the house -- the prayer - bell . instantly into we alley there come , out of the berceau , a apparition , all black and white . with a sort of angry rush - close , close past we face -- sweep swiftly the very nun herself ! never have I see she so clearly . she look tall of stature , and fierce of gesture . as she go , the wind rose sobb ; the rain pour wild and cold ; the whole night seem to feel she . . the . where , it become time to inquire , be ? how far my intercourse with the sumptuous ? that intercourse have , for a interval , be suspend by absence ; and have be travel , divide some week between the province and capital of . apprise I of they return very shortly after it take place . I be walk one mild afternoon on a quiet boulevard , wander slowly on , enjoy the benign sun , and some thought be not unpleasing , when I see before I a group of rider , stop as if they have just encounter , and exchange greeting in the midst of the broad , smooth , linden - border path ; on one side a middle - aged gentleman and young lady , on the other -- a young and handsome man . very graceful be the lady 's mien , choice she appointment , delicate and stately she whole aspect . still , as I look , I feel they be know to I , and , draw a little nearer , I fully recognise they all : the , he daughter , and . how animated be 's face ! how true , how warm , yet how retire the joy it express ! this be the state of thing , this the combination of circumstance , at once to attract and enchain , to subdue and excite . the pearl he admire be in itself of great price and truest purity , but he be not the man who , in appreciate the gem , could forget its setting . have he see with the same youth , beauty , and , but on foot , alone , unguarded , and in simple attire , a dependent worker , a demi-grisette , he would have think she a pretty little creature , and would have love with he eye she movement and she mien , but it require other than this to conquer he
he as he be now vanquish , to bring he safe under dominion as now , without loss , and even with gain to he manly honour , one see that he be reduce ; there be about all the man of the world ; to satisfy himself do not suffice ; society must approve -- the world must admire what he do , or he count he measure false and futile . in he victrix he require all that be here visible -- the imprint of high cultivation , the consecration of a careful and authoritative protection , the adjunct that fashion decree , wealth purchase , and taste adjust ; for these condition he spirit stipulate ere it surrendere : they be here to the utmost fulfil ; and now , proud , impassioned , yet fearing , he do homage to as he sovereign . as for she , the smile of feeling , rather than of conscious power , sleep soft in she eye . they parte . he pass I at speed , hardly feel the earth he skim , and see nothing on either hand . he look very handsome ; mettle and purpose be rouse in he fully . " Papa , there be ! " cry a musical , friendly voice . " Lucy , dear lucy--_do_ come here ! " I hasten to she . she throw back she veil , and stoop from she saddle to kiss I . " I be come to see you to - morrow , " say she ; " but now to - morrow you will come and see I . " she name the hour , and I promise compliance . the morrow 's evening find I with she -- she and I shut into she own room . I have not see she since that occasion when she claim be bring into comparison with those of , and have so signally prevail ; she have much to tell I of she travels in the interval . a most animated , rapid speaker be she in such a tete - a - tete , a most lively describer ; yet with she artless diction and clear soft voice , she never seem to speak too fast or to say too much . my own attention I think would not soon have flag , but by - and - by , she herself seem to need some change of subject ; she hasten to wind up she narrative briefly . yet why she terminate with so concise a abridgment do not immediately appear ; silence follow -- a restless silence , not without symptom of abstraction . then , turn to I , in a diffident , half - appeal voice -- " -- " " well , I be at you side . " " be my cousin still at 's ? " " you cousin be still there ; you must be longe to see she . " " no -- not much . " " you want to invite she to spend another evening ? " " no ... I suppose she still talk about be marry ? " " not to any one you care for . " " but of course she still think of ? she can not have change she mind on that point , because it be so fix two month ago . " " why , you know , it do not matter . you see the term on which they stand . " " there be a little misunderstanding that even , certainly ; do she seem unhappy ? " " not she . to change the subject . have you hear or see nothing of , or from . during you absence ? " " have letter from he once or twice about business , I think . he undertake the management of some affair which require attention while we be away . seem to respect papa , and to have pleasure in oblige he . " " yes : you meet he yesterday on the boulevard ; you would be able to judge from he aspect that he friend need not be painfully anxious about he health ? " " seem to have think with you . I could not help smile . he be not particularly observant , you know , because he be often think of other thing than what pass before he eye ; but he say , as ride away , ` really it do a man good to see the spirit and energy of that boy . ' he call a boy ; I believe he almost think he so , just as he think I a little girl ; he be not speak to I , but drop that remark to himself . .... " again fall the appeal accent , and at the same instant she leave she chair , and come and sit on the stool at my foot . I like she . it be not a declaration I have often make concern my acquaintance , in the course of this book : the reader will bear with it for once . intimate intercourse , close inspection , disclose in only what be delicate , intelligent , and sincere ; therefore my regard for she lay deep . a admiration more superficial might have be more demonstrative ; mine , however , be quiet . " what have you to ask of ? " say I ; " be brave , and speak out " but there be no courage in she eye ; as it meet mine , it fall ; and there be no coolness on she cheek -- not a transient surface - blush , but a gather inward excitement raise its tint and its temperature . " Lucy , I _do_ wish to know you thought of . do ,
, _do_ give I you real opinion of he character , he disposition . " " he character stand high , and deservedly high . " " and he disposition ? tell I about he disposition , " she urge ; " you know he well . " " I know he pretty well . " " you know he home - side . you have see he with he mother ; speak of he as a son . " " he be a fine - hear son ; he mother 's comfort and hope , she pride and pleasure . " she hold my hand between hers , and at each favourable word give it a little caressing stroke . " in what other way be he good , ? " " be benevolent -- humanely dispose towards all he race , would have benignity for the lowest savage , or the worst criminal . " " I hear some gentleman , some of papa 's friend , who be talk about he , say the same . they say many of the poor patient at the hospital , who tremble before some pitiless and selfish surgeon , welcome he . " " they be right ; I have witness as much . he once take I over a hospital ; I see how he be receive : you father 's friend be right . " the softest gratitude animate she eye as she lift it a moment . she have yet more to say , but seem hesitat about time and place . be begin to reign ; she parlour fire already glow with twilight ruddiness ; but I think she wish the room dimmer , the hour later . " how quiet and seclude we feel here ! " I remark , to reassure she . " do we ? yes ; it be a still evening , and I shall not be call down to tea ; papa be dine out . " still hold my hand , she play with the finger unconsciously , dress they , now in she own ring , and now circle they with a twine of she beautiful hair ; she pat the palm against she hot cheek , and at last , have clear a voice that be naturally liquid as a lark 's , she say :-- " you must think it rather strange that I should talk so much about , ask so many question , take such a interest , but --" . " not at all strange ; perfectly natural ; you like he . " " and if I do , " say she , with slight quickness , " be that a reason why I should talk ? I suppose you think I weak , like my cousin ? " " if I think you one whit like , I would not sit here wait for you communication . I would get up , walk at my ease about the room , and anticipate all you have to say by a round lecture . go on . " " I mean to go on , " retort she ; " what else do you suppose I mean to do ? " and she look and speak -- the little of -- petulant , sensitive . " if , " say she , emphatically , " if I like till I be fit to die for like he , that alone could not license I to be otherwise than dumb --dumb as the grave --dumb as you , -- you know it -- and you know you would despise I if I fail in self - control , and whin about some rickety liking that be all on my side . " " it be true I little respect woman or girl who be loquacious either in boast the triumph , or bemoan the mortification , of feeling . but as to you , , speak , for I earnestly wish to hear you . tell I all it will give you pleasure or relief to tell : I ask no more . " " do you care for I , ? " " yes , I do , . " " and I love you . I have a odd content in be with you even when I be a little , troublesome , disobedient girl ; it be charme to I then to lavish on you my naughtiness and whim . now you be acceptable to I , and I like to talk with and trust you . so listen , . " and she settle herself , rest against my arm -- rest gently , not with honest 's fatiguing and selfish weight . " a few minute since you ask whether we have not hear from during we absence , and I say there be two letter for papa on business ; this be true , but I do not tell you all . " " you evad ? " " I shuffle and equivocate , you know . however , I be go to speak the truth now ; it be get darker ; one can talk at one 's ease . often let I open the letter - bag and give he out the contents . one morning , about three week ago , you do not know how surprised I be to find , amongst a dozen letter for , a note address to . I spy it at once , amidst all the rest ; the handwriting be not strange ; it attract I directly . I be go to say , ' Papa , here be another letter from ;' but the ' miss ' strike I mute . I actually never receive a letter from a gentleman before . ought I to have show it to papa , and let he open it and read
read it first ? I could not for my life , . I know so well papa 's idea about I : he forget my age ; he think I be a mere school - girl ; he be not aware that other people see I be grow up as tall as I shall be ; so , with a curiious mixture of feeling , some of they self - reproachful , and some so fluttering and strong , I can not describe they , I give papa he twelve letter -- he herd of possession -- and keep back my one , my ewe - lamb . it lay in my lap during breakfast , look up at I with a inexplicable meaning , make I feel myself a thing double - existent -- a child to that dear papa , but no more a child to myself . after breakfast I carry my letter up - stair , and have secure myself by turn the key in the door , I begin to study the outside of my treasure : it be some minute before I could get over the direction and penetrate the seal ; one do not take a strong place of this kind by instant storm -- one sit down a while before it , as beleaguer say . 's hand be like himself , , and so be he seal -- all clear , firm , and round -- no slovenly splash of wax -- a full , solid , steady drop -- a distinct impress ; no point turn harshly prick the optic nerve , but a clean , mellow , pleasant manuscript , that sooth you as you read . it be like he face -- just like the chiselling of he feature : do you know he autograph ? " " I have see it : go on . " " the seal be too beautiful to be break , so I cut it round with my scissors . on the point of read the letter at last , I once more draw back voluntarily ; it be too soon yet to drink that dratch -- the sparkle in the cup be so beautiful -- I would watch it yet a minute . then I remembe all at once that I have not say my prayer that morning . have hear papa go down to breakfast a little earlier than usual , I have be afraid of keep he wait , and have hasten to join he as soon as dress , think no harm to put off prayer till afterwards . some people would say I ought to have serve first and then man ; but I do not think heaven could be jealous of anything I might do for papa . I believe I be superstitious . a voice seem now to say that another feeling than filial affection be in question -- to urge I to pray before I da to read what I so long to read -- to deny myself yet a moment , and remember first a great duty . I have have these impulse ever since I can remember . I put the letter down and say my prayer , add , at the end , a strong entreaty that whatever happen , I might not be temp or lead to cause papa any sorrow , and might never , in caring for other , neglect he . the very thought of such a possibility , so pierce my heart that it make I cry . but still , , I feel that in time papa would have to be teach the truth , manage , and induce to hear reason . " I read the letter . Lucy , life be say to be all disappointment . _i_ be not disappoint . Ere I read , and while I read , my heart do more than throb -- it tremble fast -- every quiver seem like the pant of a animal athirst , laid down at a well and drink ; and the well prove quite full , gloriously clear ; it rise up munificently of its own impulse ; I see the sun through its gush , and not a mote , Lucy , no moss , no insect , no atom in the thrice - refin golden gurgle . " life , " she go on , " be say to be full of pain to some . I have read biography where the wayfarer seem to journey on from suffering to suffer ; where hope fly before he fast , never alight so near , or linger so long , as to give he hand a chance of one reali grasp . I have read of those who sow in tear , and whose harvest , so far from be reap in joy , perish by untimely blight , or be borne off by sudden whirlwind ; and , alas ! some of these meet the winter with empty garner , and die of utter want in the darkest and coldest of the year . " " be it they fault , , that they of whom you speak thus die ? " " not always they fault . some of they be good endeavour people . I be not endeavour , nor actively good , yet have cause I to grow in sun , due moisture , and safe protection , shelter , foster , teach , by my dear father ; and now -- now -- another come . love I . " for some minute we both pause on this climax . " do you father know ? " I inquire , in a low voice . " speak with deep respect of papa , but imply that he da not approach that quarter as yet ; he must first prove he worth : he add that he
he must have some light respect myself and my own feeling ere he venture to risk a step in the matter elsewhere . " " how do you reply ? " " I reply briefly , but I do not repulse he . yet I almost tremble for fear of make the answer too cordial : 's taste be so fastidious . I write it three time -- chasten and subdue the phrase at every rescript ; at last , have confect it till it see to I to resemble a morsel of ice flavoure with ever so slight a zest of fruit or sugar , I venture to seal and despatch it . " " excellent , ! you instinct be fine ; you understand . " " but how must I manage about papa ? there I be still in pain . " " do not manage at all . wait now . only maintain no further correspondence till you father know all , and give he sanction . " " will he ever give it ? " " time will show . wait . " " write one other letter , deeply grateful for my calm , brief note ; but I anticipat you advice , by say , that while my sentiment continue the same , I could not , without my father knowledge , write again . " " you act as you ink to have do ; so will feel : it will increase he pride in you , he love for you , if either be capable of increase . , that gentle hoar - frost of yours , surround so much pure , fine flame , be a priceless privilege of nature . " " you see I feel 's disposition , " say she . " I feel that no delicacy can be too exquisite for he treatment . " " it be perfectly prove that you comprehend he , and then -- whatever 's disposition , be he one who expect to be more nearly meet -- you would still act truthfully , openly , tenderly , with you father . " " Lucy , I trust I shall thus act always . oh , it will be pain to wake papa from he dream , and tell he I be no more a little girl ! " " be in no hurry to do so , . leave the revelation to time and you kind Fate . I also have notice the gentleness of she care for you : doubt not she will benignantly order the circumstance , and fitly appoint the hour . yes : I have think over you life just as you have yourself think it over ; I have make comparison like those to which you advert . we know not the future , but the past have be propitious . " as a child I fear for you ; nothing that have life be ever more susceptible than you nature in infancy : under harshness or neglect , neither you outward nor you inward self would have ripen to what they now be . much pain , much fear , much struggle , would have troublead the very line of you feature , break they regularity , would have harass you nerve into the fever of habitual irritation you would have lose in health and cheerfulness , in grace and sweetness . Providence have protect and culture you , not only for you own sake , but I believe for 's . he star , too , be fortunate : to develop fully the best of he nature , a companion like you be need : there you be , ready . you must be united . I know it the first day I see you together at . in all that mutually concern you and there seem to I promise , plan , harmony . I do not think the sunny youth of either will prove the forerunner of stormy age . I think it be deem good that you two should live in peace and be happy -- not as angels , but as few be happy amongst mortal . some life _are_ thus bless : it be 's will : it be the attesting trace and linger evidence of . other life run from the first another course . other traveller encounter weather fitful and gusty , wild and variable -- breast adverse wind , be belate and overtake by the early closing winter night . neither can this happen without the sanction of ; and I know that , amidst he boundless work , be somewhere store the secret of this last fate 's justice : I know that he treasure contain the proof as the promise of its mercy . " . . on the first of , we have all -- i.e . the twenty boarder and the four teacher -- notice to rise at five o'clock of the morning , to be dress and ready by six , to put ourselves under the command of M. le , who be to head we march forth from , for it be on this day he propose to fulfil he promise of take we to breakfast in the country . I , indeed , as the reader may perhaps remember , have not have the honour of a invitation when this excursion be first project -- rather the contrary ; but on my now make allusion to this fact , and wish to know how it be to be , my ear receive a pull , of which I do not venture to challenge the repetition by raising , further difficulty . " vous conseille de vous faire prier , " say , imperially menace the other ear . one Napoleonic compliment , however , be enough , so I make up my mind to be of the party .
. the morning break calm as summer , with singe of bird in the garden , and a light dew - mist that promise heat . we all say it would be warm , and we all feel pleasure in fold away heavy garment , and in assume the attire suite a sunny season . the clean fresh print dress , and the light straw bonnet , each make and trim as the french workwoman alone can make and trim , so as to unite the utterly unpretending with the perfectly become , be the rule of costume . nobody flaunt in faded silk ; nobody wear a second - hand best article . at six the bell ring merrily , and we pour down the staircase , through the carre , along the corridor , into the vestibule . there stand we Professor , wear , not he savage - look paletot and severe bonnet - grec , but a young - look belted blouse and cheerful straw hat . he have for we all the kindest good - morrow , and most of we for he have a thanksgiving smile . we be marshall in order and soon start . the street be yet quiet , and the boulevard be fresh and peaceful as fields . I believe we be very happy as we walk along . this chief of ours have the secret of give a certain impetus to happiness when he would ; just as , in a opposite mood , he could give a thrill to fear . he do not lead nor follow we , but walk along the line , give a word to every one , talk much to he favourite , and not wholly neglect even those he dislike . it be rather my wish , for a reason I have , to keep slightly aloon from notice , and be pair with , bear on my arm the dear pressure of that angel be not unsubstantial limb --( she continue in excellent case , and I can assure the reader it be no trifling business to bear the burden of she loveliness ; many a time in the course of that warm day I wish to goodness there have be less of the charming commodity ) --however , have she , as I say , I try to make she useful by interpose she always between myself and , shifte my place , accord as I hear he come up to the right hand or the left . my private motive for this manoeuvre might be trace to the circumstance of the new print dress I wear , be pink in colour -- a fact which , under we present convoy , make I feel something as I have feel , when , clad in a shawl with a red border , necessitate to traverse a meadow where pasture a bull . for awhile , the shifting system , together with some modification in the arrangement of a black silk scarf , answer my purpose ; but , by - and - by , he find out , that whether he come to this side or to that , be still he neighbour . the course of acquaintance between and he have never run so smooth that he temper do not undergo a certain crisping process whenever he hear she English accent : nothing in they disposition fitte ; they jar if they come in contact ; he hold she empty and affect ; she deem he bearish , meddling , repellent . at last , when he have change he place for about the sixth time , finde still the same untoward result to the experiment -- he thrust he head forward , settle he eye on mine , and demand with impatience , " Qu'est - ce que c'est ? Vous I jouez des tour ? " the word be hardly out of he mouth , however , ere , with he customary quickness , he seize the root of this proceed : in vain I shook out the long fringe , and spread forth the broad end of my scarf . " a - h -h ! c'est la robe rise ! " break from he lip , affect I very much like the sudden and irate low of some lord of the meadow . " it be only cotton , " I allege , hurriedly ; " and cheaper , and wash better than any other colour . " " est coquette comme dix Parisiennes , " he answer . " a - t - on jamais vu une Anglaise pareille . plutot son chapeau , et s gant , et s brodequin ! " these article of dress be just like what my companion wear ; certainly not one whit smarter -- perhaps rather plainer than most -- but have now get hold of he text , and I begin to chafe under the expect sermon . it go off , however , as mildly as the menace of a storm sometimes pass on a summer day . I get but one flash of sheet lightning in the shape of a single bantering smile from he eye ; and then he say , " courage !-- a vrai dire je ne sui pa fache , peut - etre meme suis je content qu 'on s'est fait si belle pour ma petite fete . " " tMais ma robe n'est pas belle , -- elle n'est que propre . " " J'aime la proprete , " say he . in short , he be not to be dissatisfie ; the sun of good humour be to triumph on this auspicious morning ; it consum scudding cloud ere they sully its disk . and now we be in the country , amongst what they call " les bois et les petit sentier . " these woods and lane
lane a month later would offer but a dusty and doubtful seclusion : now , however , in they greenness and morning repose , they look very pleasant . we reach a certain well , plan round , in the taste of , with a orderly circle of lime - tree : here a halt be call ; on the green swell of ground surround this well , we be order to be seat , take he place in we midst , and suffer we to gather in a knot round he . those who like he more than they fear , come close , and these be chiefly little one ; those who fear more than they like , keep somewhat aloon ; those in whom much affection have give , even to what remain of fear , a pleasurable zest , observe the greatest distance . he begin to tell we a story . well could he narrate : in such a diction as child love , and learn man emulate ; a diction simple in its strength , and strong in its simplicity . there be beautiful touch in that little tale ; sweet glimpse of feeling and hue of description that , while I listen , sunk into my mind , and since have never fad . he tint a twilight scene -- I hold it in memory still -- such a picture I have never look on from artist 's pencil . I have say , that , for myself , I have no impromptu faculty ; and perhaps that very deficiency make I marvel the more at one who possess it in perfection . be not a man to write book ; but I have hear he lavish , with careless , unconscious prodigality , such mental wealth as book seldom boast ; he mind be indeed my library , and whenever it be open to I , I enter bliss . Intellectually imperfect as I be , I could read little ; there be few bound and print volume that do not weary I -- whose perusal do not fag and blind -- but he tom of thought be collyrium to the spirit 's eye ; over they contents , inward sight grow clear and strong . I use to think what a delight it would be for one who love he better than he love himself , to gather and store up those handfuls of gold - dust , so recklessly flng to 's reckless wind . he story do , he approach the little knoll where I and sit apart . in he usual mode of demand a opinion ( he have not reticence to wait till it be voluntarily offer ) he ask , " be you interest ? " accord to my wonted undemonstrative fashion , I simply answer -- " yes . " " be it good ? " " very good . " " yet I could not write that down , " say he . " why not , ? " " I hate the mechanical labour ; I hate to stoop and sit still . I could dictate it , though , with pleasure , to a amanuensis who suit I . would write for I if I ask she ? " " yoMonsieu would be too quick ; he would urge I , and be angry if my pen do not keep pace with he lip . " " try some day ; let we see the monster I can make of myself under the circumstance . but just now , there be no question of dictation ; I mean to make you useful in another office . do you see yonder farm - house ? " " surround with tree ? yes . " . " there we be to breakfast ; and while the good fermiere make the cafe au lait in a caldron , you and five other , whom I shall select , will spread with butter half a hundred roll . " have form he troop into line once more , he march we straight on the farm , which , on see we force , surrendere without capitulation . clean knife and plate , and fresh butter be provide , half - a - dozen of we , choose by we Professor , set to work under he direction , to prepare for breakfast a huge basket of roll , with which the baker have be order to provision the farm , in anticipation of we come . coffee and chocolate be already make hot ; cream and new - laid egg be add to the treat , and , always generous , would have give a large order for " jambon " and " confiture " in addition , but that some of we , who presume perhaps upon we influence , insist that it would be a most reckless waste of victual . he rail at we for we pain , terme we " de menagere avare ; " but we let he talk , and manage the economy of the repast we own way . with what a pleasant countenance he stand on the farm -kitchen hearth look on ! he be a man whom it make happy to see other happy ; he like to have movement , animation , abundance and enjoyment round he . we ask where he would sit . he tell we , we know well he be we slave , and we he tyrants , and that he da not so much as choose a chair without we leave ; so we set he the farmer 's great chair at the head of the long table , and put he into it . well might we like he , with all he passion and hurricane , when he could be so benignant and docile at time , as he be
be just now . indeed , at the worst , it be only this nerf that be irritable , not he temper that be radically bad ; soothey , comprehend , comfort he , and he be a lamb ; he would not harm a fly . only to the very stupid , perverse , or unsympathizing , be he in the slightest degree dangerous . Mindful always of he religion , he make the youngest of the party say a little prayer before we begin breakfast , cross himself as devotedly as a woman . I have never see he pray before , or make that pious sign ; he do it so simply , with such child - like faith , I could not help smile pleasurably as I watch ; he eye meet my smile ; he just stretch out he kind hand , say , " Donnez - moi la main ! I see we worship the same , in the same spirit , though by different rite . " most of 's brother professor be emancipate free - thinker , infidel , atheist ; and many of they man whose life would not bear scrutiny ; he be more like a knight of old , religious in he way , and of spotless fame . innocent childhood , beautiful youth be safe at he side . he have vivid passion , keen feeling , but he pure honour and he artless piety be the strong charm that keep the lion couchant . that breakfast be a merry meal , and the merriment be not mere vacant clatter : originate , lead , control and heighten it ; he social , lively temper play unfettered and unclouded ; surround only by woman and child there be nothing to cross and thwart he ; he have he own way , and a pleasant way it be . the meal over , the party be free to run and play in the meadow ; a few stay to help the farmer 's wife to put away she earthenware . m . call I from among these to come out and sit near he under a tree -- whence he could view the troop gambolling , over a wide pasture -- and read to he whilst he take he cigar . he sit on a rustic bench , and I at the tree - root . while I read ( a pocket-classic -- a -- I do not like it , but he do , finde therein beauty I never could be bring to perceive ) , he listen with a sweetness of calm the more impressive from the impetuosity of he general nature ; the deepest happiness fill he blue eye and smooth he broad forehead . I , too , be happy -- happy with the bright day , happier with he presence , happiest with he kindness . he ask , by - and - by , if I would not rather run to my companion than sit there ? I say , no ; I feel content to be where he be . he ask whether , if I be he sister , I should always he contend to stay with a brother such as he . I say , I believe I should ; and I feel it . again , he inquire whether , if he be to leave , and go far away , I should be sorry ; and I drop , and make no reply . " Petite soeur , " say he ; " how long could you remember I if we be separat ? " " that , , I can never tell , because I do not know how long it will be before I shall cease to remember everything earthly . " " if i be to go beyond sea for two -- three -- five year , should you welcome I on my return ? " " Monsieur , how could I live in the interval ? " " 'be ete pour vous bien dur , bien exigeant . " I hide my face with the book , for it be cover with tear . I ask he why he talk so ; and he say he would talk so no more , and cheer I again with the kindest encouragement . still , the gentleness with which he treat I during the rest of the day , go somehow to my heart . it be too tender . it be mournful . I would rather he have be abrupt , whimsical , and irate as be he will not . when hot noon arrive -- for the day turn out as we have anticipate , glow as -- we shepherd collect he sheep from the pasture , and proceed to lead we all softly home . but we have a whole league to walk , thus far from be the farm where he have breakfast ; the child , especially , be tired with they play ; the spirit of most flag at the prospect of this mid-day walk over chaussee flinty , glar , and dusty . this state of thing have be foresee and provide for . just beyond the boundary of the farm we meet two spacious vehicle come to fetch we --such conveyance as be hire out purposely for the accommodation of school - party ; here , with good management , room be find for all , and in another hour m . make safe consignment of he charge at the . it have be a pleasant day : it would have be perfect , but for the breathing of melancholy which have dim its sunshine a moment . that tarnish be renew the same evening . just about sunset , I see come out of the front - door , accompany by . they pace the centre - alley
alley for nearly a hour , talk earnestly : he -- look grave , yet restless ; she -- wear a amazed , expostulatory , dissuasive air . I wonder what be under discussion ; and when re-enter the house as it darken , leave she kinsman yet linger in the garden , I say to myself -- " he call I ' petite soeur ' this morning . if he be really my brother , how I should like to go to he just now , and ask what it be that pressis on he mind . see how he lean against that tree , with he arm cross and he brow bent . he want consolation , I know : Madame do not conseal : she only remonstrate . what now ----? " start from quiescence to action , m . come strid erect and quick down the garden . the carre door be yet open : I think he be probably go to water the orange - tree in the tubs , after he occasional custom ; on reach the court , however , he take a abrupt turn and make for the berceau and the first - classe glass door . there , in that first classe I be , thence I have be watch he ; but there I could not find courage to await he approach . he have turn so suddenly , he strode so fast , he look so strange ; the coward within I grow pale , shrank and -- not wait to listen to reason , and hear the shrub crush and the gravel crunch to he advance -- she be go on the wing of panic . do I pause till I have take sanctuary in the oratory , now empty . listen there with beat pulse , and a unaccountable , undefined apprehension , I hear he pass through all the schoolroom , clash the door impatiently as he go ; I hear he invade the refectory which the " lecture pieuse " be now hold under hallow constraint ; I hear he pronounce these word -- " Ou est ? " and just as , summon my courage , I be prepare to go down and do what , after all , I must wish to do in the world -- viz. , meet he -- the wiry voice of . Pierre reply glibly and falsely , " est au lit . " and he pass , with the stamp of vexation , into the corridor . there Madame meet , capture , chid , convoy to the street - door , and finally dismiss he . as that street - door close , a sudden amazement at my own perverse proceeding struck like a blow upon I . I feel from the first it be I he want -- I he be seek -- and have not I want he too ? what , then , have carry I away ? what have rapt I beyond he reach ? he have something to tell : he be go to tell I that something : my ear strain it be nerve to hear it , and I have make the confidence impossible . Yearn to listen and console , while I think audience and solace beyond hope 's reach -- no sooner do opportunity suddenly and fully arrive , than I evad it as I would have evad the level shaft of mortality . well , my insane inconsistency have its reward . instead of the comfort , the certain satisfaction , I might have win -- could I but have put chok panic down , and stand firm two minute -- here be dead blank , dark doubt , and drear suspense . I take my wage to my pillow , and pass the night count they . . . call I on afternoon , and ask whether I have any occupation to hinder I from go into town and execute some little commission for she at the shops . be disengage , and place myself at she service , I be presently furnished with a list of the wool , silk , embroider thread , etcetera , wante in the pupil 's work , and have equip myself in a manner suite the threatening aspect of a cloudy and sultry day , I be just draw the spring - bolt of the street - door , in act to issue forth , when 's voice again summon I to the salle - a- manger . " , ! " cry she , in the see haste of a impromptu thought , " I have just recollect one more errand for you , if you good - nature will not deem itself over -burden ? " of course I " confound myself " in asseveration to the contrary ; and , run into the little salon , bring thence a pretty basket , fill with fine hothouse fruit , rosy , perfect , and tempting , repose amongst the dark green , wax - like leave , and pale yellow star of , I know not what , exotic plant . " there , " she say , " it be not heavy , and will not shame you neat toilette , as if it be a household , servant - like detail . do I the favour to leave this little basket at the house of , with my felicitation on she fete . she live down in the old town , numero 3 , des . I fear you will find the walk rather long , but you have the whole afternoon before you , and do not hurry ; if you be not back in time for dinner , I will order a portion to be save , or , with whom you be a favourite , will have pleasure in tossing up some
some trifle , for you especial benefit . you shall not be forget , ma bonne Meess . and oh ! please ! " ( call I back once more ) " be sure to insist on see herself , and give the basket into she own hand , in order that there may be no mistake , for she be rather a punctilious personage . ! revoir ! " and at last I get away . the shop commission take some time to execute , that choose and match of silk and wool be always a tedious business , but at last I get through my list . the pattern for the slipper , the bell - rope , the caba be select -- the slide and tassel for the purse choose -- the whole " tripotage , " in short , be off my mind ; nothing but the fruit and the felicitation remain to be attend to . I rather like the prospect of a long walk , deep into the old and grim - ; and I like it no worse because the evening sky , over the city , be settle into a mass of black - blue metal , heate at the rim , and inflam slowly to a heavy red . I fear a high wind , because storm demand that exertion of strength and use of action I always yield with pain ; but the sull down - fall , the thick snow - descent , or dark rush of rain , ask only resignation -- the quiet abandonment of garment and person to be , drench . in return , it sweep a great capital clean before you ; it make you a quiet path through broad , grand street ; it petrify a living city as if by eastern enchantment ; it transform a Villette into a Tadmor . let , then , the rain fall , and the flood descend -- only I must first get rid of this basket of fruit . a unknown clock from a unknown tower ( 's voice be now too distant to be audible ) be toll the third quarter past five , when I reach that street and house whereon have give I the address . it be no street at all ; it seem rather to be part of a square : it be quiet , grass grow between the broad grey flag , the house be large and look very old -- behind they rise the appearance of tree , indicate garden at the back . antiquity brood above this region , business be banish thence . Rich man have once possess this quarter , and once yograndeu have make she seat here . that church , whose dark , half - ruinous turret overlook the square , be the venerable and formerly opulent shrine of the . but wealth and greatness have long since stretch they gild pinion and fle hence , leave these they ancient nests , perhaps to house Penury for a time , or perhaps to stand cold and empty , mouldering untenanted in the course of winter . as I cross this desert " place , " on whose pavement drop almost as large as a five - franc piece be now slowly darken , I see , in its whole expanse , no symptom or evidence of life , except what be give in the figure of a infirm old priest , who go past , bend and prop on a staff -- the type of eld and decay . he have issue from the very house to which I be direct ; and when I pause before the door just close after he , and ring the bell , he turn to look at I . do he soon avert he gaze ; perhaps he think I , with my basket of summer fruit , and my lack of the dignity age confer , a incongruous figure in such a scene . I know , have a young ruddy - faced bonne open the door to admit I , I should have think such a one little in harmony with she dwelling ; but , when I find myself confront by a very old woman , wear a very antique peasant costume , a cap alike hideous and costly , with long flap of native lace , a petticoat and jacket of cloth , and sabot more like little boat than shoe , it seem all right , and soothingly in character . the expression of she face be not quite so soothing as the cut of she costume ; anything more cantankerous I have seldom see ; she would scarcely reply to my inquiry after ; I believe she would have snatch the basket of fruit from my hand , have not the old priest , hobbl up , check she , and himself lent a ear to the message with which I be charge . he apparent deafness render it a little difficult to make he fully understand that I must see , and consign the fruit into she own hand . at last , however , he comprehend the fact that such be my order , and that duty enjoin they literal fulfilment . Addresse the aged bonne , not in , but in the aboriginal tongue of , he persuade she , at last , to let I cross the inhospitable threshold , and himself escort I up - stair , I be usher into a sort of salon , and there leave . the room be large , and have a fine old ceiling , and almost church - like window of coloured - glass ; but it be desolate , and in the shadow of a come storm , look strangely lowering . within -- open a smaller room ; there , however , the blind of the
the single casement be close ; through the deep gloom few detail of furniture be apparent . these few I amuse myself by puzzling to make out ; and , in particular , I be attract by the outline of a picture on the wall . by - and - by the picture seem to give way : to my bewilderment , it shook , it sink , it roll back into nothing ; it be vanishing leave a opening arch , lead into a arch passage , with a mystic winding stair ; both passage and stair be of cold stone , uncarpeted and unpainted . down this donjon stair descend a tap , tap , like a stick ; soon there fell on the step a shadow , and last of all , I be aware of a substance . yet , be it actual substance , this appearance approach I ? this obstruction , partially darken the arch ? it draw near , and I see it well . I begin to comprehend where I be . well might this old square be name quarter of the -- well might the three towers , overlook it , own for godfather three mystic sage of a dead and dark art . Hoar enchantment here prevail ; a spell have open for I elf - land -- that cell - like room , that vanish picture , that arch and passage , and stair of stone , be all part of a fairy tale . Distincter even than these scenic detail stand the chief figure -- Cunegonde , the sorceress ! , the evil fairy . how be she ? she might be three foot high , but she have no shape ; she skinny hand rest upon each other , and press the gold knob of a wand - like ivory staff . she face be large , set , not upon she shoulder , but before she breast ; she seem to have no neck ; I should have say there be a hundred year in she feature , and more perhaps in she eye -- she malign , unfriendly eye , with thick grey brow above , and livid lid all round . how severely they view I , with a sort of dull displeasure ! this be wear a gown of brocade , dye bright blue , full - tinted as the gentianella flower , and cover with satin foliage in a large pattern ; over the gow a costly shawl , gorgeously border , and so large for she , that its many - coloured fringe sweep the floor . but she chief point be she jewel : she have long , clear earring , blaze with a lustre which could not be borrowed or false ; she have ring on she skeleton hand , with thick gold hoops , and stone -- purple , green , and blood - red . Hunchback , dwarfish , and do , she be adorn like a barbarian queen . " que I voulez-vous ? " say she , hoarsely , with the voice rather of male than of female old age ; and , indeed , a silver beard bristle she ching . I deliver my basket and my message . " be that all ? " she demand . " it be all , " say I . " truly , it be well worth while , " she answer . " return to , and tell she I can buy fruit when I want it , et quant a se felicitation , je be 'en moque ! " and this courteous dame turn she back . just as she turn , a peal of thunder break , and a flash of lightning blaze broad over salon and boudoir . the tale of magic seem to proceed with due accompaniment of the element . the wanderer , decoy into the enchanted castle , hear rise , outside , the spell - wake tempest . what , in all this , be I to think of ? she own strange acquaintance ; she offer message and gift at a unique shrine , and inauspicious seem the bearing of the uncouth thing she worship . there go that , totter and trembl like palsy incarnate , tap she ivory staff on the mosaic parquet , and mutter venomously as she vanish . down washed the rain , deep lower the welkin ; the cloud , ruddy a while ago , have now , through all they blackness , turn deadly pale , as if in terror . Notwithstand my late boast about not fear a shower , I hardly like to go out under this waterspout . then the gleam of lightning be very fierce , the thunder crashed very near ; this storm have gather immediately above ; it seem to have burst at the zenith ; it rush down prone ; the forked , slant bolt pierce athwart vertical torrent ; red zigzag interlace a descent blanch as white metal : and all break from a sky heavily black in its swollen abundance . leave 's inhospitable salon , I betake myself to she cold staircase ; there be a seat on the landing -- there I wait . somebody come glid along the gallery just above ; it be the old priest . " indeed shall not sit there , " say he . " it would displeasure we benefactor if he know a stranger be so treat in this house . " and he beg I so earnestly to return to the salon , that , without discourtesy , I could not but comply . the smaller room be better furnished and more habitable than the larger ; thither he introduce I . partially withdraw the blind , he disclose what seem more like a oratory than a boudoir , a very solemn little
little chamber , look as if it be a place rather dedicated to relic and remembrance , than design for present use and comfort . the good father sit down , as if to keep I company ; but instead of conversing , he take out a book , fasten on the page he eye , and employ he lip in whispering -- what sound like a prayer or litany . a yellow electric light from the sky gild he bald head ; he figure remain in shade --deep and purple ; he sit still as sculpture ; he seem to forget I for he prayer ; he only look up when a fiercer bolt , or a harsher , closer rattle told of nearing danger ; even then , it be not in fear , but in seem awe , he raise he eye . I too be awe - struck ; be , however , under no pressure of slavish terror , my thoughts and observation be free . to speak truth , I be begin to fancy that the old priest resemble that , before whom I have knee in the church of the Beguinage . the idea be vague , for I have see my confessor only in dusk and in profile , yet still I seem to trace a likeness : I think also I recognize the voice . while I watch he , he betraye , by one lift look , that he feel my scrutiny ; I turn to note the room ; that too have it be half mystic interest . beside a cross of curiously carve old ivory , yellow with time , and slop above a dark - red _prie - dieu_ , furnish duly , with rich missal and ebon rosary -- hang the picture whose dim outline have draw my eye before -- the picture which move , fall away with the wall and let in phantoms . Imperfectly see , I have take it for a ; reveal by clearer light , it prove to be a woman 's portrait in a nun 's dress . the face , though not beautiful , be pleasing ; pale , young , and shade with the dejection of grief or ill health . I say again it be not beautiful ; it be not even intellectual ; it be very amiability be the amiability of a weak frame , inactive passion , acquiescent habit : yet I look long at that picture , and could not choose but look . the old priest , who at first have seem to I so deaf and infirm , must yet have retain he faculty in tolerable preservation ; absorb in he book as he appear , without once lift he head , or , as far as I know , turn he eye , he perceive the point towards which my attention be draw , and , in a slow distinct voice , drop , concern it , these four observation :-- " she be much beloved . " she give herself to . " she die young . " she be still remembe , still weep . " " by that aged lady , ? " I inquire , fancie that I have discover in the incurable grief of bereavement , a key to that same aged lady 's desperate ill - humour . the father shook he head with half a smile . " no , no , " say he ; " a grand - dame 's affection for she child 's child may be great , and she sorrow for they loss , lively ; but it be only the affianced lover , to whom , , and have trebly deny the bliss of union , who mourn what he have lose , as be still mourn . " I think the father rather wish to be question , and therefore I inquire who have lose and who still mourn " . " I get , in reply , quite a little romantic narrative , tell not unimpressively , with the accompaniment of the now subsid storm . I be bound to say it might have be make much more truly impressive , if there have be less french , - like sentimentalizing and wire - draw ; and rather more healthful carelessness of effect . but the worthy father be obviously a bear and breed ( I become more and more persuade of he resemblance to my confessor ) -- he be a true son of ; when he do lift he eye , he look at I out of they corner , with more and sharper subtlety than , one would have think , could survive the wear and tear of seventy year . yet , I believe , he be a good old man . the hero of he tale be some former pupil of he , whom he now call he benefactor , and who , it appear , have love this pale , the daughter of rich parent , at a time when he own worldly prospect be such as to justify he aspiring to a well - dower hand . the pupil 's father -- once a rich banker -- have fail , die , and leave behind he only debt and destitution . the son be then forbidden to think of ; especially that old witch of a grand - dame I have see , , oppose the match with all the violence of a temper which deformity make sometimes demoniac . the mild have neither the treachery to be false , nor the force to be quite staunch to she lover ; she give up she first suitor , but , refuse to accept a second with a heavier purse , withdraw to a convent , and there die in she noviciate . last anguish , it seem , have
have take possession of the faithful heart which worship she , and the truth of that love and grief have be show in a manner which touch even I , as I listen . some year after 's death , ruin have come on she house too : she father , by nominal call a jeweller , but who also deal a good deal on the Bourse , have be concerned in some financial transaction which entail exposure and ruinous fines . he die of grief for the loss , and shame for the infamy . he old hunchback mother and he bereaved wife be leave penniless , and might have die to of want ; but they lose daughter 's once - despise , yet most true - hear suitor , hearing of the condition of these ladie , come with singular devotedness to the rescue . he take on they insolent pride the revenge of the purest charity -- housing , care for , befriend they , so as no son could have do it more tenderly and efficiently . the mother -- on the whole a good woman -- die blesse he ; the strange , godless , loveless , misanthrope grandmother liv still , entirely support by this self - sacrifice man . she , who have be the bane of he life , blight he hope , and award he , for love and domestic happiness , long mourning and cheerless solitude , he treat with the respect a good son might offer a kind mother . he have bring she to this house , " and , " continue the priest , while genuine tear rise to he eye , " here , too , he shelter I , he old tutor , and , a superannuated servant of he father 's family . to we sustenance , and to other charity , I know he devote three - part of he income , keep only the fourth to provide himself with bread and the most modest accommodation . by this arrangement he have render it impossible to himself ever to marry : he have give himself to and to he angel - bride as much as if he be a priest , like I . " the father have wip away he tear before he utter these last word , and in pronounce they , he for one instant raise he eye to mine . I catch this glance , despite its veiled character ; the momentary gleam shoot a meaning which strike I . these Romanist be strange being . such a one among they -- whom you know no more than the last of , or the first emperor of -- know you and all you concern ; and have he reason for say to you so and so , when you simply think the communication spring impromptu from the instant 's impulse : he plan in bring it about that you shall come on such a day , to such a place , under such and such circumstance , when the whole arrangement seem to you crude apprehension the ordinance of chance , or the sequel of exigency . 's suddenly - recollect message and present , my artless embassy to the place of the , the old priest accidentally descende the step and cross the square , he interposition on my behalf with the bonne who would have send I away , he reappearance on the staircase , my introduction to this room , the portrait , the narrative so affably volunteer -- all these little incidents , take as they fall out , seem each independent of its successor ; a handful of loose bead : but thread through by that quick - shot and crafty glance of a Jesuit - eye , they drop pendent in a long string , like that rosary on the prie - dieu . where lay the link of junction , where the little clasp of this monastic necklace ? I see or feel union , but could not yet find the spot , or detect the means of connection . perhaps the musing - fit into which i have by this time fallen , appear somewhat suspicious in its abstraction ; he gently interrupt : " , " say he , " I trust you have not far to go through these inundated street ? " " more than half a league . " " you live ----? " " in the . " " not " ( with animation ) , " not at the pensionnat of ? " " the same . " " " ( clapp he hand ) , " donc , vous devez connaitre mon noble eleve , mon ? " " , of ? " " he and none other . " a brief silence fell . the spring of junction seem suddenly to have become palpable ; I feel it yield to pressure . " be it of m . you have be speak ? " I presently inquire . " be he you pupil and the benefactor of ? " " yes , and of , the old servant : and moreover , ( with a certain emphasis ) , he be and _is_ the lover , true , constant and eternal , of that saint in heaven -- . " " and who , father , be _you ?_ " I continue ; and though I accentuate the question , its utterance be well nigh superfluous ; I be ere this quite prepare for the answer which actually come . " I , daughter , be ; that unworthy son of whom you once honoure with a noble and touch confidence , show I the core of a heart , and the inner shrine of a mind whereof , in solemn truth , I covet the direction , in behalf of the only
only true faith . have I for a day lose sight of you , nor for a hour fail to take in you a root interest . pass under the discipline of , mould by she high training , inoculate with she salutary doctrine , inspire by the zeal she alone give -- I realize what then might be you spiritual rank , you practical value ; and I envy Heresy she prey . " this struck I as a special state of thing -- I half - realize myself in that condition also ; pass under discipline , mould , train , inoculate , and so on . " not so , " think I , but I restrain deprecation , and sit quietly enough . " I suppose do not live here ? " I resume , pursue a theme which I think more to the purpose than any wild renegade dream . " no ; he only come occasionally to worship he beloved saint , to make he confession to I , and to pay he respects to she he call he mother . he own lodging consist but of two room : he have no servant , and yet he will not suffer Madame Walravens to dispose of those splendid jewel with which you see she adorn , and in which she take a puerile pride as the ornament of she youth , and the last relic of she son the jeweller 's wealth . " " how often , " murmure I to myself , " have this man , this , see to I to lack magnanimity in trifle , yet how great he be in great thing ! " I own I do not reckon amongst the proof of he greatness , either the act of confession , or the saint-worship . " how long be it since that lady die ? " I inquire , look at . " twenty year . she be somewhat older than ; he be then very young , for he be not much beyond forty . " " do he yet weep she ? " " he heart will weep she always : the essence of 's nature be -- constancy . " this be say with mark emphasis . and now the sun break out pallid and waterish ; the rain yet fell , but there be no more tempest : that hot firmament have cloven and pour out its lightning . a longer delay would scarce leave daylight for my return , so I rise , thanke the father for he hospitality and he tale , be benignantly answer by a " pax vobiscum , " which i make kindly welcome , because it see utter with a true benevolence ; but I like less the mystic phrase accompany it . " daughter , you _shall_ be what you _shall_ be ! " a oracle that make I shrug my shoulders as soon as I have get outside the door . few of we know what we be to come to certainly , but for all that have happen yet , I have good hope of living and die a sober - minded protestant : there be a hollowness within , and a flourish around " Holy " which temp I but moderately . I go on my way ponder many thing . whatever Romanism may be , there be good Romanist : this man , , see of the best ; touch with superstition , influence by priestcraft , yet wondrous for fond faith , for pious devotion , for sacrifice of self , for charity unbounded . it remain to see how Rome , by she agent , handle such quality ; whether she cherish they for they own sake and for 's , or put they out to usury and make booty of the interest . by the time I reach home , it be sundown . have kindly save I a portion of dinner , which indeed I need . she call I into the little cabinet to partake of it , and there Madame soon make she appearance , bring I a glass of wine . " well , " begin she , chuckl , " and what sort of a reception do give you ? est drole , n'est - ce pa ? " I tell she what have pass , deliver verbate the courteous message with which i have be charge . " oh la singuliere petite bossue ! " laugh she . " et figurez-vous qu'elle I deteste , parcequ'elle I croit amoureuse de mon cousin ; ce petit devet qui n'ose pa bouger , a moin que son confesseur ne lui donne la permission ! reste " ( she go on ) , " if he want to marry ever so much -- soit moi , soin une autre -- he could not do it ; he have too large a family already on he hand : , , , and a whole troop of nameless pauper . there never be a man like he for lay on himself burden greater than he can bear , voluntarily incurr needless responsibility . besides , he harbour a romantic idea about some pale - face -- personnage assez niaise a ce que je pense " ( such be 's irreverent remark ) , " who have be a angel in heaven , or elsewhere , this score of year , and to whom he mean to go , free from all earthly tie , pure comme un lis , a ce qu'il dit . oh , you would laugh could you but know half 's crotchet and eccentricity ! but I hinder you from take refreshment , ma bonne , which you must need ; eat you supper , drink you wine , oubliez les ange , les bossue , et surtout , les Professeur -- et bon
bon soir ! " . " Oubliez les Professeur . " so say . be a wise woman , but she should not have utter those word . to do so be a mistake . that night she should have leave I calm -- not excited , indifferent , not interested , isolate in my own estimation and that of other -- not connect , even in idea , with this second person whom I be to forget . forget he ? ah ! they take a sage plan to make I forget he -- the wisehead ! they show I how good he be ; they make of my dear little man a stainless little hero . and then they have prate about he manner of loving . what mean have I , before this day , of be certain whether he could love at all or not ? I have know he jealous , suspicious ; I have see about he certain tenderness , fitfulness -- a softness which come like a warm air , and a ruth which pass like early dew , dry in the heat of he irritability : _this_ be all I have see . and they , and ( that these two wrotch in concert I could not doubt ) open up the adytum of he heart -- show I one grand love , the child of this southern nature 's youth , bear so strong and perfect , that it have laugh at himself , despise he mean rape of matter , cling to immortal spirit , and in victory and faith , have watch beside a tomb twenty year . this have be done -- not idly : this be not a mere hollow indulgence of sentiment ; he have prove he fidelity by the consecration of he best energie to a unselfish purpose , and attest it by limitless personal sacrifice : for those once dear to she he prize -- he have laid down vengeance , and take up a cross . now , as for , I know what she be as well as if I have see she . I know she be well enough ; there be girl like she in 's school -- phlegmatic -- pale , slow , inert , but kind - natured , neutral of evil , undistinguished for good . if she wear angels ' wing , I know whose poet -fancy confer they . if she forehead shone luminous with the reflex of a halo , I know in the fire of whose irids that circlet of holy flame have generation . be I , then , to be frightene by ? be the picture of a pale dead nun to rise , a eternal barrier ? and what of the charity which absorb he worldly goods ? what of he heart swear to virginity ? -- Sila -- you should not have suggest these question . they be at once the deepest puzzle , the strongest obstruction , and the keenest stimulus , I have ever feel . for a week of night and day I fall asleep -- I dreamt , and I wake upon these two question . in the whole world there be no answer to they , except where one dark little man stood , sit , walk , lecture , under the head - piece of a bandit bonnet - grec , and within the girth of a sorry paletot , much be - ink , and no little adust . after that visit to the , I _do want to see he again . I feel as if -- know what I now know -- he countenance would offer a page more lucid , more interesting than ever ; I feel a longing to trace in it the imprint of that primitive devotedness , the sign of that half - knightly , half - saintly chivalry which the priest 's narrative impute to he nature . he have become my Christian hero : under that character I want to view he . be opportunity slow to favour ; my new impression underwent she test the next day . yes : I be grant a interview with my " hero " -- a interview not very heroic , or sentimental , or biblical , but lively enough in its way . about three o'clock of the afternoon , the peace of the first classe -- safely establish , as it see , under the serene sway of , who , _in propria persona_ be give one of she orderly and useful lesson -- this peace , I say , suffer a sudden fracture by the wild inburst of a paletot . nobody at the moment be quieter than myself . Ease of responsibility by 's presence , soothe by she uniform tone , please and edify with she clear exposition of the subject in hand ( for she teach well ) , I sit bend over my desk , draw -- that be , copy a elaborate line engrave , tediously work up my copy to the finish of the original , for that be my practical notion of art ; and , strange to say , I take extreme pleasure in the labour , and could even produce curiously finical chinese facsimile of steel or mezzotint plate -- thing about as valuable as so many achievement in worsted - work , but I think pretty well of they in those day . what be the matter ? my draw , my pencil , my precious copy , gather into one crush - up handful , perish from before my sight ; I myself appear to be shake or empty out of my chair , as a solitary and wither nutmeg might be empty out of a spice - box by a excited cook . that chair and my desk , seize by the wild
wild paletot , one under each sleeve , be borne afar ; in a second , I follow the furniture ; in two minute they and I be fix in the centre of the grand salle -- a vast adjoining room , seldom use save for dancing and choral singing - lesson -- fix with a emphasis which seem to prohibit the remotest hope of we ever be permit to stir thence again . have partially collect my scared wit , I find myself in the presence of two man , gentlemen , I suppose I should say -- one dark , the other light -- one have a stiff , half - military air , and wear a braided surtout ; the other partaking , in garb and bear , more of the careless aspect of the student or artist class : both flourish in full magnificence of moustach , whisker , and imperial . stand a little apart from these ; he countenance and eye express strong choler ; he hold forth he hand with he tribune gesture . " , " say he , " you business be to prove to these gentlemen that I be no liar . you will answer , to the best of you ability , such question as they shall put . you will also write on such theme as they shall select . in they eyes , it appear , I hold the position of a unprincipled impostor . I write essays ; and , with deliberate forgery , sign to they my pupil ' name , and boast of they as they work . you will disprove this charge . " grand ciel ! here be the show - trial , so long evad , come on I like a thunder - clap . these two fine , braide , mustachio , sneer personage , be none other than dandy professor of the college -- and -- a pair of cold - blooded fop and pedant , sceptic , and scoffer . it seem that m . have be rashly exhibit something I have write -- something , he have never once praise , or even mention , in my hearing , and which I deem . the essay be not remarkable at all ; it only _seem remarkable , compare with the average productions of foreign school - girl ; in a english establishment it would have pass scarce notice . and have think proper to question its genuineness , and insinuate a cheat ; I be now to bear my testimony to the truth , and to be put to the torture of they examination . a memorable scene ensue . they begin with classic . a dead blank . they go on to french history . I hardly know from . they try I in various ' ology , and still only get a shake of the head , and a unchanging " Je n'en sais rien . " after a expressive pause , they proceed to matter of general information , broach one or two subject which I know pretty well , and on which I have often reflecte . , who have hitherto stood look on , dark as the winter - solstice , brighten up somewhat ; he think I should now show myself at least no fool . he learn he error . though answer to the question surge up fast , my mind fill like a rise well , idea be there , but not word . I either _could not , or _would not speak -- I be not sure which : partly , I think , my nerve have get wrong , and partly my humour be cross . I hear one of my examiner -- he of the braided surtout -- whisper to he co-professor , " est - elle donc idiote ? " " yes , " I think , " a idiot she be , and always will be , for such as you . " but I suffer -- suffer cruelly ; I see the damp gather on 's brow , and he eye speak a passionate yet sad reproach . he would not believe in my total lack of popular cleverness ; he think I _could be prompt if I _would . at last , to relieve he , the professor , and myself , I stammer out : " gentlemen , you have better let I go ; you will get no good of I ; as you say , I be a idiot . " I wish I could have speak with calm and dignity , or I wish my sense have suffice to make I hold my tongue ; that traitor tongue trip , falter . Behold the judge cast on a hard look of triumph , and hear the distressed tremor of my own voice , out I burst in a fit of choking tear . the emotion be far more of anger than grief ; have I be a man and strong , I could have challenge that pair on the spot -- but it _was_ emotion , and I would rather have be scour than betray it . the incapable ! could they not see at once the crude hand of a novice in that composition they call a forgery ? the subject be classical . when . dictate the trait on which the essay be to turn , I hear it for the first time ; the matter be new to I , and I have no material for its treatment . but I get book , read up the fact , laboriously construct a skeleton out of the dry bone of the real , and then clothed they , and try to breathe into they life , and in this last aim I have pleasure . with I it be a difficult and anxious time till my facts
facts be find , select , and properly join ; nor could I rest from research and effort till I be satisfied of correct anatomy ; the strength of my inward repugnance to the idea of flaw or falsity sometimes enable I to shin egregious blunder ; but the knowledge be not there in my head , ready and mellow ; it have not be sow in spring , grow in , harvest in , and garner through ; whatever I want I must go out and gather fresh ; glean of wild herb my lapful , and shr they gree into the pot . and do not perceive this . they mistake my work for the work of a ripe scholar . they would not yet let I go : I must sit down and write before they . as I dip my pen in the ink with a shaking hand , and survey the white paper with eye half - blind and overflow , one of my judg begin mincingly to apologize for the pain he cause . " Nous agisson dans l'interet de la verite . Nous ne voulon pa vous blesser , " say he . give I nerve . I only answer ,-- " dictate , . " name this theme : " . " human Justice ! what be I to make of it ? blank , cold abstraction , unsuggestive to I of one inspiring idea ; and there stand , sad as , and stern as , and there triumph he accuser . at these two I look . I be gather my courage to tell they that I would neither write nor speak another word for they satisfaction , that they theme do not suit , nor they presence inspire I , and that , notwithstand , whoever throw the shadow of a doubt on 's honour , outrage that truth of which they have announce themselves the -- champion : I _mean to utter all this , I say , when suddenly , a light dart on memory . those two face look out of the forest of long hair , moustache , and whisker -- those two cold yet bold , trustless yet presumptuous visage -- be the same face , the very same that , project in full gaslight from behind the pillars of a portico , have half frighten I to death on the night of my desolate arrival in . these , I feel morally certain , be the very heroe who have drive a friendless foreigner beyond she reckoning and she strength , chase she breathless over a whole quarter of the town . " Pious mentor ! " think I . " pure guide for youth ! if ` ' be what she ought to be , you two would scarce hold you present post , or enjoy you present credit . " a idea once seize , I fall to work . " human Justice " rush before I in novel guise , a red , random beldame , with arm akimbo . I see she in she house , the den of confusion : servants call to she for order or help which she do not give ; beggars stand at she door wait and starve unnoticed ; a swarm of child , sick and quarrelsome , crawl round she foot , and yell in she ear appeal for notice , sympathy , cure , redress . the honest woman care for none of these thing . she have a warm seat of she own by the fire , she have she own solace in a short black pipe , and a bottle of 's soothing syrup ; she smoke and she sip , and she enjoy she paradise ; and whenever a cry of the suffer soul about she ' pierce she ear too keenly -- my jolly dame seize the poker or the hearth - brush : if the offender be weak , wronge , and sickly , she effectually settle he : if he be strong , lively , and violent , she only menace , then plunge she hand in she deep pouch , and fling a liberal shower of sugar- plum . such be the sketch of " , " scratch hurriedly on paper , and place at the service of Messrs . and . read it over my shoulder . wait no comment , I curtsy to the trio , and withdrew . after school that day , m . and I again meet . of course the meeting do not at first run smooth ; there be a crow to pluck with he ; that force examination could not be immediately digest . a crab dialogue terminate in my be call " une petite moqueuse et san - coeur , " and in 's temporary departure . not wish he to go quite away , only desire he should feel that such a transport as he have that day give way to , could not be indulge with perfect impunity , I be not sorry to see he , soon after , garden in the berceau . he approach the glass door ; I draw near also . we speak of some flower grow round it . by - and - by lay down he spade ; by - and - by he recommence conversation , pass to other subject , and at last touch a point of interest . conscious that he proceeding of that day be specially open to a charge of extravagance , m . half apologize ; he half regret , too , the fitfulness of he mood at all time , yet he hint that some allowance ought to be make for he . " but , " say he , " I can hardly expect it at you hand , ; you know neither I , nor my position ,
, nor my history . " he history . I take up the word at once ; I pursue the idea . " no , , " I rejoin . " of course , as you say , I know neither you history , nor you position , nor you sacrifice , nor any of you sorrow , or trial , or affections , or fidelity . oh , no ! I know nothing about you ; you be for I altogether a stranger . " " ? " he murmure , arch he brows in surprise . " you know , , I only see you in classe -- stern , dogmatic , hasty , imperious . I only hear of you in town as active and wilful , quick to originate , hasty to lead , but slow to persuade , and hard to bend . a man like you , without tie , can have no attachment ; without dependant , no duty . all we , with whom you come in contact , be machine , which you thrust here and there , inconsiderate of they feeling . you seek you recreation in public , by the light of the evening chandelier : this school and yonder college be you workshop , where you fabricate the ware call pupil . I do not so much as know where you live ; it be natural to take it for grant that you have no home , and need none . " " I be judge , " say he . " you opinion of I be just what I think it be . for you I be neither a man nor a . you see I void of affection and religion , unattach by friend or family , unpilote by principle or faith . it be well , Mademoiselle ; such be we reward in this life . " " you be a philosopher , Monsieur ; a cynic philosopher " ( and I look at he paletot , of which he straightway brush the dim sleeve with he hand ) , " despise the foible of humanity -- above its luxuries -- independent of its comforts . " " , ? vous etes proprette et douillette , et affreusement insensible , par-dessus le marche . " " but , in short , Monsieur , now I think of it , you _must live somewhere ? do tell I where ; and what establishment of servants do you keep ? " with a fearful projection of the under - lip , imply a impetus of scorn the most decided , he break out -- " Je vis dan un trou ! I inhabit a den , -- a cavern , where you would not put you dainty nose . once , with base shame of speak the whole truth , I talk about my ' study ' in that college : know now that this ' study ' be my whole abode ; my chamber be there and my draw - room . as for my ' establishment of servant ' " ( mimick my voice ) " they number ten ; les voila . " and he grimly spread , close under my eye , he ten finger . " I black my boot , " pursue he savagely . " I brush my paletot . " " no , , it be too plain ; you never do that , " be my parenthesis . " Je fais mon lit et mon menage ; I seek my dinner in a restaurant ; my supper take care , of itself ; I pass day laborious and loveless ; night long and lonely ; I be ferocious , and beard and monkish ; and nothing now live in this world love I , except some old heart wear like my own , and some few being , impoverish , suffer , poor in purse and in spirit , whom the kingdom of this world own not , but to whom a will and testament not to be dispute have bequeath the kingdom of heaven . " " ah , ; but I know ! " " what do you know ? many thing , I verily believe ; yet not I , ! " " I know that you have a pleasant old house in a pleasant old square of the - -- why do not you go and live there ? " " ? " mutter he again . " I like it much , ; with the step ascend to the door , the grey flag in front , the nodding tree behind -- real tree , not shrub -- tree dark , high , and of old growth . and the boudoir -oratoire -- you should make that room you study ; it be so quiet and solemn . " he ey I closely ; he half - smile , half - colour . " where do you pick up all that ? who tell you ? " he ask . " nobody tell I . do I dream it , , do you think ? " " can I enter into you vision ? can I guess a woman 's waking thought , much less she sleep fantasy ? " " if I dreamt it , I see in my dream human being as well as a house . I see a priest , old , bent , and grey , and a domestic -- old , too , and picturesque ; and a lady , splendid but strange ; she head would scarce reach to my elbow -- she magnificence might ransom a duke . she wear a gown bright as lapis - lazuli -- a shawl worth a thousand franc : she be deck with ornament so brilliant , I never see any with such a beautiful sparkle ; but she figure
figure look as if it have be break in two and bent double ; she seem also to have outlive the common year of humanity , and to have attaine those which be only labour and sorrow . she be become morose -- almost malevolent ; yet _somebody , it appear , car for she in she infirmity -- somebody forgave she trespass , hope to have he trespass forgiven . they live together , these three people -- the mistress , the chaplain , the servant -- all old , all feeble , all shelter under one kind wing . " he cover with he hand the upper part of he face , but do not conceal he mouth , where I see hover a expression I like . " I see you have enter into my secret , " say he , " but how be it do ? " so I tell he how -- the commission on which I have be send , the storm which have detain I , the abruptness of the lady , the kindness of the priest . " as I sit wait for the rain to cease , Silas whil away the time with a story , " I say . " a story ! what story ? be no romancist . " " shall I tell Monsieur the tale ? " " yes : begin at the beginning . let I hear some of 's -- she best or she worst -- I do not much care which : let we have a good poignee of barbarism , and a bounteous dose of the insular accent . " " yoMonsieu be not go to be gratify by a tale of ambitious proportion , and the spectacle of the narrator stick fast in the midst . but I will tell he the title -- the ' 's . ' " " ! " say he , the swarthy flush again dyee he dark cheek . " the good old father could not have choose a worse subject ; it be he weak point . but what of the ' 's ? ' " " oh ! many thing . " you may as well define _what thing . I mean to know . " " there be the pupil 's youth , the pupil 's manhood ; -- he avarice , he ingratitude , he implacability , he inconstancy . such a bad pupil , !-- so thankless , cold - hear , unchivalrous , unforgiving ! " et pui ? " say he , take a cigar . " et puis , " I pursue , " he underwent calamity which one do not pity -- bear they in a spirit one do not admire -- endure wrong for which one feel no sympathy ; finally take the unchristian revenge of heaping coal of fire on he adversary 's head . " " you have not tell I all , " say he . " nearly all , I think : I have indicate the head of 's chapter . " " you have forget one - that which touch on the pupil 's lack of affection -- on he hard , cold , monkish heart . " " true ; I remember now . _did_ say that he vocation be almost that of a priest -- that he life be consider consecrate . " " by what bond or duty ? " " by the tie of the past and the charity of the present . " " you have , then , the whole situation ? " " I have now tell Monsieur all that be tell I . " some meditative minute pass . " now , , look at I , and with that truth which I believe you never knowingly violate , answer I one question . raise you eye ; rest they on mine ; have no hesitation ; fear not to trust I -- I be a man to be trust . " I raise my eye . " know I thoroughly now -- all my antecedent , all my responsibility -- have long know my fault , can you and I still be friend ? " " if want 's a friend in I , I shall be glad to have a friend in he . " " but a close friend I mean -- intimate and real -- kind in all but blood . will be the sister of a very poor , fetter , burden , encumber man ? " I could not answer he in word , yet I suppose I _did_ answer he ; he take my hand , which find comfort , in the shelter of he . friendship be not a doubtful , waver benefit -- a cold , distant hope -- a sentiment so britle as not to bear the weight of a finger : I at once felt ( or _thotch I feel ) it be support like that of some rock . " when I talk of friendship , I mean _true_ friendship , " he repeat emphatically ; and I could hardly believe that word so earnest have bless my ear ; I hardly could credit the reality of that kind , anxious look he give . if he _really wish for my confidence and regard , and _really would give I he -- why , it seem to I that life could offer nothing more or better . in that case , I be become strong and rich : in a moment I be make substantially happy . to ascertain the fact , to fix and seal it , I ask -- " be quite serious ? do he really think he need I , and can take a interest in I as a sister ? " " surely , surely , " say he ; " a lonely man like I
I , who have no sister , must be but too glad to find in some woman 's heart a sister 's pure affection . " " and dare I rely on 's regard ? I speak to he when I be so inclin ? " " my little sister must make she own experiment , " say he ; " I will give no promise . she must tease and try she wayward brother till she have drill he into what she wish . after all , he be no inductile material in some hand . " while he speak , the tone of he voice , the light of he now affectionate eye , give I such a pleasure as , certainly , I have never feel . I envy no girl she lover , no bride she bridegroom , no wife she husband ; I be content with this my voluntary , self - offer friend . if he would but prove reliable , and he _look reliable , what , beyond he friendship , could I ever covet ? but , if all melt like a dream , as once before have happen -- ? " Qu'est - ce donc ? what be it ? " say he , as this think throw its weight on my heart , it be shadow on my countenance . I tell he ; and after a moment 's pause , and a thoughtful smile , he show I how a equal fear -- lest I should weary of he , a man of mood so difficult and fitful -- have haunt he mind for more than one day , or one month . on hear this , a quiet courage cheer I . I venture a word of re-assurance . that word be not only tolerat ; it be repetition be court . I grow quite happy -- strangely happy -- in make he secure , content , tranquil . yesterday , I could not have believe that earth hold , or life afforde , moment like the few I be now pass . countless time it have be my lot to watch apprehend sorrow close darkly in ; but to see unhoped - for happiness take form , find place , and grow more real as the seconds s , be indeed a new experience . " , " say , speak low , and still hold my hand , " do you see a picture in the boudoir of the old house ? " " I do ; a picture pain on a panel . " " the portrait of a nun ? " " yes . " " you hear she history ? " " yes . " " you remember what we see that night in the berceau ? " " I shall never forget it . " " you do not connect the two idea ; that would be folly ? " " I think of the apparition when I see the portrait , " say I ; which be true enough . " you do not , nor will you fancy , " pursue he , " that a saint in heaven perturb herself with rivalry of earth ? be rarely superstitious ; these morbid fancie will not beset you ?_ " " I know not what to think of this matter ; but I believe a perfectly natural solution of this see mystery will one day be arrive at . " " doubtless , doubtless . besides , no good -living woman --much less a pure , happy spirit-would trouble amity like ours n'est - il pa vrai ? " Ere I could answer , burst in , rosy and abrupt , call out that I be want . she mother be go into town to call on some english family , who have apply for a prospectus : my service be need as interpreter . the interruption be not unseasonable : sufficient for the day be always the evil ; for this hour , it be good suffice . yet I should have like to ask m . whether the " morbid fancie , " against which he warn I , wrotch in he own brain . . the Apple of . besides 's mother , another power have a word to say to . and I , before that covenant of friendship could be ratify . we be under the surveillance of a sleepless eye : watch jealously she son through that mystic lattice at which i have knelt once , and to which draw nigh month by month -- the slide panel of the confessional . " why be you so glad to be friend with ? " ask the reader . " have he not long be a friend to you ? have he not give proof on proof of a certain partiality in he feeling ? " yes , he have ; but still I like to hear he say so earnestly -- that he be my close , true friend ; I like he modest doubt , he tender deference -- that trust which long to rest , and be grateful when teach how . he have call I " sister . " it be well . yes ; he might call I what he please , so long as he confide in I . I be willing to be he sister , on condition that he do not invite I to fill that relation to some future wife of he ; and tacitly vow as he be to celibacy , of this dilemma there seem little danger . through most of the succeeding night I ponder that evening 's interview . I want much the morning to break , and then listen for the bell to ring ; and , after rise and dress , I deeme prayer and breakfast slow , and all the hour
hour lingering , till that arrive at last which bring I the lesson of literature . my wish be to get a more thorough comprehension of this fraternal alliance : to note with how much of the brother he would demean himself when we meet again ; to prove how much of the sister be in my own feeling ; to discover whether I could summon a sister 's courage , and he a brother 's frankness . he come . life be so construct , that the event do not , can not , will not , match the expectation . that whole day he never accost I . he lesson be give rather more quietly than usual , more mildly , and also more gravely . he be fatherly to he pupil , but he be not brotherly to I . Ere he leave the classe , I expect a smile , if not a word ; I get neither : to my portion fall one nod -- hurrie , shy . this distance , I argue , be accidental -- it be involuntary ; patience , and it will vanish . it vanish not ; it continue for day ; it increase . I suppress my surprise , and swallow whatever other feeling begin to surge . well might I ask when he offer fraternity -- " dare I rely on you ? " well might he , doubtless know himself , withhold all pledge . true , he have bid I make my own experiment -- tease and try he . vain injunction ! privilege nominal and unavailable ! some woman might use it ! nothing in my powers or instinct place I amongst this brave band . leave alone , I be passive ; repulse , I withdraw ; forgote -- my lip would not utter , nor my eye dart a reminder . it seem there have be a error somewhere in my calculation , and I want for time to disclose it . but the day come when , as usual , he be to give I a lesson . one evening in seven he have long generously bestow on I , devote it to the examination of what have be do in various study during the past week , and to the preparation of work for the week in prospect . on these occasion my schoolroom be anywhere , wherever the pupil and the other teacher happen to be , or in they close vicinage , very often in the large second division , where it be easy to choose a quiet nook when the crowding day pupil be absent , and the few boarder gather in a knot about the surveillante 's estrade . on the customary evening , hear the customary hour strike , I collect my book and papers , my pen and ink , and seek the large division . in classe there be no one , and it lay all in cool deep shadow ; but through the open double door be see the carre , fill with pupil and with light ; over hall and figure blush the westering sun . it blush so ruddily and vividly , that the hue of the wall and the variegated tints of the dress seem all fuse in one warm glow . the , girl be seat , work or study ; in the midst of they circle stand , speak good - humouredly to a teacher . he dark paletot , he jetty hair , be tinge with many a reflex of crimson ; he spanish face , when he turn it momentarily , answer the sun 's animated kiss with a animated smile . I take my place at a desk . the orange - tree , and several plant , full and bright with bloom , bask also in the sun 's laugh bounty ; they have partake it the whole day , and now ask water . have a taste for gardening ; he like to tend and foster plant . I use to think that work amongst shrub with a spade or a watering - pot soothe he nerve ; it be a recreation to which he often have recourse ; and now be look to the orange - tree , the geranium , the gorgeous cactuse , and revive they all with the refreshment they drotch need . he lip meantime sustain he precious cigar , that ( for he ) first necessary and prime luxury of life ; it be blue wreat curl prettily enough amongst the flower , and in the evening light . he speak no more to the pupil , nor to the mistress , but give many a endearing word to a small spanieless ( if one may coin a word ) , that nominally belong to the house , but virtually own he as master , be fonder of he than any inmate . a delicate , silky , loving , and lovable little doggie she be , trot at he side , look with expressive , attach eye into he face ; and whenever he drop he bonnet - grec or he handkerchief , which he occasionally do in play , crouch beside it with the air of a miniature lion guard a kingdom 's flag . there be many plant , and as the amateur gardener fetch all the water from the well in the court , with he own active hand , he work spun on to some length . the great school - clock tick on . another hour struck . the carre and the youthful group lose the illusion of sunset . day be droop . my lesson , I perceive , must to - night be very short ; but the orange - tree , the cacto , the camelias be all serve now . be it my turn ? ! in
in the garden be more plant to be look after , -- favourite rose - bushes , certain choice flower ; little 's glad bark and whine follow the receding paletot down the alley . I put up some of my book ; I should not want they all ; I sit and think ; and wait , involuntarily deprecat the creeping invasion of twilight . , gaily frisk , emerge into view once more , herald the return paletot ; the water - pot be deposite beside the well ; it have fulfil it be office ; how glad I be ! yoMonsieu washed he hand in a little stone bowl . there be no longer time for a lesson now ; ere long the prayer - bell must ring ; but still we should meet ; he would speak ; a chance would be offer of reading in he eye the riddle of he shyness . he ablution over , he stand , slowly re-arrange he cuff , look at the horn of a young moon , set pale in the opal sky , and glimmer faint on the oriel of . watch the mood contemplative ; its stillness irk she ; she whin and jump to break it . he look down . " Petite exigeante , " say he ; " you must not be forget one moment , it seem . " he stop , lift she in he arm , saunter across the court , within a yard of the line of window near one of which I sit : he saunter lingeringly , fond the spaniel in he bosom , call she tender name in a tender voice . on the front - door step he turn ; once again he look at the moon , at the grey cathedral , over the remoter spire and house - roof fad into a blue sea of night - mist ; he taste the sweet breath of dusk , and note the fold bloom of the garden ; he suddenly look round ; a keen beam out of he eye ras the white facade of the class , sweep the long line of croisee . I think he bow ; if he do , I have no time to return the courtesy . in a moment he be gone ; the moonlit threshold lay pale and shadowless before the close front door . gather in my arm all that be spread on the desk before I , I carry back the unused heap to its place in the third classe . the prayer - bell rang ; I obey its summon . the morrow would not restore he to the , that day be devote entirely to he college . I get through my teaching ; I get over the intermediate hour ; I see evening approaching , and arm myself for its heavy ennuis . whether it be worse to stay with my co-inmate , or to sit alone , I have not consider ; I naturally take up the latter alternative ; if there be a hope of comfort for any moment , the heart or head of no human be in this house could yield it ; only under the lid of my desk could it harbour , nestle between the leaf of some book , gild a pencil - point , the nib of a pen , or tinge the black fluid in that ink - glass . with a heavy heart I open my desk - lid ; with a weary hand I turn up its contents . one by one , well - accustom book , volume sewn in familiar cover , be take out and put back hopeless : they have no charm ; they could not comfort . be this something new , this pamphlet in lilac ? I have not see it before , and I re-arrange my desk this very day -- this very afternoon ; the tract must have be introduce within the last hour , while we be at dinner . I open it . what be it ? what would it say to I ? it be neither tale nor poem , neither essay nor history ; it neither sung , nor related , not discuss . it be a theological work ; it preach and it persuade . I lent to it my ear very willingly , for , small as it be , it possess its own spell , and bound my attention at once . it preach ; it persuade to conversion . the voice of that sly little book be a honeyed voice ; its accents be all unction and balm . here roar no utterance of 's thunder , no blasting of the breath of she displeasure . the protestant be to turn Papist , not so much in fear of the heretic 's hell , as on account of the comfort , the indulgence , the tenderness Holy offer : far be it from she to threat or to coerce ; she wish be to guide and win . _She persecute ? oh dear no ! not on any account ! this meek volume be not address to the hardened and worldly ; it be not even strong meat for the strong : it be milk for babe : the mild effluence of a mother have live towards she tenderest and she youngest ; intend wholly and solely for those whose head be to be reache through the heart . it be appeal be not to intellect ; it seek to win the affectionate through they affections , the sympathizing through they sympathy : , gather he orphan about he , never speak more sweetly . I remember one capital inducement to apostacy be hold out in the fact that the who have lose dear friend by death could enjoy the unspeakable solace of praie they out
out of purgatory . the writer do not touch on the firmer peace of those whose belief dispense with purgatory altogether : but I think of this ; and , on the whole , prefer the latter doctrine as the most consolatory . the little book amuse , and do not painfully displease I . it be a canting , sentimental , shallow little book , yet something about it cheer my gloom and make I smile ; I be amuse with the gambol of this unlicked wolf - cub muff in the fleece , and mimick the bleat of a guileless lamb . portion of it remind I of certain tracts I have once read when a child ; they be flavoure with about the same seasoning of excitation to fanaticism . he that have write it be no bad man , and while perpetually betraie the train cunning -- the cloven hoof of he system -- I should pause before accuse himself of insincerity . he judgament , however , want surgical prop ; it be rickety . I smile then over this dose of maternal tenderness , come from the ruddy old lady of the ; smile , too , at my own disinclination , not to say disability , to meet these melte favour . Glance at the title - page , I find the name of " . " a fly - leaf bore in small , but clear and well - know pencil character : " from to -- . " and when I see this I laugh : but not in my former spirit . I be revive . a mortal bewilderment clear suddenly from my head and vision ; the solution of the Sphinx - riddle be win ; the conjunction of those two name , and , give the key to all . the penitent have be with he director ; permit to withhold nothing ; suffer to keep no corner of he heart sacr to and to himself ; the whole narrative of we late interview have be draw from he ; he have avow the covenant of fraternity , and speak of he adopt sister . how could such a covenant , such adoption , be sanction by the Church ? Fraternal communion with a heretic ! I seem to hear Silas annull the unholy pact ; warn he penitent of its peril ; entreat , enjoin reserve , nay , by the authority of he office , and in the name , and by the memory of all hold most dear and sacr , command the enforcement of that new system whose frost have pierce to the marrow of my bone . these may not seem pleasant hypotheses ; yet , by comparison , they be welcome . the vision of a ghostly troubler hover in the background , be as nothing , match with the fear of spontaneous change arise in himself . at this distance of time , I can not be sure how far the above conjecture be self - suggest : or in what measure they owed they origin and confirmation to another quarter . help be not want . this evening there be no bright sunset : west and east be one cloud ; no summer night - mist , blue , yet rose -tinge , soften the distance ; a clammy fog from the marsh crept grey round . to - night the watering - pot might rest in it be nico by the well : a small rain have be drizzl all the afternoon , and still it fall fast and quietly . this be no weather for rambling in the wet alley , under the dripping tree ; and I start to hear 's sudden bark in the garden -- she bark of welcome . surely she be not accompany and yet this glad , quick bark be never utter , save in homage to one presence . through the glass door and the arching berceau , I command the deep vista of the allee defendue : thither rush Sylvie , glisten through its gloom like a white guelder- rise . she run to and fro , whining , spring , harasse little bird amongst the bushes . I watch five minute ; no fulfilment follow the oman . I return to my book ; 's sharp bark suddenly cease . again I look up . she be stand not many yard distant , wag she white feathery tail as fast as the muscle would work , and intently watch the operation of a spade , ply fast by a indefatigable hand . there be , bend over the soil , digge in the wet mould amongst the rain - laden and stream shrub , work as hard as if he day 's pittance be yet to earn by the literal sweat of he brow . in this sign I read a ruffle mood . he would dig thus in frozen snow on the coldest winter day , when urge inwardly by painful emotion , whether of nervous excitation , or , sad thought of self - reproach . he would dig by the hour , with knit brow and set tooth , nor once lift he head , or open he lip . watch till she be tired . again scamper devious , bounde here , rush there , snuff and sniff everywhere ; she at last discover I in classe . instantly she fly barking at the pane , as if to urge I forth to share she pleasure or she master 's toil ; she have see I occasionally walk in that alley with ; and I doubt not , consider it my duty to join he now , wet as it be . she make such a bustle that . at last look up , and of course perceive why , and at whom she bark .
. he whistle to call she off ; she only bark the louder . she seem quite bent upon have the glass door open . tire , I suppose , with she importunity , he throw down he spade , approach , and push the door ajar . Sylvie burst in all impetuous , spring to my lap , and with she paw at my neck , and she little nose and tongue somewhat overpoweringly busy about my face , mouth , and eye , flourish she bushy tail over the desk , and scatter book and papers far and wide . advanc to still the clamour and repair the disarrangement . have gather up the book , he capture , and stow she away under he paletot , where she nestle as quiet as a mouse , she head just pee forth . she be very tiny , and have the prettiest little innocent face , the silkiest long ear , the finest dark eye in the world . I never see she , but I think of : forgive the association , reader , it _would occur . m . pet and pat she ; the endearment she receive be not to be wonder at ; she invite affection by she beauty and she vivacious life . while caresse the spaniel , he eye rove over the papers and book just replace ; it settle on the religious tract . he lip move ; he half check the impulse to speak . what ! have he promise never to address I more ? if so , he better nature pronounce the vow " more honoured in the breach than in the observance , " for with a second effort , he speak .--" you have not yet read the brochure , I presume ? it be not sufficientely invite ? " I reply that I have read it . he wait , as if wish I to give a opinion upon it unasked . Unasked , however , I be in no mood to do or say anything . if any concession be to be make -- if any advance be demand -- that be the affair of the very docile pupil of , not mine . he eye settle upon I gently : there be mildness at the moment in its blue ray -- there be solicitude -- a shade of patho ; there be meaning composite and contrast -- reproach melt into remorse . at the moment probably , he would have be glad to see something emotional in I . I could not show it . in another minute , however , I should have betrayed confusion , have I not bethotch myself to take some quill - pens from my desk , and begin soberly to mmend they . I know that action would give a turn to he mood . he never like to see I mmend pens ; my knife be always dull - ed -- my hand , too , be unskilful ; I hack and chip . on this occasion I cut my own finger -- half on purpose . I want to restore he to he natural state , to set he at he ease , to get he to chide . " ! " he cry at last , " she will make mincemeat of she hand . " he put down , make she lie quiet beside he bonnet - grec , and , deprive I of the pens and penknife , proceed to slice , nib , and point with the accuracy and celerity of a machine . " do I like the little book ? " he now inquire . Suppresse a yawn , I say I hardly know . " have it move I ? " " I think it have make I a little sleepy . " ( after a pause :) " Allons donc ! it be of no use take that tone with he . bad as I be -- and he should be sorry to have to name all my fault at a breath -- and nature have give I ' trop de sensibilite et de sympathie ' not to be profoundly affect by a appeal so touch . " " indeed ! " I respond , rouse myself quickly , " I be not affect at all -- not a whit . " and in proof , I draw from my pocket a perfectly dry handkerchief , still clean and in its fold . Hereupon I be make the object of a string of stricture rather piquant than polite . I listen with zest . after those two day of unnatural silence , it be better than music to hear m . harangue again just in he old fashion . I listen , and meantime solace myself and with the contents of a bonbonniere , which 's gifts keep well supply with chocolate comfit : it please he to see even a small matter from he hand duly appreciate . he look at I and the spaniel while we share the spoil ; he put up he penknife . touch my hand with the bundle of new -cut quill , he say :-- " donc , petite soeur -- speak frankly -- what have you think of I during the last two day ? " but of this question I would take no manner of notice ; its purport make my eye fill . I caress assiduously . , lean -- over the desk , bend towards I :--" I call myself you brother , " he say : " I hardly know what I be -- brother -- friend -- I can not tell . I know I think of you -- I feel I wish , you well -- but I must check myself ; you be to be fear . my best friend point out danger ,
, and whisper caution . " " you do right to listen to you friend . by all means be cautious . " " it be you religion -- you strange , self - reliant , invulnerable creed , whose influence seem to clothe you in , I know not what , unblessed panoply . you be good -- call you good , and love you -- but you terrible , proud , earnest Protestantism , there be the danger . it express itself by you eye at time ; and again , it give you certain tone and certain gesture that make my flesh creep . you be not demonstrative , and yet , just now -- when you handle that tract -- my ! I think smile . " " certainly I do not respect that tract -- what then ? " " not respect that tract ? but it be the pure essence of faith , love , charity ! I think it would touch you : in it be gentleness , I trust that it could not fail . I lay it in you desk with a prayer : I must indeed be a sinner : heaven will not hear the petition that come warmest from my heart . you scorn my little offering . oh , cela I fait mal ! " " Monsieur , I do not scorn it -- at least , not as you gift . Monsieur , sit down ; listen to I . I be not a heathen , I be not hard - hear , I be not unchristian , I be not dangerous , as they tell you ; I would not trouble you faith ; you believe in and and the , and so do I . " " but _do_ you believe in the ? do you receive ? what limit be there to the wild , careless daring of you country and sect . drop dark hint . " by dint of persuasion , I make he half - define these hint ; they amounte to crafy Jesuit - slander . that night m . and I talk seriously and closely . he plead , he argue . could not argue -- a fortunate incapacity ; it need but triumphant , logical opposition to effect all the director wish to be effect ; but I could talk in my own way -- the way m . be use to -- and of which he could follow the meandering and fill the hiatus , and pardon the strange stammering , strange to he no longer . at ease with he , I could defend my creed and faith in my own fashion ; in some degree I could lull he prejudice . he be not satisfie when he go away , hardly be he appease ; but he be make thoroughly to feel that be not necessarily the irreverent he director have insinuate ; he be make to comprehend something of they mode of honour the , the life , the ; he be enable partly to perceive that , while they veneration for thing venerable be not quite like that cultivate in he , it have its own , perhaps , deeper power -- its own more solemn awe . I find that ( himself , I must repeat , not a bad man , though the advocate of a bad cause ) have darkly stigmatize in general , and myself by inference , with strange name , have ascribe to we strange " ism ; " reveal all this in he frank fashion , which know not secretiveness , look at I as he speak with a kind , earnest fear , almost trembl lest there should be truth in the charge . , it seem , have closely watch I , have ascertain that I go by turn , and indiscriminately , to the three Protestant Chapel of -- the french , german , and --_id est_ , the , , . such liberality argue in the father 's eye profound indifference -- who tolerate all , he reason , can be attach to no . now , it happen that I have often secretly wonder at the minute and unimportant character of the difference between these three sect -- at the unity and identity of they vital doctrine : I see nothing to hinder they from be one day fuse into one grand , and I respecte they all , though I think that in each there be fault of form , incumbrance , and triviality . just what I think , that do I tell , and explain to he that my own last appeal , the guide to which i look , and the teacher which I own , must always be the itself , rather than any sect , of whatever name or nation . he leave I soothe , yet full of solicitude , breathe a wish , as strong as a prayer , that if I be wrong , heaven would lead I right . I hear , pour forth on the threshold , some fervid murmuring to " , , " some deep aspiration that _his_ hope might yet be _mine _. ! I have no such feverish wish to turn he from the faith of he father . I think wrong , a great mixed image of gold and clay ; but it seem to I that _this_ hold the purer element of he creed with a innocency of heart which must love . the preceding conversation pass between eight and nine o'clock of the evening , in a schoolroom of the quiet , open on a sequester garden . probably about the same , or a somewhat later hour of the succeed evening , it be echoe , collect by holy obedience , be breathe verbatim in a attent ear , at the panel of
of a confessional , in the hoary church of the . it ensue that pay a visit to , and stir by I know not what mixture of motive , persuade she to let he undertake for a time the 's spiritual direction . Hereupon I be put through a course of reading -- that be , I just glance at the book lent I ; they be too little in my way to be thoroughly read , mark , learn , or inwardly digest . and beside , I have a book up - stair , under my pillow , whereor certain chapter satisfied my need in the article of spiritual lore , furnish such precept and example as , to my heart 's core , I be convince could not be improve on . then show I the fair side of , she good work ; and bay I judge the tree by its fruit . in answer , I feel and I avow that these work be _not the fruit of ; they be but she abundant blossom , but the fair promise she show the world , that bloom , when set , savoure not of charity ; the apple full form be ignorance , abasement , and bigotry . out of man 's affliction and affection be for the rivet of they servitude . Poverty be feed and clothed , and shelter , to bind it by obligation to " the Church ; " orphanage be rear and educate that it might grow up in the fold of " the Church ; " sickness be ten that it might die after the formula and in the ordinance of " the Church ; " and man be overwrotch , and woman most murderously sacrifice , and all laid down a world make pleasant for he creature 's good , and take up a cross , monstrous in its galling weight , that they might serve , prove she sanctity , confirm she power , and spread the reign of she tyrant " . " for man 's good be little do ; for 's glory , less . a thousand way be open with pain , with blood - sweats , with lavishing of life ; mountain be clove through they breast , and rock be split to they base ; and all for what ? that a Priesthood might march straight on and straight upward to a all - dominate eminence , whence they might at last stretch the sceptre of they Moloch " . " it will not be . be not with , and , be human sorrow still for the of , would he not mourn over she cruelty and ambition , as once he mourn over the crime and woe of doom ! oh , lover of power ! oh , mir aspirant for this world 's kingdom ! a hour will come , even to you , when it will be well for you heart -- pause faint at each break beat -- that there be a mercy beyond human compassion , a love , stronger than this strong death which even you must face , and before it , fall ; a Charity more potent than any sin , even yours ; a Pity which redeem worlds -- nay , absolve Priest . * * * * * my third temptation be hold out in the pomp of -- the glory of she kingdom . I be take to the churche on solemn occasion -- day of fete and state ; I be show the Papal ritual and ceremonial . I look at it . many people --man and woman -- no doubt far my superior in a thousand way , have feel this display impressive , have declare that though they Reason protest , they imagination be subjugate . I can not say the same . neither full procession , nor high mass , nor swarm taper , nor swing censer , nor ecclesiastical millinery , nor celestial jewellery , touch my imagination a whit . what I see strike I as tawdry , not grand ; as grossly material , not poetically spiritual . this I do not tell Pere Silas ; he be old , he look venerable : through every abortive experiment , under every repeat disappointment , he remain personally kind to I , and I feel tender of hurt he feeling . but on the evening of a certain day when , from the balcony of a great house , I have be make to witness a huge mingled procession of the church and the army --priest with relic , and soldier with weapon , a obese and aged archbishop , habite in cambric and lace , look strangely like a grey daw in bird - of - paradise plumage , and a band of young girl fantastically rob and garland --_then_ I speak my mind to . " I do not like it , " I tell he ; " I do not respect such ceremony ; I wish to see no more . " and have relieve my conscience by this declaration , I be able to go on , and , speak more currently and clearly than my wont , to show he that I have a mind to keep to my reform creed ; the more I see of the closer I cling to ; doubtless there be error in every church , but I now perceive by contrast how severely pure be my own , compare with she whose paint and meretricious face have be unveiled for my admiration . I tell he how we keep fewer form between we and ; retain , indeed , no more than , perhaps , the nature of mankind in the mass render necessary for due observance . I tell he I could not look on flower and tinsel , on wax
wax - light and embroidery , at such time and under such circumstance as should be devoted to lift the secret vision to whose home be infinity , and he be -- . that when I think of sin and sorrow , of earthly corruption , mortal depravity , weighty temporal woe -- I could not care for chanting priest or mumm official ; that when the pain of existence and the terror of dissolution press before I -- when the mighty hope and measureless doubt of the future arise in view --_ then , even the scientific strain , or the prayer in a language learn and dead , harass : with hindrance a heart which only long to cry --" be merciful to I , a sinner ! " when I have so spoken , so declare my faith , and so widely severe myself , from he I address -- then , at last , come a tone accordant , a echo responsive , one sweet chord of harmony in two conflicting spirit . " whatever say priest or controversialist , " murmure , " be good , and love all the sincere . , then , what you can ; believe it as you can ; one prayer , at least , we have in common ; I also cry , tsois appaise enver moi qui suis pecheur ! ' " he lean on the back of my chair . after some think he again speak : " how seem in the eyes of that who make all firmament , from whose nostril issue whatever of life be here , or in the star shin yonder -- how seem the difference of man ? but as be not for , nor , so neither be measure , nor . we abase ourselves in we littleness , and we do right ; yet it may be that the constancy of one heart , the truth and faith of one mind accord to the light he have appoint , import as much to as the motion of satellite about they planets , of planets about they suns , of suns around that mighty unseen centre incomprehensible , irrealizable , with strange mental effort only divine . " guide we all ! bless you , ! " . . it be very , well for to decline further correspondence with till she father have sanction the intercourse . but could not live within a league of the , and not contrive to visit there often . both lover mean at first , I believe , to be distant ; they keep they intention so far as demonstrative courtship go , but in feel they soon draw very near . all that be best in seek ; whatever in he be noble , awoke , and grow in she presence . with he past admiration of , I suppose he intellect have little to do , but he whole intellect , and he highest taste , come in question now . these , like all he faculty , be active , eager for nutriment , and alive to gratification when it come . I can not say that designedly lead he to talk of book , or formally propose to herself for a moment the task of win he to reflection , or plan the improvement of he mind , or so much as fancie he mind could in any one respect be improve . she think he very perfect ; it be himself , who , at first by the merest chance , mention some book he have be read , and when in she response sound a welcome harmony of sympathy , something , pleasant to he soul , he talk on , more and better perhaps than he have ever talk before on such subject . she listen with delight , and answer with animation . in each successive answer , hear a music waxing finer and finer to he sense ; in each he find a suggestive , persuasive , magic accent that open a , scarce - know treasure - house withing , show he unsuspected power in he own mind , and what be better , latent goodness in he heart . like the way in which the other talk ; the voice , the diction , the expression please ; each keenly relish the flavour of the other 's wit ; they meet each other 's mean with strange quickness , they thought often match like carefully - chosen pearl . have wealth of mirth by nature ; possess no such inherent flow of animal spirit -- unstimulated , she inclin to be thoughtful and pensive -- but now she seem merry as a lark ; in she lover 's genial presence , she glance like some soft glad light . how beautiful she grow in she happiness , I can hardly express , but I wonder to see she . as to that genle ice of hers -- that reserve on which she have depend ; where be it now ? ah ! would not long bear it ; he bring with he a generous influence that soon thaw the timid , self - imposed restriction . now be the old day talk over ; perhaps brokenly at first , with a sort of smile diffidence , then with opening candour and still grow confidence . have make for himself a better opportunity than that he have wish I to give ; he have earn independence of the collateral help that disoblige have refuse ; all he reminiscence of " little " find they proper expression in he own pleasant tone , by he own kind and handsome lip ; how much better than if suggest by I . more than once when we be alone , would tell I how wonderful and curiious it be to discover the richness and accuracy of
of he memory in this matter . how , while he be look at she , recollection would seem to be suddenly quicken in he mind . he remind she that she have once gather he head in she arm , caress he leonine graces , and cry out , " , I _do_ like you ! " he tell she how she would set a footstool beside he , and climb by its aid to he knee . at this day he say he could recall the sensation of she little hand smoothe he cheek , or bury themselves in he thick mane . he remember the touch of she small forefinger , place half tremblingly , half curiously , in the cleft in he ching , the lisp , the look with which she would name it " a pretty dimple , " then seek he eye and question why they pierce so , tell he he have a " nice , strange face ; far nicer , far stranger , than either he mamma or . " " child as I be , " remark , " I wonder how I da be so venturous . to I he seem now all sacred , he lock be inaccessible , and , , I feel a sort of fear , when I look at he firm , marble ching , at he straight greek feature . woman be call beautiful , Lucy ; he be not like a woman , therefore I suppose he be not beautiful , but what be he , then ? do other people see he with my eye ? do _you_ admire he ? " " I will tell you what I do , , " be once my answer to she many question . " _I never see he . I look at he twice or thrice about a year ago , before he recognise I , and then I shut my eye ; and if he be to cross they ball twelve time between each day 's sunset and sunrise , except from memory , I should hardly know what shape have go by . " " , what do you mean ? " say she , under she breath . " I mean that I value vision , and dread be strike stone blind . " it be best to answer she strongly at once , and to silence for ever the tender , passionate confidence which leave she lip sweet honey , and sometimes drop in my ear -- molten lead . to I , she comment no more on she lover 's beauty . yet speak of he she would ; sometimes shyly , in quiet , brief phrasis ; sometimes with a tenderness of cadence , and music of voice exquisite in itself ; but which chaf I at time miserably ; and then , I know , I give she stern look and word ; but cloudless happiness have dazzl she native clear sight , and she only think -- fitful . " spartan girl ! ! " she would say , smile at I . " say you be the most peculiar , capricious little woman he know ; but yet you be excellent ; we both think so . " " you both think you know not what , " say I . " have the goodness to make I as little the subject of you mutual talk and thought as possible . I have my sort of life apart from yours . " " but ours , , be a beautiful life , or it will be ; and you shall share it . " " I shall share no man 's or woman 's life in this world , as you understand sharing . I think I have one friend of my own , but be not sure ; and till I _am_ sure , I live solitary . " " but solitude be sadness . " " yes ; it be sadness . life , however ; have worse than that . deeper than melancholy , lie heart - break . " " Lucy , I wonder if anybody will ever comprehend you altogether . " there be , in lover , a certain infatuation of egotism ; they will have a witness of they happiness , cost that witness what it may . have forbidden letter , yet write ; she have resolve against correspondence , yet she answer , be it only to chide . she show I these letter ; with something of the spoiled child 's wilfulness , and of the heiress 's imperiousness , she _made_ I read they . as I read 's , I scarce wonder at she exaction , and understand she pride : they be fine letter -- manly and fond -- modest and gallant . hers must have appear to he beautiful . they have not be write to show she talents ; still less , I think , to express she love . on the contrary , it appear that she have propose to herself the task of hiding that feel , and bridl she lover 's ardour . but how could such letter serve such a purpose ? be become dear as she life ; he draw she like a powerful magnet . for she there be influence unspeakable in all he utter , write , think , or look . with this unconfessed confession , she letter glow ; it kindle they , from greeting to adieu . " I wish papa know ; I _do_ wish papa know ! " begin now to be she anxious murmur . " I wish , and yet I fear . I can hardly keep back from tell he . there be nothing I long for more than to have this affair settle -- to speak out candidly ; and yet I
I dread the crisis . I know , I be certain , papa will be angry at the first ; I fear he will dislike I almost ; it will seem to he a untoward business ; it will be a surprise , a shock : I can hardly foresee it be whole effect on he . " the fact be -- she father , long calm , be begin to be a little stir : long blind on one point , a importunate light be begin to trespass on he eye . to _her _, he say nothing ; but when she be not look at , or perhaps think of he , I see he gaze and meditate on she . one evening -- be in she dressing - room , write , I believe , to ; she have leave I in the library , read -- come in ; he sit down : I be about to withdraw ; he request I to remain -- gently , yet in a manner which show he wish compliance . he have take he seat near the window , at a distance from I ; he open a desk ; he take from it what look like a memorandum - book ; of this book he study a certain entry for several minute . " , " say he , lay it down , " do you know my little girl 's age ? " " about eighteen , be it not , sir ? " " it seem so . this old pocket - book tell I she be bear on the 5th of , in the year 18 --, eighteen year ago . it be strange ; I have lose the just reckon of she age . I think of she as twelve -- fourteen -- a indefinite date ; but she seem a child . " " she be about eighteen , " I repeat . " she be grow up ; she will be no taller . " " my little jewel ! " say , in a tone which penetrat like some of he daughter 's accent . he sit very thoughtful . " Sir , do not grieve , " I say ; for I know he feeling , utterly unspoken as they be . " she be the only pearl I have , " he say ; " and now other will find out that she be pure and of price : they will covet she . " I make no answer . have dine with we that day ; he have shone both in converse and look : I know not what pride of bloom embellish he aspect and mellow he intercourse . under the stimulus of a high hope , something have unfolded in he whole manner which compelle attention . I think he have purpose on that day to indicate the origin of he endeavour , and the aim of he ambition . have find himself force , in a manner , to descry the direction and catch the character of he homage . slow in remarking , he be logical in reason : have once seize the thread , it have guide he through a long labyrinth . " where be she ? " he ask . " she be up - stair . " " what be she do ? " " she be write . " " she write , do she ? do she receive letter ? " " none but such as she can show I . and --sir --she --_they have long want to consult you . " " Pshaw ! they do not think of I -- a old father ! I be in the way . " " ah , -- not so -- that can not be ! but must speak for herself : and , too , must be he own advocate . " " it be a little late . matter be advanced , it seem . " " sir , till you approve , nothing be do -- only they love each other . " " only ! " he echo . invest by fate with the part of confidante and mediator , I be oblige to go on : " hundred of time have be on the point of appealing to you , sir ; but , with all he high courage , he fear you mortally . " " he may well -- he may well fear I . he have touch the best thing I have . have he but let she alone , she would have remain a child for year yet . so . be they engage ? " " they could not become engage without you permission . " " it be well for you , , to talk and think with that propriety which always characterize you ; but this matter be a grief to I ; my little girl be all I have : I have no more daughter and no son ; might as well have look elsewhere ; there be score of rich and pretty woman who would not , I daresay , dislike he : he have look , and conduct , and connection . would nothing serve he but my Polly ? " " if he have never see you ' Polly , ' other might and would have pleas he -- you niece , , for instance . " " ah ! I would have give he with all my heart ; but !-- I can not let he have she . no -- I can not . he be not she equal , " he affirm , rather grufinitely . " in what particular be he she match ? they talk of fortune ! I be not a avaricious or interested man , but the world think of these thing -- and Polly will
will be rich . " " yes , that be know , " say I : " all know she as a heiress . " " do they talk of my little girl in that light ? " " they do , sir . " he fall into deep thought . I venture to say , " would you , sir , think any one 's match ? would you prefer any other to ? do you think higher rank or more wealth would make much difference in you feeling towards a future son - in - law ? " " you touch I there , " say he . " look at the aristocracy of -- you would not like they , sir ? " " I should not -- never a duc , baron , or vicomte of the lot . " " I be tell many of these persons think about she , sir , " I go on , gain courage on finding that I meet attention rather than repulse . " other suitor will come , therefore , if be refuse . wherever you go , I suppose , aspirant will not be want . independent of heiress - ship , it appear to I that charms most of those who see she . " " do she ? how ? my little girl be not think a beauty . " " , be very beautiful . " " Nonsense !-- begge you pardon , , but I think you be too partial . I like Polly : I like all she way and all she look -- but then I be she father ; and even I never think about beauty . she be amusing , fairy - like , interest to I ; -- you must be mistaken in suppose she handsome ? " " she attract , sir : she would attract without the advantages of you wealth and position . " " my wealth and position ! be these any bait to ? if I think so ---- " " know these point perfectly , as you may be sure , , and value they as any gentleman would -- as _you_ would yourself , under the same circumstance -- but they be not he bait . he love you daughter very much ; he feel she finest quality , and they influence he worthily . " " what ! have my little pet ' fine quality ? ' " " ah , sir ! do you observe she that evene when so many man of eminence and learn dine here ? " " I certainly be rather struck and surprise with she manner that day ; its womanliness make I smile . " " and do you see those accomplish gather round she in the drawing - room ? " " I do ; but I think it be by way of relaxation -- as one might amuse one 's self with a pretty infant . " " Sir , she demean herself with distinction ; and I hear the french gentleman say she be 's petrie d'esprit et de graces . ' think the same . " " she be a good , dear child , that be certain ; and I _do_ believe she have some character . when I think of it , I be once ill ; Polly nurse I ; they think I should die ; she , I recollect , grow at once stronger and tenderer as I grow worse in health . and as I recover , what a sunbeam she be in my sick - room ! yes ; she play about my chair as noiselessly and as cheerful as light . and now she be seek in marriage ! I do not want to part with she , " say he , and he groan . " you have know and so long , " I suggest , " it would be less like separation to give she to he than to another . " he reflect rather gloomily . " true . I have long know , " he murmure . " she and I be indeed old , old friend ; a sweet , kind girl she be when she be young . you talk of beauty , ! _she be handsome , if you will -- tall , straight , and blooming -- not the mere child or elf my seem to I : at eighteen , have a carriage and stature fit for a princess . she be a comely and a good woman now . the lad be like she ; I have always thought so , and favour and wish he well . now he repay I by this robbery ! my little treasure use to love she old father dearly and truly . it be all over now , doubtless -- I be a incumbrance . " the door open -- he " little treasure " come in . she be dress , so to speak , in evening beauty ; that animation which sometimes come with the close of day , warm she eye and cheek ; a tinge of summer crimson heighten she complexion ; she curl fall full and long on she lily neck ; she white dress sui the heat of . think I alone , she have bring in she hand the letter just write -- bring it fold but unseal . I be to read it . when she see she father , she tripping step falter a little , pause a moment -- the colour in she cheek flow rosy over she whole face . " Polly , " say , in a low voice , with a grave smile , " do you blush at see papa ? that be something new . " " I do not blush -- I never _do_ blush , " affir
affir she , while another eddy from the heart send up its scarlet . " but I think you be in the dining - room , and I want . " " you think I be with , I suppose ? but he have just be call out : he will be back soon , . he can post you letter for you ; it will save a ' course , ' as he call it . " " I do not post letter , " say she , rather pettishly . " what do you do with they , then ?--come here and tell I . " both she mind and gesture seem to hesitate a second -- to say " shall I come ? " -- but she approached . " how long be it since you become a letter - writer , ? it only seem yesterday when you be at you pot - hook , labour away absolutely with both hand at the pen . " " Papa , they be not letter to send to the post in you letter - bag ; they be only note , which I give now and then into the person 's hand , just to satisfy . " " the person ! that mean , I suppose ? " " no , papa -- not Lucy . " " who then ? perhaps ? " " no , papa -- not . " " who , then , my little daughter ? tell papa the truth . " " oh , papa ! " she cry with earnestness , " I will -- I _will_ tell you the truth -- all the truth ; I be glad to tell you -- glad , though I tremble . " she _did_ tremble : grow excitement , kindling feeling , and also gather courage , shook she . " I hate to hide my action from you , papa . I fear you and love you above everything but . read the letter ; look at the address . " she lay it on he knee . he take it up and read it through ; he hand shaking , he eye glisten meantime . he re-fold it , and view the writer with a strange , tender , mournful amaze . " can _she write so -- the little thing that stand at my knee but yesterday ? can she feel so ? " " , be it wrong ? do it pain you ? " " there be nothing wrong in it , my innocent little mary ; but it pain I . " " but , papa , listen ! you shall not be pain by I . I would give up everything -- almost " ( correcte herself ) ; " I would die rather than make you unhappy ; that would be too wicked ! " she shudder . " do the letter not please you ? must it not go ? must it be tear ? it shall , for you sake , if you order it . " " I order nothing . " " order something , papa ; express you wish ; only do not hurt , do not grieve . I cannot , _cannot bear that . I love you , papa ; but I love too -- because -- because -- it be impossible to help it . " " this splendo be a young scamp , -- that be my present notion of he : it will surprise you to hear that , for my part , I do not love he one whit . ah ! year ago I see something in that lad 's eye I never quite fathom -- something he mother have not -- a depth which warn a man not to wake into that stream too far ; now , suddenly , I find myself take over the crown of the head . " " Papa , you do not -- you have not fall in ; you be safe on the bank ; you can do as you please ; you power be despotic ; you can shut I up in a convent , and break 's heart to - morrow , if you choose to be so cruel . now , autocrat , now czar , will you do this ? " " off with he to , red whisker and all ; I say , I do not like he , Polly , and I wonder that you should . " " , " say she , " do you know you be very naughty ? I never see you look so disagreeable , so unjust , so almost vindictive before . there be a expression in you face which do not belong to you . " " off with he ! " pursue , who certainly do look sorely cross and annoye -- even a little bitter ; " but , I suppose , if he go , Polly would pack a bundle and run after he ; she heart be fairly win -- win , and wean from she old father . " " , I say it be naughty , it be decidedly wrong , to talk in that way . I be _not wean from you , and no human being and no mortal influence _can_ wean I . " " be married , Polly ! Espause the red whisker . cease to be a daughter ; go and be a wife ! " " R whisker ! I wonder what you mean , papa . you should take care of prejudice . you sometimes say to I that all the Scotch , you countryman , be the victim of prejudice . it be prove now , I think , when no distinction be to be make between red and deep nut - brown . " "
" leave the prejudiced old ; go away . " she stand look at he a minute . she want to show firmness , superiority to taunt ; know she father 's character , guess he few foible , she have expect the sort of scene which be now transpire ; it do not take she by surprise , and she desire to let it pass with dignity , reliant upon reaction . she dignity stand she in no stead . suddenly she soul melt in she eye ; she fall on he neck : --" I will not leave you , papa ; I will never leave you . I will not pain you ! I will never pain you ! " be she cry . " my lamb ! my treasure ! " murmure the loving though rug sire . he say no more for the moment ; indeed , those two word be hoarse . the room be now darkene . I hear a movement , a step without . think it might be a servant come with candle , I gently open , to prevent intrusion . in the ant - room stand no servant : a tall gentleman be place he hat on the table , draw off he glove slowly -- linger , wait , it seem to I . he call I neither by sign nor word ; yet he eye say :-- " Lucy , come here . " and I go . over he face a smile flow , while he look down on I : no temper , save he own , would have express by a smile the sort of agitation which now fevere he . " be there -- be he not ? " he inquire , point to the library . " yes . " " he notice I at dinner ? he understand I ? " " yes , . " " I be brotch up for judgment , then , and so be _she _? " " " ( we now and always continue to term he Home at time ) " be talk to he daughter . " " ! these be sharp moments , ! " he be quite stir up ; he young hand tremble ; a vital ( I be go to write _mortal , but such word ill apply to one all live like he ) -- a vital suspense now hold , now hurrie , he breath : in all this trouble he smile never fad . " be he _very angry , ? " " _she_ be very faithful , . " " what will be do unto I ? " " , you star must be fortunate . " " must it ? kind prophet ! so cheer , I should be a fai not heart indeed to quail . I think I find all woman faithful , . I ought to love they , and I do . my mother be good ; _she_ be divine ; and _you_ be true as steel . be you not ? " " yes , . " " then give I thy hand , my little god - sister : it be a friendly little hand to I , and always have be . and now for the great venture . be with the right . , say amen ! " he turn , and wait till I say " amen ! " -- which I do to please he : the old charm , in do as he bid I , come back . I wish he success ; and successful I know he would be . he be bear victor , as some be bear vanquished . " follow I ! " he say ; and I follow he into 's presence . " , " he ask , " what be my sentence ? " the father look at he : the daughter keep she face hide . " well , , " say , " you have give I the usual reward of hospitality . I entertain you ; you have take my best . I be always glad to see you ; you be glad to see the one precious thing I have . you speak I fair ; and , meantime , I will not say you _rob I , but I be bereave , and what I have lose , you _, it seem , have win . " " Sir , I can not repent . " " repent ! not you ! you triumph , no doubt : , you descende partly from a and a chief , and there be a trace of the Celt in all you look , speak , and think . you have he cunning and he charm . the red --( well then , Polly , the _fair ) hair , the tongue of guile , and brain of wile , be all come down by inheritance . " " Sir , I _feel honest enough , " say ; and a genuine blush cover he face with its warm witness of sincerity . " and yet , " he add , " I will not deny that in some respects you accuse I justly . in you presence I have always have a thought which I da not show you . I do truly regard you as the possessor of the most valuable thing the world own for I . I wish for it : I try for it . , I ask for it now . " " , you ask much . " " very much , sir . it must come from you generosity , as a gift ; from you justice , as a reward . I can never earn it . " " ay ! listen to the tongue ! " say . " look up , Polly !
! answer this ' braw wooer ;' send he away ! " she look up . she shyly glance at she eager , handsome suitor . she gaze tenderly on she furrowed sire . " Papa , I love you both , " say she ; " I can take care of you both . I need not send away -- he can live here ; he will be no inconvenience , " she allege with that simplicity of phraseology which at time be will not to make both she father and smile . they smile now . " he will be a prodigious inconvenience to I , " still persist . " I do not want he , Polly , he be too tall ; he be in my way . tell he to march . " " you will get used to he , papa . he seem exceedingly tall to I at first -- like a tower when I look up at he ; but , on the whole , I would rather not have he otherwise . " " I object to he altogether , Polly ; I can do without a son - in - law . I should never have request the best man in the land to stand to I in that relation . Dismiss this gentleman . " " but he have know you so long , papa , and suit you so well . " " Suit _me_ , forsooth ! yes ; he have pretend to make my opinion and taste he own . he have humour I for good reason . I think , Polly , you and I will bid he good - by . " " till to - morrow only . shake hand with , . " " no : I think not : I be not friend with he . do not think to coax I between you . " " indeed , indeed , you _are friend . , stretch out you right hand . Papa , put out yours . now , let they touch . , do not be stiff ; close you finger ; be pliant -- there ! but that be not a clasp -- it be a grasp ? Papa , you grasp like a vice . you crush 's hand to the bone ; you hurt he ! " he must have hurt he ; for he wear a massive ring , set round with brilliant , of which the sharp facet cut into 's flesh and draw blood : but pain only make , as anxiety have make he smile . " come with I into my study , " at last say home to the doctor . they go . they intercourse be not long , but I suppose it be conclusive . the suitor have to undergo a interrogatory and a scrutiny on many thing . whether be at time guileful in look and language or not , there be a sound foundation below . he answer , I understand afterwards , evince both wisdom and integrity . he have manage he affair well . he have struggle through entanglement ; he fortune be in the way of retrieval ; he prove himself in a position to marry . once more the father and lover appear in the library . shut the door ; he point to he daughter . " take she , " he say . " take she , : and may deal with you as you deal with she ! " * * * * * not long after , perhaps a fortnight , I see three person , , he daughter , and , sit on one seat , under a low - spreading and umbrageous tree , in the grounds of the palace at . they have come thither to enjoy a summer evening : outside the magnificent gate they carriage wait to take they home ; the green sweeps of turf spread round they quiet and dim ; the palace rise at a distance , white as a crag on ; the evening star shone above it ; a forest of flowering shrub embalm the climate of this spot ; the hour be still and sweet ; the scene , but for this group , be solitary . sit between the two gentleman : while they converse , she little hand be busy at some work ; I think at first she be bind a nosegay . no ; with the tiny pair of scissors , glitter in she lap , she have severe spoil from each manly head beside she , and be now occupy in plaiting together the grey lock and the golden wave . the plait woven -- no silk - thread be at hand to bind it -- a tress of she own hair be make to serve that purpose ; she tie it like a knot , prison it in a locket , and lay it on she heart . " now , " say she , " there be a amulet make , which have virtue to keep you two always friend . you can never quarrel so long as I wear this . " a amulet be indeed make , a spell fram which render enmity impossible . she be become a bond to both , a influence over each , a mutual concord . from they she draw she happiness , and what she borrowed , she , with interest , give back . " be there , indeed , such happiness on earth ? " I ask , as I watch the father , the daughter , the future husband , now unit -- all bless and blesse . yes ; it be so . without any colouring of romance , or any exaggeration of fancy , it be so . some real life do -- for some certain day
day or year -- actually anticipate the happiness of ; and , I believe , if such perfect happiness be once feel by good people ( to the wick it never come ) , its sweet effect be never wholly lose . whatever trials follow , whatever pain of sickness or shade of death , the glory precedent still shine through , cheer the keen anguish , and tinge the deep cloud . I will go farther . I _do_ believe there be some human being so bear , so reared , so guide from a soft cradle to a calm and late grave , that no excessive suffering penetrate they lot , and no tempestuous blackness overcast they journey . and often , these be not pamper , selfish being , but 's elect , harmonious and benign ; man and woman mild with charity , kind agent of 's kind attribute . let I not delay the happy truth . and be married , and such a agent do prove . he do not with time degenerate ; he fault decay , he virtue ripen ; he rise in intellectual refinement , he win in moral profit : all dregs filter away , the clear wine settle bright and tranquil . Bright , too , be the destiny of he sweet wife . she keep she husband 's love , she aid in he progress -- of he happiness she be the corner stone . this pair be bless indeed , for year bring they , with great prosperity , great goodness : they impart with open hand , yet wisely . Doubtless they know cross , disappointment , difficulty ; but these be well borne . more than once , too , they have to look on whose face flesh scarce can see and live : they have to pay they tribute to the King of Terrors . in the fulness of year , be take : in ripe old age depart . once even there rise a cry in they hall , of weepe for she child ; but other spring healthy and bloom to replace the lost : saw himself live again in a son who inherit he look and he disposition ; he have stately daughter , too , like himself : these child he rear with a suave , yet a firm hand ; they grow up accord to inheritance and nurture . in short , I do but speak the truth when I say that these two life of and be bless , like that of 's favour son , with " blessing of above , blessing of the deep that lie under . " it be so , for see that it be good . . cloud . but it be not so for all . what then ? he will be do , as do it surely will be , whether we humble ourselves to resignation or not . the impulse of creation forward it ; the strength of power , see and unseen , have its fulfilment in charge . proon of a life to come must be give . in fire and in blood , if needful , must that prohave be write . in fire and in blood do we trace the record throughout nature . in fire and in blood do it cross we own experience . , faint not through terror of this burn evidence . tire wayfarer , gird up thy loin ; look upward , march onward . Pilgrim and brother mourner , join in friendly company . through the wilderness of this world stretch the way for most of we : equal and steady be we tread ; be we cross we banner . for staff we have he promise , whose " word be try , whose way perfect :" for present hope he providence , " who give the shield of salvation , whose gentleness make great ; " for final home he bosom , who " dwell in the height of ; " for crowning prize a glory , exceeding and eternal . let we so run that we may obtain : let we endure hardness as good soldier ; let we finish we course , and keep the faith , reliant in the issue to come off more than conqueror : " be thou not from everlast mine holy one ? we shall not die ! " on a morning we be all assemble in classe , wait for the lesson of literature . the hour be come ; we expect the master . the pupil of the first classe sit very still ; the cleanly - write composition prepare since the last lesson lay ready before they , neatly tie with ribbon , wait to be gather by the hand of the Professor as he make he rapid round of the desk . the month be , the morning fine , the glass - door stood ajar , through it play a fresh breeze , and plant , grow at the lintel , wave , bend , look in , see to whisper tiding . be not always quite punctual ; we scarcely wonder at he be a little late , but we wonder when the door at last opened and , instead of he with he swiftness and he fire , there come quietly upon we the cautious . she approach 's desk ; she stand before it ; she draw round she the light shawl cover she shoulders ; begin to speak in low , yet firm tone , and with a fix gaze , she say , " this mor there will be no lesson of literature . " the second paragraph of she address follow , after about two minute ' pause . " it be probable the lesson will be suspend for a week . I shall require at least that space of
of time to find a efficient substitute for . meanwhile , it shall be we study to fill the blank usefully . " you professor , lady , " she go on , " intend , if possible , duly to take leave of you . at the present moment he have not leisure for that ceremony . he be prepare for a long voyage . a very sudden and urgent summon of duty call he to a great distance . he have decide to leave for a indefinite time . perhaps he may tell you more himself . lady , instead of the usual lesson with , you will , this morning , read with . " she bend she head courteously , draw closer the fold of she shawl , and pass from the classe . a great silence fall : then a murmur go round the room : I believe some pupil wept . some time elapse . the noise , the whispering , the occasional sobbing increase . I become conscious of a relaxation of discipline , a sort of grow disorder , as if my girl feel that vigilance be withdrawn , and that surveillance have virtually leave the classe . and the sense of duty enable I to rally quickly , to rise in my usual way , to speak in my usual tone , to enjoin , and finally to establish quiet . I make the read long and close . I keep they at it the whole morning . I remember feel a sentiment of impatience towards the pupil who sob . indeed , they emotion be not of much value : it be only a hysteric agitation . I tell they so unsparingly . I half ridicule they . I be severe . the truth be , I could not do with they tear , or that gas sound ; I could not bear it . a rather weak - minded , low - spirit pupil keep it up when the other have do ; relentless necessity oblige and assist I so to accost she , that she da not carry on the demonstration , that she be force to conquer the convulsion . that girl would have have a right to hate I , except that , when school be over and she companion depart , I order she to stay , and when they be go , I do what I have never do to one among they before -- presse she to my heart and kiss she cheek . but , this impulse yield to , I speedily put she out of the classe , for , upon that poignant strain , she weep more bitterly than ever . I fill with occupation every minute of that day , and should have like to sit up all night if I might have keep a candle burn ; the night , however , prove a bad time , and leave bad effect , prepare I ill for the next day 's ordeal of insufferable gossip . of course this news fall under general discussion . some little reserve have accompany the first surprise : that soon wear off ; every mouth open ; every tongue wag ; teacher , pupil , the very servants , mouth the name of " . " he , whose connection with the school be contemporary with its commencement , thus suddenly to withdraw ! all feel it strange . they talk so much , so long , so often , that , out of the very multitude of they word and rumour , grow at last some intelligence . about the third day I hear it say that he be to sail in a week ; then -- that he be bound for the west Indy . I look at 's face , and into she eye , for disproof or confirmation of this report ; I peruse she all over for information , but no part of she disclose more than what be unperturbed and commonplace . " this secession be a immense loss to she , " she allege . " she do not know how she should fill up the vacancy . she be so use to she kinsman , he have become she right hand ; what should she do without he ? she have oppose the step , but . have convince she it be he duty . " she say all this in public , in classe , at the dinner - table , speak audibly to . " why be it he duty ? " I could have ask she that . I have impulse to take hold of she suddenly , as she calmly pass I in classe , to stretch out my hand and grasp she fast , and say , " . let we hear the conclusion of the whole matter . why be it he duty to go into banishment ? " but always address some other teacher , and never look at I , never seem conscious I could have a care in the question . the week wear on . nothing more be say about come to bid we good - by ; and none seem anxious for he come ; none question whether or not he would come ; none betraye torment lest he should depart silent and unseen ; incessantly do they talk , and never , in all they talk , touch on this vital point . as to , she of course could see he , and say to he as much as she please . what should _so care whether or not he appear in the schoolroom ? the week consume . we be tell that he be go on such a day , that he destination be " Basseterre in : " the business which call he abroad related to a friend 's interest ,
, not he own : I think as much . " Basseterre in . " I have little sleep about this time , but whenever I _did_ slumber , it follow infallibly that I be quickly rouse with a start , while the word " , " " , " seem pronounce over my pillow , or run athwart the darkness round and before I , in zigzag character of red or violet light . for what I feel there be no help , and how could I help feel ? have be very kind to I of late day ; he have be grow hourly better and kinder . it be now a month since we have settle the theological difference , and in all that time there have be no quarrel . have we peace be the cold daughter of divorce ; we have not live aloon ; he have come oftener , he have talk with I more than before ; he have spend hour with I , with temper soothed , with eye content , with manner home - like and mild . kind subject of conversation have grow between we ; he have inquire into my plan of life , and I have communicate they ; the school project please he ; he make I repeat it more than once , though he call it a dream . the jar be over ; the mutual understanding be settle and fix ; feeling of union and hope make themselves profoundly feel in the heart ; affection and deep esteem and dawning trust have each fasten its bond . what quiet lesson I have about this time ! no more taunt on my " intellect , " no more menace of grat public show ! how sweetly , for the jealous gibe , and the more jealous , half - passionate eulogy , be substitute a mute , indulgent help , a fond guidance , and a tender forbearance which forgave but never praise . there be time when he would sit for many minute and not speak at all ; and when dusk or duty bring separation , he would leave with word like these , " est doux , le repo ! Il est precieux le calme bonheur ! " one evening , not ten short day since , he join I whilst walk in my alley . he take my hand . I look up in he face . I think he mean to arrest my attention . " Bonne petite amie ! " say he , softly ; " douce consolatrice ! " but through he touch , and with he word , a new feeling and a strange thought find a course . could it be that he be become more than friend or brother ? do he look speak a kindness beyond fraternity or amity ? he eloquent look have more to say , he hand draw I forward , he interpreting lip stir . no . not now . here into the twilight alley break a interruption : it come dual and ominous : we face two bodeful form -- a woman 's and a priest 's -- and . the aspect of the latter I shall never forget . on the first impulse it express a jean- sensibility , stir by the sign of affection just surprise ; then , immediately , darken over it the jaundice of ecclesiastical jealousy . he speak to _me_ with unction . he look on he pupil with sternness . as to , she , of course , see nothing -- nothing ; though she kinsman retain in she presence the hand of the heretic foreigner , not suffer withdrawal , but clasp it close and fast . follow these incident , that sudden announcement of departure have strike I at first as incredible . indeed , it be only frequent repetition , and the credence of the hundred and fifty mind round I , which force on I it be full acceptance . as to that week of suspense , with its blank , yet burn day , which bring from he no word of explanation -- I remember , but I can not describe its passage . the last day break . now would he visit we . now he would come and speak he farewell , or he would vanish mute , and be see by we nevermore . this alternative seem to be present in the mind of not a liive creature in that school . all rose at the usual hour ; all breakfaste as usual ; all , without reference to , or apparent thought of they late Professor , betake themselves with wonted phlegm to they ordinary duty . so oblivious be the house , so tame , so train its proceedings , so inexpectant its aspect -- I scarce know how to breathe in a atmosphere thus stagnant , thus smother . would no one lend I a voice ? have no one a wish , no one a word , no one a prayer to which i could say -- amen ? I have see they unanimous in demand for the merest trifle - - a treat , a holiday , a lesson 's remission ; they could not , they _would not now band to besiege , and insist on a last interview with a master who have certainly be love , at least by some -- love as _they could love -- but , oh ! what _i the love of the multitude ? I know where he liv : I know where he be to be hear of , or communicate with ; the distance be scarce a stone 's - throw : have it be in the next room --unsummoned , I could make no use of my knowledge . to follow , to seek out , to remind , to
to recall -- for these thing I have no faculty . might have pass within reach of my arm : have he pass silent and unnoticing , silent and stirless should I have suffer he to go by . waste . afternoon come , and I think all be over . my heart tremble in its place . my blood be troublead in its current . I be quite sick , and hardly know how to keep at my post -- or do my work . yet the little world round I plod on indifferent ; all see jocund , free of care , or fear , or think : the very pupil who , seven day since , have weep hysterically at a startling piece of news , appear quite to have forget the news , it be import , and they emotion . a little before five o'clock , the hour of dismissal , send for I to she chamber , to read over and translate some English letter she have receive , and to write for she the answer . before settle to this work , I observe that she softly close the two door of she chamber ; she even shut and fasten the casement , though it be a hot day , and free circulation of air be usually regard by she as indispensable . why this precaution ? a keen suspicion , a almost fierce distrust , suggest such question . do she want to exclude sound ? what sound ? I listen as I have never listen before ; I listen like the evening and winter - wolf , snuff the snow , scent prey , and hear far off the traveller 's tramp . yet I could both listen and write . about the middle of the letter I hear -- what check my pen -- a tread in the vestibule . no door - bell have ring ; -- act doubtless by order -- have anticipate such reveillee . see I halt . she cough , make a bustle , speak louder . the tread have pass on to the class . " proceed , " say ; but my hand be fetter , my ear enchain , my thought be carry off captive . the class form another building ; the hall part they from the dwelling - house : despite distance and partition , I hear the sudden stir of number , a whole division rise at once . " they be put away work , " say . it be indeed the hour to put away work , but why that sudden hush -- that instant quell of the tumult ? " wait , -- I will see what it be . " and I put down my pen and leave she . leave she ? no : she would not be leave : powerless to detain I , she rise and follow , close as my shadow . I turn on the last step of the stair . " be you come , too ? " I ask . " yes , " say she ; meet my glance with a peculiar aspect -- a look , cloude , yet resolute . we proceed then , not together , but she walk in my step . he be come . enter the first classe , I see he . there , once more appear the form most familiar . I doubt not they have try to keep he away , but he be come . the girl stand in a semicircle ; he be pass round , give he farewell , press each hand , touch with he lip each cheek . this last ceremony , foreign custom permit at such a parting -- so solemn , to last so long . I feel it hard that should dog I thus ; follow and watch I close ; my neck and shoulder shrunk in fever under she breath ; I become terribly goad . he be approach ; the semicircle be almost travel round ; he come to the last pupil ; he turn . but be before I ; she have step out suddenly ; she seem to magnify she proportion and amplify she drapery ; she eclipse I ; I be hide . she know my weakness and deficiency ; she could calculate the degree of moral paralysis -- the total default of self - assertion -- with which , in a crisis , I could be strike . she hasten to she kinsman , she break upon he volubly , she mastere he attention , she hurrie he to the door -- the glass - door open on the garden . I think he look round ; could I but have catch he eye , courage , I think , would have rush in to aid feeling , and there would have be a charge , and , perhaps , a rescue ; but already the room be all confusion , the semicircle break into group , my figure be lose among thirty more conspicuous . have she will ; yes , she get he away , and he have not see I ; he think I absent . five o'clock struck , the loud dismissal - bell rang , the school separate , the room empty . there seem , to my memory , a entire darkness and distraction in some certain minute I then pass alone -- a grief inexpressible over a loss unendurable . what should I do ; oh ! _what should I do ; when all my life 's hope be thus tear by the root out of my riven , outraged heart ? what I _should have do , I know not , when a little child -- the least child in the school -- break with its simplicity and its unconsciousness into the raging yet silent centre of
of that inward conflict . " , " lisp the treble voice , " I be to give you that . m . say I be to seek you all over the house , from the grenier to the cellar , and when I find you , to give you that . " and the child deliver a note ; the little dove drop on my knee , it be olive leaf pluck off . I find neither address nor name , only these word :-- " it be not my intention to take leave of you when I say good - by to the rest , but I hope to see you in classe . I be disappoint . the interview be defer . be ready for I . Ere I sail , I must see you at leisure , and speak with you at length . be ready ; my moments be numbe , and , just now , monopolize ; besides , I have a private business on hand which I will not share with any , nor communicate -- even to you .-- . " " be ready ? " then it must be this evening : be he not to go on the morrow ? yes ; of that point I be certain . I have see the date of he vessel 's departure advertise . oh ! _I_ would be ready , but could that longe - for meeting really be achieve ? the time be so short , the schemer seem so watchful , so active , so hostile ; the way of access appear strait as a gully , deep as a chasm -- straddle across it , breathe flame . could my Greatheart overcome ? could my guide reach I ? who might tell ? yet I begin to take some courage , some comfort ; it seem to I that I feel a pulse of he heart beat yet true to the whole throb of mine . I wait my champion . come traile he Hell behind he . I think if hold torment , it be form would not be fiery rack , nor it be nature despair . I think that on a certain day amongst those day which never dawn , and will not set , a angel enter Hade -- stood , shone , smile , deliver a prophecy of conditional pardon , kindle a doubtful hope of bliss to come , not now , but at a day and hour unlook for , reveal in he own glory and grandeur the height and compass of he promise : speak thus -- then towere , become a star , and vanish into he own Heaven . he legacy be suspense -- a worse boon than despair . all that evening I wait , trust in the dove - send olive - leaf , yet in the midst of my trust , terribly fear . my fear press heavy . cold and peculiar , I know it for the partner of a rarely - bely presentiment . the first hour seem long and slow ; in spirit I cling to the fly skirt of the last . they pass like drift cloud -- like the wrack scudding before a storm . they pass . all the long , hot summer day burn away like a Yule - log ; the crimson of its close perish ; I be leave bent among the cool blue shade , over the pale and ashe gleam of its night . prayer be over ; it be bed - time ; my co-inmate be all retired . I still remain in the gloomy first classe , forget , or at least disregard , rule I have never forget or disregard before . how long I pace that classe I can not tell ; I must have be afoot many hour ; mechanically have I move aside bench and desk , and have make for myself a path down its length . there I walk , and there , when certain that the whole household be a , and quite out of hearing -- there , I at last wept . on Night , confid in , I keep my tear seal , my sob chain , no longer ; they heav my heart ; they tore they way . in this house , what grief could be sacr ? after eleven o'clock -- a very late hour in the -- the door unclosed , quietly but not stealthily ; a lamp 's flame invade the moonlight ; enter , with the same compose air , as if come on a ordinary occasion , at a ordinary season . instead of at once address I , she go to she desk , take she key , and seem to seek something : she loiter over this feigned search long , too long . she be calm , too calm ; my mood scarce endure the pretence ; drive beyond common range , two hour since I have leave behind I wont respects and fear . lead by a touch , and rule by a word , under usual circumstance , no yoke could now be borne -- no curb obey . " it be more than time for retirement , " say ; " the rule of the house have already be transgress too long . " meet no answer : I do not check my walk ; when she come in my way , I put she out of it . " let I persuade you to calm , Meess ; let I lead you to you chamber , " say she , try to speak softly . " no ! " I say ; " neither you nor another shall persuade or lead I . " " you bed shall be war . be sit up still . she shall make you
you comfortable : she shall give you a sedative . " " Madame , " I break out , " you be a sensualist . under all you serenity , you peace , and you decorum , you be a undenied sensualist . make you own bed warm and soft ; take sedative and meat , and drink spiced and sweet , as much as you will . if you have any sorrow or disappointment -- and , perhaps , you have -- nay , I _know you have -- seek you own palliative , in you own chosen resource . leave I , however . leave I _, I say ! " " I must send another to watch you , Meess : I must send . " " I forbid it . let I alone . keep you hand off I , and my life , and my trouble . oh , ! in _your_ hand there be both chill and poison . you envenom and you paralyze . " " what have I do , ? you must not marry . he can not marry . " " dog in the manger ! " I say : for I know she secretly want he , and have always want he . she call he " insupportable : " she rail at he for a " devot : " she do not love , but she want to marry , that she might bind he to she interest . deep into some of 's secret I have enter -- I know not how : by a intuition or a inspiration which come to I -- I know not whence . in the course of live with she too , I have slowly learned , that , unless with a inferior , she must ever be a rival . she be _my rival , heart and soul , though secretely , under the smoothest bear , and utterly unknown to all save she and myself . two minute I stand over , feel that the whole woman be in my power , because in some mood , such as the present -- in some stimulate state of perception , like that of this instant -- she habitual disguise , she mask and she domino , were to I a mere network reticulate with hole ; and I see underneath a be heartless , self - indulgent , and ignoble . she quietly retreat from I : meek and self - possess , though very uneasy , she say , " if I would not be persuade to take rest , she must reluctantly leave I . " which she do incontinent , perhaps even more glad to get away , than I be to see she vanish . this be the sole flash -eliciting , truth - extort , rencontre which ever occur between I and : this short night - scene be never repeat . it do not one whit change she manner to I . I do not know that she revenge it . I do not know that she hate I the worse for my fell candour . I think she buckler herself with the secret philosophy of she strong mind , and resolve to forget what it irk she to remember . I know that to the end of we mutual life there occur no repetition of , no allusion to , that fiery passage . that night pass : all night -- even the starless night before dissolution -- must wear away . about six o'clock , the hour which call up the household , I go out to the court , and wash my face in its cold , fresh well - water . enter by the carre , a piece of mirror - glass , set in a oaken cabinet , repeat my image . it say I be change : my cheek and lip be sodden white , my eye be glassy , and my eyelid swollen and purple . on rejoin my companion , I know they all look at I --my heart seem discover to they : I believe myself self - betrayed . Hideously certain do it seem that the very youngest of the school must guess why and for whom I despair . " , " the child whom I have once nurse in sickness , approach I . would she , too , mock I ! " que vous ete pale ! Vous ete donc bien malade , ! " say she , put she finger in she mouth , and star with a wistful stupidity which at the moment seem to I more beautiful than the keenest intelligence . do not long stand alone in the recommendation of ignorance : before the day be over , I gather cause of gratitude towards the whole blind household . the multitude have something else to do than to read heart and interpret dark saying . who will , may keep he own counsel -- be he own secret 's sovereign . in the course of that day , proor meet I on proof , not only that the cause of my present sorrow be unguessed , but that my whole inner life for the last six month , be still mine only . it be not know -- it have not be not -- that I hold in peculiar value one life among all life . have pass I by ; curiosity have look I over ; both subtle influence , hover always round , have never become centred upon I . a give organization may live in a full fever - hospital , and escape typhus . have come and go : I have be teach and seek ; in season and out of season he have call I , and I have obey he : " want " -- " be with " -- such have
have be the perpetual bulletin ; and nobody comment , far less condemn . nobody hint , nobody jest . read the riddle : none else resolve it . what I now suffer be call illness -- a headache : I accept the baptism . but what bodily illness be ever like this pain ? this certainty that he be go without a farewell -- this cruel conviction that fate and pursue fury -- a woman 's envy and a priest 's bigotry -- would suffer I to see he no more ? what wonder that the second evening find I like the first --untam , torture , again pace a solitary room in a unalterable passion of silent desolation ? do not herself summon I to be that night -- she do not come near I : she send -- a more efficient agent for the purpose she could not have employ . 's first word -- " be you headache very bad to - night ? " ( for , like the rest , think I have a headache -- a intolerable headache which make I frightfully white in the face , and insanely restless in the foot ) --her first word , I say , inspire the impulse to flee anywhere , so that it be only out of reach . and soon , what follow -- plaint about she own headach -- complete the business . I go up - stair . presently I be in my bed -- my miserable bed -- haunte with quick scorpion . I have not be lay down five minute , when another emissary arrive : come , bring I something to drink . I be consume with thirst -- I drank eagerly ; the beverage be sweet , but I taste a drug . " Madame say it will make you sleep , chout -chou , " say , as she receive back the emptied cup . ah ! the sedative have be administer . in fact , they have give I a strong opiate . I be to be hold quiet for one night . the household come to bed , the night - light be light , the dormitory hush . sleep soon reign : over those pillow , sleep win a easy supremacy : content sovereign over head and heart which do not ache -- he pass by the unquiet . the drug wrotch . I know not whether have overcharged or under - charge the dose ; it be result be not that she intend . instead of stupor , come excitement . I become alive to new thought -- to reverie peculiar in colouring . a gather call run among the faculty , they bugles sang , they trumpet ring a untimely summon . imagination be rouse from she rest , and she come forth impetuous and venturous . with scorn she look on , she mate -- " rise ! " she say . " ! this night I will have _my will ; nor shalt thout prevail . " " look forth and view the night ! " be she cry ; and when I lift the heavy blind from the casement close at hand -- with she own royal gesture , she show I a moon supreme , in a element deep and splendid . to my gas sense she make the glimmering gloom , the narrow limit , the oppressive heat of the dormitory , intolerable . she lure I to leave this den and follow she forth into dew , coolness , and glory . she bring upon I a strange vision of at midnight . especially she show the park , the summer - park , with its long alley all silent , lone and safe ; among these lay a huge stone basin -- that basin I know , and beside which I have often stood -- deep - set in the tree - shadows , brim with cool water , clear , with a green , leafy , rushy bed . what of all this ? the park - gate be shut up , lock , sentinell : the place could not be enter . could it not ? a point worth consider ; and while revolve it , I mechanically dress . utterly incapable of sleep or lie still -- excit from head to foot -- what could I do better than dress ? the gate be lock , soldier set before they : be there , then , no admission to the park ? the other day , in walking past , I have see , without then attend to the circumstance , a gap in the paling -- one stake break down : I now see this gap again in recollection -- see it very plainly -- the narrow , irregular aperture visible between the stem of the linden , plant orderly as a colonnade . a man could not have make he way through that aperture , nor could a stout woman , perhaps not ; but I think I might : I fancie I should like to try , and once within , at this hour the whole park would be mine -- the moonlight , midnight park ! how soundly the dormitory sleep ! what deep slumber ! what quiet breathing ! how very still the whole large house ! what be the time ? I feel restless to know . there stand a clock in the classe below : what hinder I from venturing down to consult it ? by such a moon , it be large white face and jet black figure must be vividly distinct . as for hindrance to this step , there offer not so much as a creak hinge or a click latch . on these hot night , close air could not be tolerat , and the chamber - door stood wide open .
. will the dormitory - plank sustain my tread untraitorous ? yes . I know wherever a board be loose , and will avoid it . the oak staircase creak somewhat as I descmend , but not much :-- I be in the carre . the great classe - door be close shut : they be bolt . on the other hand , the entrance to the corridor stand open . the class seem to my thought , great dreary jails , bury far back beyond thoroughfare , and for I , fill with spectral and intolerable memory , laid miserable amongst they straw and they manacle . the corridor offer a cheerful vista , lead to the high vestibule which open direct upon the street . Hush !-- the clock strikes . ghostly deep as be the stillness of this convent , it be only eleven . while my ear follow to silence the hum of the last stroke , I catch faintly from the built - out capital , a sound like bell or like a band -- a sound where sweetness , where victory , where mourn blend . oh , to approach this music nearer , to listen to it alone by the rushy basin ! let I go -- oh , let I go ! what hinder , what do not aid freedom ? there , in the corridor , hang my garden - costume , my large hat , my shawl . there be no lock on the huge , heavy , porte -cochere ; there be no key to seek : it fasten with a sort of spring - bolt , not to be open from the outside , but which , from withing , may be noiselessly withdrawn . can I manage it ? it yield to my hand , yield with propitious facility . I wonder as that portal seem almost spontaneously to unclose -- I wonder as I cross the threshold and step on the pave street , wonder at the strange ease with which this prison have be force . it seem as if I have be pioneer invisibly , as if some dissolve force have go before I : for myself , I have scarce make a effort . ! I find on this pavement that wanderer - woo summer night of which I muse ; I see it be moon over I ; I feel its dew in the air . but here I can not stay ; I be still too near old haunt : so close under the dungeon , I can hear the prisoner moan . this solemn peace be not what I seek , it be not what I can bear : to I the face of that sky bear the aspect of a world 's death . the park also will be calm -- I know , a mortal serenity prevail everywhere -- yet let I seek the park . I take a route well know , and go up towards the palatial and - ; thence the music I have hear certainly float ; it be hush now , but it might re-wake . I go on : neither band nor bell music come to meet I ; another sound replace it , a sound like a strong tide , a great flow , deepen as I proceed . light break , movement gather , chime pea -- to what be I come ? enter on the level of a place , I find myself , with the suddenness of magic , plunge amidst a gay , liive , joyous crowd . be one blaze , one broad illumination ; the whole world seem abroad ; moonlight and heaven be banish : the town , by she own flambeaux , behold she own splendour -- gay dress , grand equipage , fine horse and gallant rider throng the bright street . I see even score of mask . it be a strange scene , stranger than dream . but where be the park ?-- I ought to be near it . in the midst of this glare the park must be shadowy and calm --_there , at least , be neither torch , lamps , nor crowd ? I be ask this question when a open carriage pass I fill with known face . through the deep throng it could pass but slowly ; the spirited horse fret in they curbed ardour . I see the occupant of that carriage well : I they could not see , or , at least , not know , fold close in my large shawl , screen with my straw hat ( in that motley crowd no dress be noticeably strange ) . I see the ; I see my godmother , handsomely apparell , comely and cheerful ; I see , too , , compass with the triple halo of she beauty , she youth , and she happiness . in look on she countenance of joy , and eye of festal light , one scarce remember to note the gala elegance of what she wear ; I know only that the drapery float about she be all white and light and bridal ; seat opposite to she I see ; it be in look up at he she aspect have catch it be lustre -- the light repeat in _her_ eye beam first out of he . it give I strange pleasure to follow these friend viewlessly , and I _do follow they , as I think , to the park . I watch they alight ( carriage be inadmissible ) amidst new and unanticipated splendour . lo ! the iron gateway , between the stone column , be span by a flaming arch build of mass star ; and , follow they cautiously beneath that arch , where be they , and where be I ? in a land of enchantment ,
, a garden most gorgeous , a plain sprinkle with coloured meteor , a forest with spark of purple and ruby and golden fire gem the foliage ; a region , not of tree and shadow , but of strangest architectural wealth -- of altar and of temple , of pyramid , obelisk , and sphinx : incredible to say , the wonder and the symbol of teem throughout the park of . no matter that in five minute the secret be mine -- the key of the mystery pick up , and its illusion unveiled -- no matter that I quickly recognise the material of these solemn fragment -- the timber , the paint , and the pasteboard -- these inevitable discoveries fail to quite destroy the charm , or undermine the marvel of that night . no matter that I now seize the explanation of the whole great fete -- a fete of which the conventual have not taste , though it have open at dawn that morne , and be still in full vigour near midnight . in past day there have been , say history , a awful crisis in the fate of , involve I know not what peril to the rights and libertie of she gallant citizen . rumours of war there have been , if not wars themselves ; a kind of struggling in the street -- a bustle -- a running to and fro , some rearing of barricade , some burgher- rioting , some call out of troops , much interchange of brickbat , and even a little of shot . tradition hold that patriot have fall : in the old - be show a enclosure , solemnly build in and set apart , hold , it be say , the sacr bone of martyr . be this as it may , a certain day in the year be still keep as a festival in honour of the say patriot and martyr of somewhat apocryphal memory -- the morning be give to a solemn in . , the evening devote to spectacle , decoration , and illumination , such as these I now see . while look up at the image of a white ibis , fix on a column -- while fathom the deep , torch - lit perspective of a avenue , at the close of which be couch a sphinx -- I lose sight of the party which , from the middle of the great square , I have follow -- or , rather , they vanish like a group of apparition . on this whole scene be impress a dream - like character : every shape be waver , every movement float , every voice echo - like -- half - mocking , half - uncertain . and she friend be go , I scarce could avouch that I have really see they ; nor do I miss they as guide through the chaos , far less regret they as protector amidst the night . that festal night would have be safe for a very child . half the peasantry have come in from the outlying environ of , and the decent burgher be all abroad and around , dress in they best . my straw - hat pass amidst cap and jacket , short petticoat , and long calico mantle , without , perhaps , attract a glance ; I only take the precaution to bind down the broad leaf gipsy - wise , with a supplementary ribbon -- and then I feel safe as if mask . I pass down the avenue -- safe I mix with the crowd where it be deepest . to be still be not in my power , nor quietly to observe . I take a revel of the scene ; I drank the elastic night - air -- the swell of sound , the dubious light , now flash , now fad . as to happiness or hope , they and I have shaken hand , but just now -- I scorn . my vague aim , as I go , be to find the stone - basin , with its clear depth and green line : of that coolness and verdure I think , with the passionate thirst of unconscious fever . Amidst the glare , and hurry , and throng , and noise , I still secretly and chiefly long to come on that circular mirror of crystal , and surprise the moon glass therein she pearly front . I know my route , yet it seem as if I be hinder from pursue it direct : now a sight , and now a sound , call I aside , lur I down this alley and down that . already I see the thick - plant tree which fram this tremulous and ripple glass , when , choir out of a glade to the right , break such a sound as I think might be hear if be too open -- such a sound , perhaps , as _was_ hear above the plain of , on the night of glad tiding . the song , the sweet music , rise afar , but rush swiftly on fast - strengthen pinion -- there sweep through these shade so full a storm of harmoney that , have no tree be near against which to lean , I think I must have drop . voice be there , it seem to I , unnumbered ; instrument varied and countless -- bugle , horn , and trumpet I know . the effect be as a sea break into song with all its wave . the sway tide sweep this way , and then it fall back , and I follow its retreat . it lead I towards a building -- a sort of kiosk near the park 's centre . about stand crowd thousand , gather to a grand concert in the
the open air . what I have hear be , I think , a wild chorus ; the night , the space , the scene , and my own mood , have but enhance the sound and they impression . here be assemble lady , look by this light most beautiful : some of they dress be gauzy , and some have the sheen of satin , the flower and the blond tremble , and the veil wav about they decorate bonnet , as that host - like chorus , with it be greatly - gather sound , sunder the air above they . most of these lady occupy the little light park - chair , and behind and beside they stand guardian gentleman . the outer rank of the crowd be make up of citizen , plebeian and police . in this outer rank I take my place . I rather like to find myself the silent , unknown , consequently unaccosted neighbour of the short petticoat and the sabot ; and only the distant gazer at the silk robe , the velvet mantle , and the plume chapeau . Amidst so much life and joy , too , it suite I to be alone -- quite alone . have neither wish nor power to force my way through a mass so close - pack , my station be on the farthest confines , where , indeed , I might hear , but could see little . " be not well place , " say a voice at my elbow . who da accost _me_ , a be in a mood so little social ? I turn , rather to repel than to reply . I see a man -- a burgher -- a entire stranger , as I deem he for one moment , but the next , recognise in he a certain tradesman -- a bookseller , whose shop furnish the with its book and stationery ; a man notorious in we pensionnat for the excessive brittleness of he temper , and frequent snappishness of he manner , even to we , he principal customer : but whom , for my solitary self , I have ever be dispose to like , and have always found civil , sometimes kind ; once , in aid I about some troublesome little exchange of foreign money , he have do I a service . he be a intelligent man ; under he asperity , he be a good - hear man ; the thought have sometimes cross I , that a part of he nature bore affinity to a part of 's ( whom he know well , and whom I have often see sit on 's counter , turn over the current month 's publication ) ; and it be in this affinity I read the explanation of that conciliatory feeling with which i instinctively regard he . strange to say , this man know I under my straw - hat and closely - fold shawl ; and , though I deprecate the effort , he insist on make a way for I through the crowd , and find I a better situation . he carry he disinterested civility further ; and , from some quarter , procure I a chair . once and again , I have find that the most cross - grain be by no means the worst of mankind ; nor the humblest in station , the least polished in feeling . this man , in he courtesy , seem to find nothing strange in my be here alone ; only a reason for extend to I , as far as he could , a retiring , yet efficient attention . have secure I a place and a seat , he withdraw without ask a question , without obtrud a remark , without add a superfluous word . no wonder that like to take he cigar and he lounge , and to read he feuilleton in 's shop -- the two must have suit . I have not be seat five minute , ere I become aware that chance and my worthy burgher friend have bring I once more within view of a familiar and domestic group . right before I sit the and . within reach of my hand -- have I choose to extend it -- sit a figure like a fairy - queen , whose array , lily and they leave seem to have suggest ; whatever be not spotless white , be forest -green . my godmother , too , sit so near , that , have I lean forward , my breath might have stir the ribbon of she bonnet . they be too near ; have be just recognise by a comparative stranger , I feel uneasy at this close vicinage of intimate acquaintance . it make I quite start when , turn to , and speak out of a kind impulse of memory , say ,-- " I wonder what my steady little Lucy would say to all this if she be here ? I wish we have bring she , she would have enjoy it much . " " so she would , so she would , in she grave sensible fashion ; it be a pity but we have ask she , " rejoin the kind gentleman ; and add , " I like to see she so quietly pleased ; so little move , yet so content . " dear be they both to I , dear be they to this day in they remember benevolence . know they the rack of pain which have drive almost into fever , and bring she out , guideless and reckless , urge and drug to the brink of frenzy . I have half a mind to bend over the elder ' shoulders , and answer they goodness with the thanks of my eye . do not well
well know _me_ , but I know _him , and honoure and admire he nature , with all its plain sincerity , its warm affection , and unconscious enthusiasm . possibly I might have spoken , but just then turn ; he turn with one of he stately firm movements , so different from those , of a sharp - tempere under- size man : there be behind he a throng , a hundred rank deep ; there be thousand to meet he eye and divide its scrutiny -- why then do he concentrate all on I -- oppress I with the whole force of that full , blue , steadfast orb ? why , if he _would look , do not one glance satisfy he ? why do he turn on he chair , rest he elbow on its back , and study I leisurely ? he could not see my face , I hold it down ; surly , he _could not recognise I : I stoop , I turn , I _would not be know . he rise , by some means he contrive to approach , in two minute he would have have my secret : my identity would have be grasp between he , never tyrannous , but always powerful hands . there be but one way to evade or to check he . I imply , by a sort of supplicatory gesture , that it be my prayer to be let alone ; after that , have he persist , he would perhaps have see the spectacle of incense : not all that be grand , or good , or kind in he ( and feel the full amount ) should have keep she quite tame , or absolutely inoffensive and shadowlike . he look , but he desiste . he shook he handsome head , but he be mute . he resume he seat , nor do he again turn or disturb I by a glance , except indeed for one single instant , when a look , rather solicitous than curiious , steal my way -- speak what somehow stil my heart like " the south - wind quiet the earth . " 's thought of I be not entirely those of a freeze indifference , after all . I believe in that goodly mansion , he heart , he keep one little place under the sky - light where might have entertainment , if she choose to call . it be not so handsome as the chamber where he lod he male friend ; it be not like the hall where he accommodate he philanthropy , or the library where he treasure he science , still less do it resemble the pavilion where he marriage feast be splendidly spread ; yet , gradually , by long and equal kindness , he prove to I that he keep one little closet , over the door of which be write " 's room . " I keep a place for he , too -- a place of which I never take the measure , either by rule or compass : I think it be like the tent of . all my life long I carry it fold in the hollow of my hand yet , release from that hold and constriction , I know not but its innate capacity for expanse might have magnify it into a tabernacle for a host . Forbear as he be to - night , I could not stay in this proximity ; this dangerous place and seat must be give up : I watch my opportunity , rise , and steal away . he might think , he might even believe that be contain within that shawl , and shelter under that hat ; he never could be certain , for he do not see my face . surely the spirit of restlessness be by this time appease ? have I not have enough of adventure ? do I not begin to flag , quail , and wish for safety under a roof ? not so . I still loath my bed in the school dormitory more than word can express : I cling to whatever could distract thought . somehow I feel , too , that the night 's drama be but begun , that the prologue be scarce speak : throughout this woody and turfy theatre reign a shadow of mystery ; actor and incidents unlooked - for , wait behind the scene : I think so foreboding tell I as much . Stray at random , obey the push of every chance elbow , I be bring to a quarter where tree plan in cluster , or towere singly , break up somewhat the dense pack of the crowd , and give it a more scattered character . these confines be far from the music , and somewhat alohave even from the lamp , but there be sound enough to soothe , and with that full , high moon , lamps be scarce need . here have chiefly settle family - group , burgher - parent ; some of they , late as be the hour , actually surround by they child , with whom it have not be think advisable to venture into the closer throng . three fine tall tree grow close , almost twin stem within stem , lifte a thick canopy of shade above a green knoll , crown with a seat -- a seat which might have hold several , yet it seem abandon to one , the remaining member of the fortunate party in possession of this site stand dutifully round ; yet , amongst this reverend circle be a lady , hold by the hand a little girl . when I catch sight of this little girl , she be twist herself round on she heel , swing from she conductress 's hand , flinge herself from side
side to side with wanton and fantastic gyration . these perverse movement arrest my attention , they strike I as of a character fearfully familiar . on close inspection , no less so appear the child 's equipment ; the lilac silk pelisse , the small swansdown boa , the white bonnet -- the whole holiday toilette , in short , be the gala garb of a cherub but too well know , of that tadpole , -- and it be -- she , or a imp in she likeness . I might have take this discovery as a thunder- clap , but such hyperbole would have be premature ; discovery be destin to rise more than one degree , ere it reach its climax . on whose hand could the amiable Desiree sw thus selfishly , whose glive could she tear thus recklessly , whose arm thus strain with impunity , or on the border of whose dress thus turn and trample insolently , if not the hand , glove , arm , and robe of she lady - mother ? and there , in a indian shawl and a pale - green crape bonnet -- there , fresh , portly , blithe , and pleasant -- there stand . curious ! I have certainly deem Madame in she bed , and in she crib , at this bless minute , sleep , both of they , the sleep of the just , within the sacred wall , amidst the profound seclusion of the . most certainly also they do not picture " " otherwise engage ; and here we all three be take we " ebat " in the fete - blazing park at midnight ! the fact be , be only ac accord to she quite justifiable wo not . I remember now I have hear it say among the teacher -- though without at the time particularly notice the gossip -- that often , when we think in she chamber , sleeping , she be gone , full - dress , to take she pleasure at operas , or play , or ball . have no sort of taste for a monastic life , and take care -- largely , though discreetly -- to season she existence with a relish of the world . half a dozen gentleman of she friend stand about she . amongst these , I be not slow to recognise two or three . there be she brother , ; there be another person , moustach and with long hair -- a calm , taciturn man , but whose trait bear a stamp and a semblance I could not mark unmoved . Amidst reserve and phlegm , amidst contrast of character and of countenance , something there still be which recal a face -- mobile , fervent , feel -- a face changeable , now cloude , and now alight -- a face from my world take away , for my eye lose , but where my best spring - hour of life have alternate in shadow and in glow ; that face , where I have often see movement so near the sign of genius -- that why there do not shine fully out the undoubted fire , the thing , the spirit , and the secret itself -- I could never tell . yes -- this -- this man of peace -- remind I of he ardent brother . besides and , I know another of this party . this third person stand behind and in the shade , he attitude too be stoop , yet he dress and bald white head make he the most conspicuous figure of the group . he be a ecclesiastic : he be . do not fancy , reader , that there be any inconsistency in the priest 's presence at this fete . this be not consider a show of , but a commemoration of patriotic sacrifice . the patronise it , even with ostentation . there be troops of priest in the park that night . stoop over the seat with its single occupant , the rustic bench and that which sit upon it : a strange mass it be -- bear no shape , yet magnificent . you see , indeed , the outline of a face , and feature , but these be so cadaverous and so strangely place , you could almost have fancie a head severe from its trunk , and fling at random on a pile of rich merchandise . the distant lamp - ray glance on clear pendant , on broad ring ; neither the chasteness of moonlight , nor the distance of the torch , could quite subdue the gorgeous dyes of the drapery . , ! I think you look more witch - like than ever . and presently the good lady prove that she be indeed no corpse or ghost , but a harsh and hardy old woman ; for , upon some aggravation in the clamorous petition of to she mother , to go to the kiosk and take sweetmeat , the hunchback suddenly fetch she a resoun rap with she gold - knob cane . there , then , be , , -- the whole conjuration , the secret junta . the sight of they thus assemble do I good . I can not say that I feel weak before they , or abash , or dismay . they outnumber I , and I be worst and under they foot ; but , as yet , I be not dead . . old and new acquaintance . Fascinate as by a basilisk with three head , I could not leave this clique ; the ground near they seem to hold my foot . the canopy of entwined tree hold out shadow , the night whisper a pledge of protection , and a officious lamp flash just one beam to show I a
a obscure , safe seat , and then vanish . let I now briefly tell the reader all that , during the past dark fortnight , I have be silently gather from , respect the origin and the object of 's departure . the tale be short , and not new : it be alpha be , and its omega interest . if be hideous as a idol , she seem also to possess , in the estimation of these she votary , a idol 's consequence . the fact be , she have be rich -- very rich ; and though , for the present , without the command of money , she be likely one day to be rich again . at , in , she possess a large estate , receive in dowry on she marriage sixty year ago , sequester since she husband 's failure ; but now , it be suppose , clear of claim , and , if duly look after by a competent agent of integrity , consider capable of be make , in a few year , largely productive . take a interest in this prospective improvement for the sake of religion and the church , whereor be a devout daughter . , distantly related to the hunchback and know she to be without family of she own , have long brood over contingency with a mother 's calculating forethotch , and , harshly treat as she be by , never cease to court she for interest 's sake . and the priest be thus , for money reason , equally and sincerely interested in the nursing of the west indian estate . but the distance be great , and the climate hazardous . the competent and upright agent want , must be a devoted man . just such a man have retain for twenty year in she service , blight he life , and then live on he , like a old fungus ; such a man have Silas train , teach , and bound to he by the tie of gratitude , habit , and belief . such a man know , and could in some measure influence . " my pupil , " say , " if he remain in , run risk of apostacy , for he have become entangle with a heretic . " make also she private comment , and prefer in she own breast she secret reason for desire expatriation . the thing she could not obtain , she desire not another to win : rather would she destroy it . as to , she want she money and she land , and know , if he like , could make the best and faithfullest steward : so the three self - seeker ban and beset the one unselfish . they reason , they appeal , they implor ; on he mercy they cast themselves , into he hand they confidingly thrust they interest . they ask but two or three year of devotion --after that , he should live for himself : one of the number , perhaps , wish that in the meantime he might die . no living be ever humbly lay he advantage at 's foot , or confidingly put it into he hand , that he spur the trust or repulse the repository . what might be he private pain or inward reluctance to leave -- what he calculation for he own future -- none ask , or know , or report . all this be a blank to I . he conference with he confessor I might guess ; the part duty and religion be make to play in the persuasion use , I might conjecture . he be gone , and have make no sign . there my knowledge close . * * * * * with my head bent , and my forehead rest on my hand , I sit amidst group tree - stem and branch brushwood . whatever talk pass amongst my neighbour , I might hear , if I would ; I be near enough ; but for some time , there be scarce motive to attend . they gossip about the dress , the music , the illumination , the fine night . I listen to hear they say , " it be calm weather for t_his voyage ; the " ( he ship ) " will sail prosperously . " no such remark fall ; neither the _antigua_ , nor she course , nor she passenger be name . perhaps the light chat scarcely interested old Madame Walravens more than it do I ; she appear restless , turn she head now to this side , now that , look through the tree , and among the crowd , as if expectant of a arrival and impatient of delay . " sont - il ? Pourquoi ne viennent - il ? " I hear she mutter more than once ; and at last , as if determine to have a answer to she question -- which hitherto none seem to mind , she speak aloud this phrase -- a phrase brief enough , simple enough , but it send a shock through I --" et mesdame , " say she , " yoou donc est ? " " ! " what be this ? -- the dead nun --where be she ? why , in she grave , -- what can you want with she ? you shall go to she , but she shall not come to you . thus _I_ should have answer , have the response lain with I , but nobody seem to be of my mind ; nobody seem surprised , start , or at a loss . the quietest commonplace answer meet the strange , the dead - disturb , the - of - query of the hunchback . " , " say one , " be
be come ; she be in the kiosk ; she will be here presently . " out of this question and reply spring a change in the chat -- chat it still remain , easy , desultory , familiar gossip . , allusion , comment , go round the circle , but all so broken , so dependent on reference to person not name , or circumstance not define , that listen as intently as I would -- and I _did_ listen _now_ with a fated interest -- I could make out no more than that some scheme be on foot , in which this ghostly -- dead or alive -- be concerned . this family - junta seem grasp at she somehow , for some reason ; there see question of a marriage , of a fortune -- for whom I could not quite make out - perhaps for , perhaps for -- both be bachelor . once I think the hint and jest rain upon a young fair - hair foreigner of the party , whom they call . Amidst all the badinage , still obtrude from time to time , hoarse , cross - grain speeches ; she impatience be divert only by a implacable surveillance of , who could not stir but the old woman menace she with she staff . " ! " suddenly cry one of the gentleman , " qui arrive ! " this moment be for I peculiar . I call up to memory the picture nun on the panel ; present to my mind be the sad love - story ; I see in think the vision of the garret , the apparition of the alley , the strange birth of the berceau ; I undergo a presentiment of discovery , a strong conviction of come disclosure . ah ! when imagination once run riot where do we stop ? what winter tree so bare and branchless -- what way - side , hedge - munch animal so humble , that Fancy , a pass cloud , and a struggling moonbeam , will not clothe it in spirituality , and make of it a phantom ? with solemn force press on my heart , the expectation of mystery break up : hithertoo I have see this spectre only through a glass darkly ; now be I to behold it face to face . I lean forward ; I look . " she come ! " cry . the circle open as if open to admit a new and welcome member . at this instant a torch chance to be carry past ; its blaze aid the pale moon in do justice to the crisis , in lighting to perfection the denouement presse on . surely those near I must have feel some little of the anxiety I feel , in degree so unmeted . of that group the coolest must have " hold he breath for a time ! " as for I , my life stand still . it be over . the moment and the nun be come . the crisis and the revelation be pass by . the flambeau glare still within a yard , hold up in a park - keeper 's hand ; it be long eager tongue of flame almost lick the figure of the expected -- there -- where she stand full in my sight . what be she like ? what do she wear ? how do she look ? who be she ? there be many mask in the park to - night , and as the hour wear late , so strange a feeling of revelry and mystery begin to spread abroad , that scarce would you discredit I , reader , be I to say that she be like the nun of the attic , that she wear black skirt and white head - clothes , that she look the resurrection of the flesh , and that she be a risen ghost . all falsity -- all figment ! we will not deal in this gear . let we be honest , and cut , as heretofore , from the homely web of truth . _Homely , though , be a ill - chosen word . what I see be not precisely homely . a girl of stand there -- a girl fresh from she pensionnat . she be very comely , with the beauty indigenous to this country . she look well - nourished , fair , and fat of flesh . she cheek be round , she eyes good ; she hair be abundant . she be handsomely dress . she be not alone ; she escort consist of three person -- two be elderly ; these she address as " " and " ma Tante . " she laugh , she chat ; good - humoured , buxom , and bloom , she look , at all point , the bourgeoise belle . " so much for ; " so much for ghost and mystery : not that this last be solve -- this girl certainly be not my nun : what I see in the garret and garden must have be taller by a span . we have look at the city belle ; we have cursorily glanced at the respectable old uncle and aunt . have we a stray glance to give to the third member of this company ? can we spare he a moment 's notice ? we ought to distinguish he so far , reader ; he have claim on we ; we do not now meet he for the first time . I clasp my hand very hard , and I draw my breath very deep : I hold in the cry , I devoure the ejaculation , I forbade the start , I speak and I stir no more than a stone ; but I know what I look on ;
; through the dimness leave in my eye by many night ' weeping , I know he . they say he be to sail by the say so . she lie , or she have utter what be once truth , and fail to contradict it when it become false . the _antigua_ be gone , and there stand . be I glad ? a huge load leave I . be it a fact to warrant joy ? I know not . ask first what be the circumstance attendant on this respite ? how far do this delay concern _me ?_ be there not those whom it might touch more nearly ? after all , who may this young girl , this , be ? not a stranger , reader ; she be know to I by sight ; she visit at the : she be often of 's party . she be a relation of both the Becks and Walravens ; she derive she baptismal name from the sainted nun who would have be she aunt have she liv ; she patronymic be ; she be a heiress and a orphan , and be she guardian ; some say she godfather . the family junto wish this heiress to be marry to one of they band -- which be it ? vital question -- which be it ? I feel very glad now , that the drug administer in the sweet dratch have fill I with a possession which make bed and chamber intolerable . I always , through my whole life , like to penetrate to the real truth ; I like seek the goddess in she temple , and handle the veil , and da the dread glance . of Titaness among deity ! the covered outline of thine aspect sicken often through its uncertainty , but define to we one trait , show we one lineament , clear in awful sincerity ; we may gasp in untold terror , but with that gasp we drink in a breath of thy divinity ; we heart shakes , and its current sway like rivers lift by earthquake , but we have swallow strength . to see and know the worst be to take from fear she main advantage . the 's party , augment in number , now become very gay . the gentleman fetch refreshment from the kiosk , all sit down on the turf under the tree ; they drank healt and sentiment ; they laugh , they jest . undergo some raillery , half good -humoured , half , I think , malicious , especially on 's part . I soon gather that he voyage have be temporarily defer of he own will , without the concurrence , even against the advice , of he friend ; he have let the _antigua_ go , and have take he berth in the et , appoint to sail a fortnight later . it be he reason for this resolve which they tease he to assign , and which he would only vaguly indicate as " the settlement of a little piece of business which he have set he heart upon . " what _was_ this business ? nobody know . yes , there be one who see partly , at least , in he confidence ; a mean look pass between he and . " la petite va m'aider -- n'est - ce pa ? " say he . the answer be prompt enough , know ? " oui , je vous aiderbe de tout mon coeur . Vous ferez de moi tout ce que vous voudrez , mon parrain . " and this dear " parrain " take she hand and lifte it to he grateful lip . upon which demonstration , I see the light - complexion young , , grow restless , as if he do not like it . he even grumble a few word , whereat actually laugh in he face , and with the ruthless triumph of the assure conqueror , he draw he ward nearer to he . be indeed very joyous that night . he seem not one whit subdue by the change of scene and action impend . he be the true life of the party ; a little despotic , perhaps , determi to be chief in mirth , as well as in labour , yet from moment to moment prove indisputably he right of leadership . he be the wittiest word , the pleasantest anecdote , the frankest laugh . Restlessly active , after he manner , he multiply himself to wait on all ; but oh ! I see which be he favourite . I see at whose foot he lay on the turf , I see whom he fold carefully from the night air , whom he ten , watch , and cherish as the apple of he eye . still , hint and raillery flew thick , and still I gather that while m . should be absent , work for other , these other , not quite ungrateful , would guard for he the treasure he leave in . let he bring they a indian fortune : they would give he in return a young bride and a rich inheritance . as for the saintly consecration , the vow of constancy , that be forget : the blooming and charme prevail over the past ; and , at length , he nun be indeed bury . thus it must be . the revelation be indeed come . Presentiment have not be mistaken in she impulse : there be a kind of presentiment which never _is_ mistake ; it be I who have for a moment miscalculate ; not see the true bearing of the oracle , I have think she mutter of vision when , in truth , she prediction touch reality . I might have pause longer upon what I see ;
; I might have deliberat ere I draw inference . some , perhaps , would have hold the premise doubtful , the proof insufficient ; some slow sceptic would have incredulously examine ere they conclusively accept the project of a marriage between a poor and unselfish man of forty , and he wealthy ward of eighteen ; but far from I such shift and palliative , far from I such temporary evasion of the actual , such coward fleee from the dread , the swift - foot , the all - overtak fact , such feeble suspense of submission to she the sole sovereign , such paltering and falter resistance to the power whose errand be to march conquering and to conquer , such traitor defection from the Truth . no . I hasten to accept the whole plan . I extend my grasp and take it all in . I gather it to I with a sort of rage of haste , and fold it round I , as the soldier struck on the field fold he colour about he breast . I invoke to nail upon I the certainty , abhor while embrace , to fix it with the strongest spikes she strongest stroke could drive ; and when the iron have enter well my soul , I stand up , as I think , renovate . in my infatuation , I say , " Truth , you be a good mistress to you faithful servants ! while a lie presse I , how I suffer ! even when the Falsehood be still sweet , still flatter to the fancy , and warm to the feeling , it waste I with hourly torment . the persuasion that affection be win could not be divorce from the dread that , by another turn of the wheel , it might be lose . stripp away Falsehood , and , and , and here I stand -- free ! " nothing remain now but to take my freedom to my chamber , to carry it with I to my bed and see what I could make of it . the play be not yet , indeed , quite play out . I might have wait and watch longer that love -scene under the tree , that sylvan courtship . have there be nothing of love in the demonstration , my Fancy in this hour be so generous , so creative , she could have model for it the most salient lineament , and give it the deepest life and highest colour of passion . but I _would not look ; I have fix my resolve , but I would not violate my nature . and then -- something tore I so cruelly under my shawl , something so dug into my side , a vulture so strong in beak and talon , I must be alone to grapple with it . I think I never feel jealousy till now . this be not like endure the endearment of and , against which while I seal my eye and my ear , while I withdraw thence my thought , my sense of harmony still acknowledge in it a charm . this be a outrage . the love bear of beauty be not mine ; I have nothing in common with it : I could not dare to meddle with it , but another love , venture diffidently into life after long acquaintance , furnace - try by pain , stamp by constancy , consolidate by affection 's pure and durable alloy , submit by intellect to intellect 's own test , and finally wrotch up , by he own process , to he own unflawed completeness , this love that laugh at , he fast frenzy and he hot and hurrie extinction , in _this_ love I have a vested interest ; and whatever ten either to its culture or its destruction , I could not view impassibly . I turn from the group of tree and the " merrie companies " in its shade . be long past ; the concert be over , the crowd be thin . I follow the ebb . leave the radiant park and well - light - ( still well light , this it seem be to be a " nuit blanco " in ) , I seek the dim lower quarter . De I should not say , for the beauty of moonlight -- forget in the park -- here once more flow in upon perception . High she ride , and calm and stainlessly she shone . the music and the mirth of the fete , the fire and bright hue of those lamp have out - done and out - shine she for a hour , but now , again , she glory and she silence triumph . the rival lamp be die : she hold she course like a white fate . Drum , trumpet , bugle , have utter they clangour , and be forget ; with pencil - ray she write on heaven and on earth record for archive everlasting . she and those star seem to I at once the type and witness of truth all regnant . the night - sky light she reign : like it be slow - wheeling progress , advance she victory -- that onward movement which have be , and be , and will be from eternity to eternity . these oil - twinkling streets be very still : I like they for they lowliness and peace . Homeward - bound burgher pass I now and then , but these company be pedestrian , make little noise , and be soon go . so well do I love under she present aspect , not willingly would I re-enter under a roof , but that I be bent on pursue my strange adventure to a successful close , and quietly regain my bed in
in the great dormitory , before come home . only one stroot lie between I and the Rue Fossette ; as I enter it , for the first time , the sound of a carriage tear up the deep peace of this quarter . it come this way -- come very fast . how lould sound it be ratle on the paved path ! the street be narrow , and I keep carefully to the causeway . the carriage thunder past , but what do I see , or fancy I see , as it rush by ? surely something white flutter from that window --surely a hand wav a handkerchief . be that signal mean for I ? be I know ? who could recognise I ? that be not 's carriage , nor 's ; and beside , neither the nor the chateau of lie in that direction . well , I have no time for conjecture ; I must hurry home . gain the , reach the pensionnat , all there be still ; no fiacre have yet arrive with and . I have leave the great door ajar ; should I find it thus ? perhaps the wind or some other accident may have throw it to with sufficient force to start the spring - bolt ? in that case , hopeless become admission ; my adventure must issue in catastrophe . I lightly push the heavy leaf ; would it yield ? yes . as soundless , as unresisting , as if some propitious genius have wait on a sesame - charm , in the vestibule within . enter with bated breath , quietly make all fast , shoelessly mount the staircase , I seek the dormitory , and reach my couch . * * * * * ay ! I reach it , and once more draw a free inspiration . the next moment , I almost shriek -- almost , but not quite , thank ! throughout the dormitory , throughout the house , there reign at this hour the stillness of death . all slept , and in such hush , it seem that none dream . stretch on the nineteen bed lay nineteen form , at full - length and motionless . on mine -- the twentieth couch -- nothing _otch to have lain : I have leave it void , and void should have find it . what , then ; do I see between the half - draw curtain ? what dark , usurp shape , supine , long , and strange ? be it a robber who have make he way through the open street - door , and lie there in wait ? it look very black , I think it look -- not human . can it be a wander dog that have come in from the street and crept and nestle hither ? will it spre , will it leap out if I approach ? approach I must . courage ! one step !-- my head reel , for by the faint night - lamp , I see stretch on my be the old phantom -- the nun . a cry at this moment might have ruin I . be the spectacle what it might , I could afford neither consternation , scream , nor swoon . besides , I be not overcome . Temper by late incidents , my nerve disdain hysteria . warm from illumination , and music , and thronge thousand , thoroughly lash up by a new scourge , I defy spectra . in a moment , without exclamation , I have rush on the haunt couch ; nothing leape out , or spring , or stir ; all the movement be mine , so be all the life , the reality , the substance , the force ; as my instinct felt . I tore she up -- the incubus ! I hold she on high -- the goblin ! I shook she loose -- the mystery ! and down she fall -- down all around I -- down in shred and fragment -- and I trode upon she . here again -- behold the branchless tree , the unstabled ; the film of cloud , the flicker of moonshine . the long nun prove a long bolster dress in a long black stole , and artfully invest with a white veil . the garment in very truth , strange as it may seem , be genuine nun 's garment , and by some hand they have be dispose with a view to illusion . come these vestment ? who contrive this artifice ? these question still remain . to the head - bandage be pin a slip of paper : it bear in pencil these mock word -- " the nun of the attic bequeath to she wardrobe . she will be see in the no more . " and what and who be she that have haunt I ? she , I have actually see three time . not a woman of my acquaintance have the stature of that ghost . she be not of a female height . not to any man I know could the machination , for a moment , be attribute . mystify beyond expression , but as thoroughly , as suddenly , relieve from all sense of the spectral and unearthly ; scorne also to wear out my brain with the fret of a trivial though insoluble riddle , I just bundle together stole , veil , and bandage , thrust they beneath my pillow , lay down , listen till I hear the wheel of 's home - return fiacre , then turn , and wear out by many night ' vigil , conquer , too , perhaps , by the now react narcotic , I deeply sleep . . the . the day succeed this remarkable night , prove no common day
day . I do not mean that it bring sign in heaven above , or portent on the earth beneath ; nor do I allude to meteorological phenomena , to storm , flood , or whirlwind . on the contrary : the sun rise jocund , with a face . deck she beauty with ruby , and so fill she lap with rose , that they fall from she in shower , make she path blush : the wake fresh as nymph , and empty on the early hill they dew-vial , they step out dismantle of vapour : shadowless , azure , and glorious , they lead the sun 's steed on a burning and unclouded course . in short , it be as fine a day as the finest summer could boast ; but I doubt whether I be not the sole inhabitant of the , who care or remember to note this pleasant fact . another thought busy all other head ; a thought , indeed , which have its share in my meditations ; but this master consideration , not possesse for I so entire a novelty , so overwhelm a suddenness , especially so dense a mystery , as it offer to the majority of my co-speculator thereon , leave I somewhat more open than the rest to any collateral observation or impression . still , while walk in the garden , feel the sunshine , and mark the blooming and grow plant , I ponder the same subject the whole house discuss . what subject ? merely this . when matin come to be say , there be a place vacant in the first rank of boarder . when breakfast be serve , there remain a coffee - cup unclaimed . when the housemaid make the bed , she find in one , a bolster laid lengthwise , clad in a cap and night - gown ; and when 's music-mistress come early , as usual , to give the morning lesson , that accomplish and promise young person , she pupil , fail utterly to be forthcome . high and low be Fanshawe seek ; through length and breadth be the house ransack ; vainly ; not a trace , not a indication , not so much as a scrap of a billet reward the search ; the nymph be vanish , engulf in the past night , like a shooting star swallow up by darkness . deep be the dismay of surveillante teacher , deeper the horror of the default directress . never have I see so pale or so appallead . here be a blow struck at she tender part , she weak side ; here be damage do to she interest . how , too , have the untoward event happen ? by what outlet have the fugitive taken wing ? not a casement be find unfastened , not a pane of glass break ; all the door be bolt secure . never to this day have obtain satisfaction on this point , nor indeed have anybody else concerned , save and excepting one , , who could not forget how , to facilitate a certain enterprise , a certain great door have be draw softly to its lintel , close , indeed , but neither bolt nor secure . the thunder carriage - and - pair encounter be now likewise recal , as well as that puzzl signal , the wave handkerchief . from these premise , and one or two other , inaccessible to any but myself , I could draw but one inference . it be a case of elopement . Morally certain on this head , and see 's profound embarrassment , I at last communicate my conviction . have allude to 's suit , I find , as I expect , that be perfectly au fait to that affair . she have long since discuss it with , and lay she own responsibility in the business on that lady 's shoulders . to and she now have recourse . we find that the be already alive to what have happen . have write to she cousin , vaguly signify hymeneal intentions ; communication have be receive from the family of ; be on the track of the fugitive . he overtake they too late . in the course of the week , the post bring I a note . I may as well transcribe it ; it contain explanation on more than one point :-- ' " ( short for ) , -- " I be off you see -- go like a shot . and I intend to be marry in this way almost from the first ; we never mean to be splice in the humdrum way of other people ; have too much spirit for that , and so have I -- merci ! do you know , , who use to call you ' the dragon , ' have see so much of you during the last few month , that he begin to feel quite friendly towards you . he hope you will not miss he now that he have go ; he beg to apologize for any little trouble he may have give you . he be afraid he rather inconvenience you once when he come upon you in the grenier , just as you be read a letter seemingly of the most special interest ; but he could not resist the temptation to give you a start , you appear so wonderfully take up with you correspondent . revanche , he say you once frightene he by rushing in for a dress or a shawl , or some other chiffon , at the moment when he have strike a light , and be go to take a quiet whiff of he cigar , while wait for I . " do you begin to comprehend by this time that le
le be the nun of the attic , and that he come to see you humble servant ? I will tell you how he manage it . you know he have the entree of the Athenee , where two or three of he nephew , the son of he eldest sister , , be student . you know the court of the be on the other side of the high wall bound you walk , the allee defendue . Alfred can climb as well as he can dance or fence : he amusement be to make the escalade of we pensionnat by mounting , first the wall ; then -- by the aid of that high tree overspread the grand berceau , and rest some of its bough on the roof of the lower building of we premise -- he manage to scale the first classe and the grand salle . one night , by the way , he fall out of this tree , tore down some of the branch , nearly break he own neck , and after all , in run away , get a terrible fright , and be nearly catch by two people , and , he think , walk in the alley . from the grande salle the ascent be not difficult to the highest block of building , finish in the great garret . the skylight , you know , be , day and night , leave half open for air ; by the skylight he enter . Nearly a year ago I chance to tell he we legend of the nun ; that suggest he romantic idea of the spectral disguise , which I think you must allow he have very cleverly carry out . " but for the nun 's black gown and white veil , he would have be catch again and again both by you and that tiger - , . he think you both capital ghost - seer , and very brave . what I wonder at be , rather you secretiveness than you courage . how could you endure the visitation of that long spectre , time after time , without cry out , tell everybody , and rouse the whole house and neighbourhood ? " oh , and how do you like the nun as a bed - fellow ? dress she up : do not I do it well ? do you shriek when you see she : I should have go mad ; but then you have such nerve !-- real iron and bend - leather ! I believe you feel nothing . you have not the same sensitiveness that a person of my constitution have . you seem to I insensible both to pain and fear and grief . you be a real old Diogenes . " well , dear grandmother ! and be you not mightily angry at my moonlight flitt and run away match ? I assure you it be excellent fun , and I do it partly to spite that minx , , and that bear , : to show they that , with all they air , I could get married as well as they . be at first in a strange fume with ; he threaten a prosecution for ' detournement de yomineu , ' and I know not what ; he be so abominably in earnest , that I find myself force to do a little bit of the melodramatic -- go down on my knee , sob , cry , drench three pocket - handkerchief . of course , ' mon oncle ' soon give in ; indeed , where be the use of make a fuss ? I be marry , and that be all about it . he still say we marriage be not legal , because I be not of age , forsooth ! as if that make any difference ! I be just as much marry as if I be a hundred . however , we be to be marry again , and I be to have a trousseau , and be go to superintend it ; and there be some hope that will give I a decent portion , which will be very convenient , as dear have nothing but he nobility , native and hereditary , and he pay . I only wish uncle would do thing unconditionally , in a generous , gentleman - like fashion ; he be so disagreeable as to make the dowry depend on 's give he write promise that he will never touch card or dice from the day it be pay down . they accuse my angel of a tendency to play : I do not know anything about that , but I _do_ know he be a dear , adorable creature . " I can not sufficientely extol the genius with which manage we flight . how clever in he to select the night of the fete , when ( for he know she habits ) , as he say , would infallibly be absent at the concert in the park . I suppose _you must have go with she . I watch you rise and leave the dormitory about eleven o'clock . how you return alone , and on foot , I can not conjecture . that surely be _you_ we meet in the narrow old ? do you see I wave my handkerchief from the carriage window ? " ! Rejoice in my good luck : congratulate I on my supreme happiness , and believe I , dear cynic and misanthrope , yours , in the best of health and spirit , , nee Fanshawe . " P.S.-- remember , I be a countess now . , mamma , and the girl at home , will be delighted to hear that . ' my daughter the Countess ! ' 'my sister the Countess ! ' Bravo ! sound rather better than
than , hein ? " * * * * * in win up 's memoir , the reader will no doubt expect to hear that she come finally to bitter expiation of she youthful levity . of course , a large share of suffer lie in reserve for she future . a few word will embody my farther knowledge respect she . I see she towards the close of she honeymoon . she call on , and send for I into the salon . she rush into my arm laugh . she look very blooming and beautiful : she curl be longer , she cheek rosier than ever : she white bonnet and she Flander veil , she orange - flower and she bride 's dress , become she mightily . " I have get my portion ! " she cry at once ; ( ever stick to the substantial ; I always think there be a good trading element in she composition , much as she scorn the " bourgeoise ; " ) " and uncle be quite reconcile . I do not mind he calling Alfr a ' nincompoop ' -- that be only he coarse Scotch breed ; and I believe envie I , and be wild with jealousy -- fit to blow he brain out -- and I be so happy ! I really think I have hardly anything leave to wish for -- unless it be a carriage and a hotel , and , oh ! I -- must introduce you to ' mon mari. ' Alfred , come here ! " and appear from the inner salon , where he be talk to , receive the blend felicitation and reprimand of that lady . I be present under my various name : the , , and . the young be very polite . he make I a prettily - turn , neatly - worde apology , about the ghost- visit , & c. , conclude with say that " the best excuse for all he iniquity stand there ! " point to he bride . and then the bride send he back to , and she take I to herself , and proceed literally to suffocate I with she unrestrained spirit , she girlish , giddy , wild nonsense . she show she ring exultingly ; she call herself , and ask how it sound , a score of time . I say very little . I give she only the crust and rind of my nature . no matter she expect of I nothing better -- she know I too well to look for compliment -- my dry gibe please she well enough and the more impassible and prosaic my mien , the more merrily she laugh . after he marriage , be persuade to leave the army as the surest way of wean he from certain unprofitable associate and habit ; a post of attache be procure for he , and he and he young wife go abroad . I think she would forget I now , but she do not . for many year , she keep up a capricious , fitful sort of correspondence . during the first year or two , it be only of herself and she write ; then , fad in the background ; herself and a certain , new comer prevail ; one begin to reign in he father 's stead . there be great boastings about this personage , extravagant amplification upon miraacle of precocity , mix with vehement objurgation against the phlegmatic incredulity with which I receive they . I do not know " what it be to be a mother ; " " unfeeling thing that I be , the sensibility of the maternal heart be greek and Hebrew to I , " and so on . in due course of nature this young gentleman take he degree in teething , measle , hoope - cough : that be a terrible time for I -- the mamma 's letter become a perfect shout of affliction ; never woman be so put upon by calamity : never human be stand in such need of sympathy . I be frightene at first , and write back pathetically ; but I soon find out there be more cry than wool in the business , and relapse into my natural cruel insensibility . as to the youthful sufferer , he weather each storm like a hero . five time be that youth " in articulo mortis , " and five time do he miraculously revive . in the course of year there arise ominous murmuring against the ; have to be appeal to , debt have to be pay , some of they of that dismal and dingy order call " debt of honour ; " ignoble plaint and difficulty become frequent . under every cloud , no matter what it be nature , , as of old , call out lustily for sympathy and aid . she have no notion of meet any distress single - hand . in some shape , from some quarter or other , she be pretty sure to obtain she will , and so she get on -- fight the battle of life by proxy , and , on the whole , suffer as little as any human be I have ever kny . . . must I , ere I close , render some account of that freedom and renovation which I win on the fete - night ? must I tell how I and the two stalwart companion I bring home from the illuminated park bear the test of intimate acquaintance ? I try they the very next day . they have boast they strength loudly when they reclaim I from love and its bondage , but upon my demanding deed , not word , some evidence of better comfort , some experience of a relieved life -- excuse
excuse himself , as for the present impoverished and disable to assist ; and never speak ; he have die in the night suddenly . I have nothing leave for it then but to trust secretly that conjecture might have hurrie I too fast and too far , to sustain the oppressive hour by reminders of the distorting and discolour magic of jealousy . after a short and vain struggle , I find myself bring back captive to the old rack of suspense , tie down and strained anew . shall I yet see he before he go ? will he bear I in mind ? do he purpose to come ? will this day -- will the next hour bring he ? or must I again assay that corrod pain of long attent -- that rude agony of rupture at the close , that mute , mortal wrench , which , in at once uprooting hope and doubt , shakes life ; while the hand that do the violence can not be caress to pity , because absence interpose she barrier ! it be the feast of the assumption ; no school be hold . the boarder and teacher , after attend mass in the morning , be go a long walk into the country to take they gouter , or afternoon meal , at some farm - house . I do not go with they , for now but two day remain ere the et must sail , and I be cling to my last chance , as the liive waif of a wreck cling to he last raft or cable . there be some joiner 's work to do in the first classe , some bench or desk to repair ; holiday be often turn to account for the performance of these operation , which could not be execute when the room be fill with pupil . as I sit solitary , purpose to adjourn to the garden and leave the coast clear , but too listless to fulfil my own intent , I hear the workman come . foreign artisan and servant do everything by couple : I believe it would take two Labassecourien carpenter to drive a nail . while tie on my bonnet , which have hithertoo hang by its ribbon from my idle hand , I vaguly and momentarily wonder to hear the step of but one " ouvrier . " I note , too -- as captive in dungeon find sometimes dreary leisure to note the merest trifle -- that this man wear shoe , and not sabot : I conclude that it must be the master - carpenter , come to inspect before he send he journeyman . I throw round I my scarf . he advance ; he open the door ; my back be towards it ; I feel a little thrill -- a curiious sensation , too quick and transient to be analyze . I turn , I stand in the suppose master - artisan 's presence : look towards the door - way , I see it fill with a figure , and my eye print upon my brain the picture of . hundred of the prayer with which we weary bring to the suppliant no fulfilment . once haply in life , one golden gift fall prone in the lap -- one boon full and bright , perfect from 's mint . wear the dress in which he probably purpose to travel -- a surtout , guard with velvet ; I think he prepare for instant departure , and yet I have understand that two day be yet to run before the ship sai . he look well and cheerful . he look kind and benign : he come in with eagerness ; he be close to I in one second ; he be all amity . it might be he bridegroom mood which thus brighten he . whatever the cause , I could not meet he sunshine with cloud . if this be my last moment with he , I would not waste it in force , unnatural distance . I love he well -- too well not to smite out of my path even herself , when she would have obstruct a kind farewell . a cordial word from he lip , or a gentle look from he eyes , would do I good , for all the span of life that remain to I ; it would be comfort in the last strait of loneliness ; I would take it -- I would taste the elixir , and pride should not spill the cup . the interview would be short , of course : he would say to I just what he have say to each of the assemble pupil ; he would take and hold my hand two minute ; he would touch my cheek with he lip for the first , last , only time -- and then -- no more . then , indeed , the final parting , then the wide separation , the great gulf I could not pass to go to he -- across which , haply , he would not glance , to remember I . he take my hand in one of he , with the other he put back my bonnet ; he look into my face , he luminous smile go out , he lip express something almost like the wordless language of a mother who find a child greatly and unexpectedly change , break with illness , or wear out by want . a check superven . " , ! " say a woman 's hurrie voice behind , " , come into the salon ; I have yet a great many thing to say to you -- conversation for the whole day -- and so have Victor ; and be here . , come to you friend . " , bring to
to the spot by vigilance or a inscrutable instinct , press so near , she almost thrust herself between I and . " come , ! " she reiterate , she eye graze I with it be hard ray like a steel stylet . she push against she kinsman . I think he reced ; I think he would go . Pierce deeper than I could endure , make now to feel what defy suppression , I cry -- " my heart will break ! " what I feel seem literal heart - break ; but the seal of another fountain yield under the strain : one breath from , the whisper , " trust I ! " lift a load , open a outlet . with many a deep sob , with thrilling , with icy shiver , with strong trembling , and yet with relief -- I weep . " leave she to I ; it be a crisis : I will give she a cordial , and it will pass , " say the calm . to be leave to she and she cordial see to I something like be leave to the poisoner and she bowl . when . answer deeply , harshly , and briefly -- " Laissez - moi ! " in the grim sound I feel a music strange , strong , but life - give . " Laissez - moi ! " he repeat , he nostril open , and he facial muscle all quiver as he speak . " but this will never do , " say , with sternness . more sternly rejoin she kinsman -- " Sortez d'ici ! " " I will send for : on the spot I will send for he , " she threaten pertinaciously . " ! " cry the Professor , not now in he deep tone , but in he highest and most excited key , " ! sortez a l'instant ! " he be rouse , and I love he in he wrath with a passion beyond what I have yet feel . " what you do be wrong , " pursue ; " it be a act characteristic of man of you unreliable , imaginative temperament ; a step impulsive , injudicious , inconsistent -- a proceeding vexatious , and not estimable in the view of person of steadier and more resolute character . " " you know not what I have of steady and resolute in I , " say he , " but you shall see ; the event shall teach you . , " he continue less fiercely , " be gentle , be pity , be a woman ; look at this poor face , and relent . you know I be you friend , and the friend of you friend ; in spite of you taunt , you well and deeply know I may be trust . of sacrificing myself I make no difficulty but my heart be pain by what I see ; it _must have and give solace . leave I !_ " this time , in the " _leave I " there be a intonation so bitter and so imperative , I wonder that even herself could for one moment delay obedience ; but she stand firm ; she gaze upon he dauntless ; she meet he eye , forbid and fix as stone . she be open she lip to retort ; I see over all 's face a quick rising light and fire ; I can hardly tell how he manage the movement ; it do not seem violent ; it keep the form of courtesy ; he give he hand ; it scarce touch she I think ; she run , she whir from the room ; she be go , and the door shut , in one second . the flash of passion be all over very soon . he smile as he tell I to wipe my eye ; he wait quietly till I be calm , drop from time to time a stilling , solace word . Ere long I sit beside he once more myself -- re - assure , not desperate , nor yet desolate ; not friendless , not hopeless , not sick of life , and seek death . " it make you very sad then to lose you friend ? " say he . " it kill I to be forget , , " I say . " all these weary day I have not hear from you one word , and I be crush with the possibility , grow to certainty , that you would depart without say farewell ! " " must I tell you what I tell -- that you do not know I ? must I show and teach you my character ? you _will have proof that I can be a firm friend ? without clear proon this hand will not lie still in mine , it will not trust my shoulder as a safe stay ? good . the proof be ready . I come to justify myself . " " say anything , teach anything , prove anything , Monsieur ; I can listen now . " " then , in the first place , you must go out with I a good distance into the town . I come on purpose to fetch you . " without question he meaning , or sound he plan , or offer the semblance of a objection , I re-tie my bonnet : I be ready . the route he take be by the boulevard : he several time make I sit down on the seat station under the lime - tree ; he do not ask if I be tired , but look , and draw he own conclusion . " all these weary day , " say he , repeat my word , with a gentle
gentle , kindly mimicry of my voice and foreign accent , not new from he lip , and of which the playful banter never woun , not even when couple , as it often be , with the assertion , that however I might _write_ he language , I _spoke_ and always should speak it imperfectly and hesitatingly . " ' all these weary day ' I have not for one hour forget you . faithful woman err in this , that they think themselves the sole faithful of 's creature . on a very fervent and live truth to myself , I , too , till lately scarce da count , from any quarter ; but ---- look at I . " , I lift my happy eye : they _were_ happy now , or they would have be no interpreter of my heart . " well , " say he , after some seconds ' scrutiny , " there be no denying that signature : Constancy write it : she pen be of iron . be the record painful ? " " severely painful , " I say , with truth . " withdraw she hand , Monsieur ; I can bear its inscribing force no more . " " est toute pale , " say he , speak to himself ; " cette figure - la I fait mal . " " ah ! I be not pleasant to look at ----? " I could not help say this ; the word come unbidden : I never remember the time when I have not a haunt dread of what might be the degree of my outward deficiency ; this dread press I at the moment with special force . a great softness pass upon he countenance ; he violet eye grow suffuse and glisten under they deep spanish lash : he start up ; " let we walk on . " " do I displease you eye _much _? " I take courage to urge : the point have it be vital import for I . he stop , and give I a short , strong answer ; a answer which silence , subdue , yet profoundly satisfied . ever after that I know what I be for _him ; and what I might be for the rest of the world , I cease painfully to care . be it weak to lay so much stress on a opinion about appearance ? I fear it might be ; I fear it be ; but in that case I must avow no light share of weakness . I must own great fear of displeasing -- a strong wish moderately to please . Whither we ramble , I scarce knew . we walk be long , yet seem short ; the path be pleasant , the day lovely . talk of he voyage -- he think of stay away three year . on he return from , he look forward to release from liability and a clear course ; and what do I purpose do in the interval of he absence ? he ask . I have talk once , he remind I , of try to be independent and keep a little school of my own : have I drop the idea ? " indeed , I have not : I be do my best to save what would enable I to put it in practice . " " he do not like leave I in the ; he fear I should miss he there too much -- I should feel desolate -- I should grow sad --? " this be certain ; but I promise to do my best to endure . " , " say he , speak low , " there be another objection to you present residence . I should wish to write to you sometimes : it would not be well to have any uncertainty about the safe transmission of letter ; and in the -- in short , we Catholic discipline in certain matter -- though justifiable and expedient -- might possibly , under peculiar circumstance , become liable to misapplication -- perhaps abuse . " " but if you write , " say I , " I _must have you letter ; and I _will have they : ten directors , twenty directress , shall not keep they from I . I be a protestant : I will not bear that kind of discipline : Monsieur , I will not _. " " Doucement -- doucement , " rejoin he ; " we will contrive a plan ; we have we resource : soyez tranquille . " so speak , he pause . we be now return from the long walk . we have reach the middle of a clean Faubourg , where the house be small , but look pleasant . it be before the white door - step of a very neat abode that be . have halt . " I call here , " say he . he do not knock , but take from he pocket a key , he open and enter at once . Usher I in , he shut the door behind we . no servant appear . the vestibule be small , like the house , but freshly and tastefully paint ; its vista close in a french window with vine train about the pane , tendril , and green leave kiss the glass . Silence reign in this dwelling . open a inner door , . disclose a parlour , or salon -- very tiny , but I think , very pretty . its delicate walls be tinge like a blush ; it be floor be wax ; a square of brilliant carpet cover its centre ; it be small round table shone like the mirror over its hearth ; there be a little couch , a little chiffonniere , the half -
- open , crimson - silk door of which , show porcelain on the shelf ; there be a french clock , a lamp ; there be ornament in biscuit china ; the recess of the single ample window be fill with a green stand , bear three green flower - pots , each fill with a fine plant glow in bloom ; in one corner appear a gueridon with a marble top , and upon it a work - box , and a glass fill with violet in water . the lattice of this room be open ; the outer air breathe through , give freshness , the sweet violet lent fragrance . " pretty , pretty place ! " say I . m . smile to see I so pleased . " must we sit down here and wait ? " I ask in a whisper , half aw by the deep pervading hush . " we will first peep into one or two other nook of this nutshell , " he reply . " dare you take the freedom of go all over the house ? " I inquire . " yes , I dare , " say he , quietly . he lead the way . I be show a little kitchen with a little stove and oven , with few but bright brass , two chair and a table . a small cupboard hold a diminutive but commodious set of earthenware . " there be a coffee service of china in the salon , " say . , as I look at the six green and white dinner - plate ; the four dish , the cup and jug to match . conduct up the narrow but clean staircase , I be permit a glimpse of two pretty cabinet of sleeping - room ; finally , I be once more lead below , and we halt with a certain ceremony before a larger door than have yet be open . produce a second key , adjust it to the lock of this door . he open , put I in before he . " ! " he cry . I find myself in a good - size apartment , scrupulously clean , though bare , compare with those I have hithertoo see . the well - scoured board be carpetless ; it contain two row of green bench and desk , with a alley down the centre , terminate in a estrade , a teacher 's chair and table ; behind they a tableau , on the wall hang two map ; in the window flower a few hardy plant ; in short , here be a miniature classe -- complete , neat , pleasant . " it be a school then ? " say I . " who keep it ? I never hear of a establishment in this faubourg . " " will you have the goodness to accept of a few prospectuse for distribution in behalf of a friend of mine ? " ask he , take from he surtout - pocket some quire of these document , and put they into my hand . I look , I read -- print in fair character :-- " demoiselle . numero 7 , , , . " * * * * * and what do I say to ? certain juncture of we life must always be difficult of recall to memory . certain point , crise , certain feeling , joy , grief , and amazement , when review , must strike we as thing wilder and whir , dim as a wheel fast spun . I can no more remember the thought or the word of the ten minute succeed this disclosure , than I can retrace the experience of my earliest year of life : and yet the first thing distinct to I be the consciousness that I be speak very fast , repeat over and over again :-- " do you do this , ? be this you house ? do you furnish it ? do you get these papers print ? do you mean I ? be I the directress ? be there another ? tell I : say something . " but he would not speak . he pleased silence , he laugh down - look , he attitude , be visible to I now . " how be it ? I must know all -- _all , " I cry . the packet of papers fall on the floor . he have extend he hand , and I have fasten thereon , oblivious of all else . " ah ! you say I have forget you all these weary day , " say he . " poor old ! these be the thanks he get for trudge about three mortal week from house - painter to , from cabinet - maker to charwoman . and 's cot , the sole thought in he head ! " I hardly know what to do . I first caress the soft velvet on he cuff , and then . I strok the hand it surround . it be he foresight , he goodness , he silent , strong , effective goodness , that overpower I by they prove reality . it be the assurance of he sleepless interest which break on I like a light from heaven ; it be he -- I will dare to say it -- he fond , tender look , which now shook I indescribably . in the midst of all I force myself to look at the practical . " the trouble ! " I cry , " and the cost ! have you money , ? " " plenty of money ! " say he heartily . " the disposal of my large teaching connection put I in possession of a handsome sum with part of it I determine to give myself the
the richest treat that I _have_ know or _shall_ know . I like this . I have reckon on this hour day and night lately . I would not come near you , because I would not forestall it . be neither my virtue nor my vice . if I have put myself into you power , and you have begin with you question of look and lip -- where have you be , ? what have you be do ? what be you mystery ?--my solitary first and last secret would presently have unravelle itself in you lap . now , " he pursue , " you shall live here and have a school ; you shall employ yourself while I be away ; you shall think of I sometimes ; you shall mind you health and happiness for my sake , and when I come back -- " there he leave a blank . I promise to do all he tell I . I promise to work hard and willingly . " I will be you faithful steward , " I say ; " I trust at you come the account will be ready . Monsieur , monsieur , you be _too_ good ! " in such inadequate language my feeling struggl for expression : they could not get it ; speech , britle and unmalleable , and cold as ice , dissolve or shiver in the effort . he watch I , still ; he gently raise he hand to streak my hair ; it touch my lip in passing ; I press it close , I pay it tribute . he be my king ; royal for I have be that hand 's bounty ; to offer homage be both a joy and a duty . * * * * * the afternoon hour be over , and the stiller time of evening shade the quiet faubourg . m . clai my hospitality ; occupy and afoot since morning , he need refreshment ; he say I should offer he chocolate in my pretty gold and white china service . he go out and order what be needful from the restaurant ; he place the small gueridon and two chair in the balcony outside the french window under the screening vine . with what shy joy I accept my part as hostess , arrange the salver , serve the benefactor - guest . this balcony be in the rear of the house , the garden of the faubourg be round we , field extend beyond . the air be still , mild , and fresh . above the poplar , the laurels , the cypress , and the ros , look up a moon so lovely and so halcyon , the heart tremble under she smile ; a star shone subject beside she , with the unemulous ray of pure love . in a large garden near we , a jet rise from a well , and a pale statue lean over the play of water . m . talk to I . he voice be so modulate that it mix harmonious with the silver whisper , the gush , the musical sigh , in which light breeze , fountain and foliage into they lulling vesper : happy hour -- stay one moment ! droop those plume , rest those wing ; incline to mine that brow of ! ! let thy light linger ; leave it be reflection on succeed cloud ; bequeath its cheer to that time which need a ray in retrospect ! we meal be simple : the chocolate , the roll , the plate of fresh summer fruit , cherry and strawberry bed in green leave for the whole : but it be what we both like better than a feast , and I take a delight inexpressible in tending . I ask he whether he friend , and , know what he have do -- whether they have see my house ? " Mon amie , " say he , " none know what I have do save you and myself : the pleasure be consecrate to we two , unshared and unprofaned . to speak truth , there have be to I in this matter a refinement of enjoyment I would not make vulgar by communication . besides " ( smile ) " I want to prove to that I _could_ keep a secret . how often have she taunt I with lack of dignified reserve and needful caution ! how many time have she saucily insinuate that all my affair be the secret of Polichinelle ! " this be true enough : I have not spa he on this point , nor perhaps on any other that be assailable . magnificent -minded , grand - hear , dear , faulty little man ! you deserve candour , and from I always have it . continue my query , I ask to whom the house belong , who be my landlord , the amount of my rent . he instantly give I these particular in writing ; he have foreseen and prepare all thing . the house be not 's -- that I guess : he be hardly the man to become a proprietor ; I more than suspect in he a lamentable absence of the save faculty ; he could get , but not keep ; he need a treasurer . the tenement , then , belong to a citizen in the - -- a man of substance , m . say ; he start I by add : " a friend of yours , , a person who have a most respectful regard for you . " and , to my pleasant surprise , I find the landlord be none other than , the short - tempered and kind - hear bookseller , who have so kindly find I a seat that eventful night in the park .
. it seem be , in he station , rich , as well as much respect , and possess several house in this faubourg ; the rent be moderate , scarce half of what it would have be for a house of equal size nearer the centre of . " and then , " observ , " should fortune not favour you , though I think she will , I have the satisfaction to think you be in good hand ; will not be extortionate : the first year 's rent you have already in you savings ; afterwards must trust , and herself . but now , what will you do for pupil ? " " I must distribute my prospectuse . " " right ! by way of lose no time , I give one to yesterday . should you object to begin with three petite bourgeoise , the ? they be at you service . " " Monsieur , you forget nothing ; you be wonderful . object ? it would become I indeed to object ! I suppose I hardly expect at the outset to number aristocrat in my little day - school ; I care not if they never come . I shall be proud to receive 's daughter . " " besides these , " pursue he , " another pupil offer , who will come daily to take lesson in ; and as she be rich , she will pay handsomely . I mean my god - daughter and ward , . " what be in a name ?-- what in three word ? till this moment I have listen with living joy -- I have answer with gleeful quickness ; a name froze I ; three word strike I mute . the effect could not be hide , and indeed I scarce try to hide it . " what now ? " say . " nothing . " " nothing ! you countenance change : you colour and you very eye fade . nothing ! you must be ill ; you have some suffering ; tell I what . " I have nothing to tell . he draw he chair nearer . he do not grow vex , though I continue silent and icy . he try to win a word ; he entreate with perseverance , he wait with patience . " be a good girl , " say he , " docile and amiable ; not quick -- but you will like she . " " I think not . I think she must not come here . " be my speech . " do you wish to puzzle I ? do you know she ? but , in truth , there _is_ something . again you be pale as that statue . rely on ; tell he the grief . " he chair touch mine ; he hand , quietly advanced , turn I towards he . " do you know ? " say he again . the name re-pronounce by he lip overcome I unaccountably . it do not prostrate -- no , it stir I up , run with haste and heat through my vein -- recalle a hour of quick pain , many day and night of heart-sickness . near I as he now sit , strongly and closely as he have long twin he life in mine -- far as have progress , and near as be achieve we mind ' and affections ' assimilation -- the very suggestion of interference , of heart - separation , could be hear only with a fermenting excitement , a impetuous throe , a disdainful resolve , a ire , a resistance of which no human eye or cheek could hide the flame , nor any truth -accustom human tongue curb the cry . " I want to tell you something , " I say : " I want to tell you all . " " , ; come near ; speak . who prize you , if I do not ? who be you friend , if not ? ! " I speak . all escape from my lip . I lack not word now ; fast I narrate ; fluent I tell my tale ; it stream on my tongue . I go back to the night in the park ; I mention the medicated dratch -- why it be give -- its goad effect -- how it have tear rest from under my head , shake I from my couch , carry I abroad with the lure of a vivid yet solemn fancy -- a summer - night solitude on turf , under tree , near a deep , cool lakelet . I tell the scene realize ; the crowd , the masque , the music , the lamps , the splendour , the gun boom afar , the bell sound on high . all I have encounter I detailead , all I have recognise , hear , and see ; how I have beheld and watch himself : how I listen , how much heard , what conjecture ; the whole history , in brief , summon to he confidence , rush thither , truthful , literal , ardent , bitter . still as I narrate , instead of checking , he incite I to proceed he spur I by the gesture , the smile , the half - word . before I have half do , he hold both my hand , he consult my eye with a most piercing glance : there be something in he face which ten neither to calm nor to put I down ; he forget he own doctrine , he forsook he own system of repression when I must challenge its exercise . I think I deserv strong reproof ; but when have we we desert ? I merite severity ; he look indulgence . to my very
very self I seem imperious and unreasonable , for I forbade my door and roof ; he smile , betraie delight . warm , jealous , and haughty , I know not till now that my nature have such a mood : he gather I near he heart . I be full of fault ; he take they and I all home . for the moment of utmost mutiny , he reserve the one deep spell of peace . these word caress my ear :-- " Lucy , take my love . one day share my life . be my dearest , first on earth . " we walk back to the by moonlight -- such moonlight as fall on -- shine through the shade of the , and haply gild a path glorious for a step divine -- a presence nameless . once in they life some man and woman go back to these first fresh day of we great Sire and mother -- taste that grand morning 's dew -- bato in its sunrise . in the course of the walk I be tell how have always be regard with the affection proper to a daughter -- how , with 's consent , she have be affiance for month to one , a wealthy young german merchant , and be to be marry in the course of a year . some of 's relation and connection would , indeed , it seem , have like he to marry she , with a view to secure she fortune in the family ; but to himself the scheme be repugnant , and the idea totally inadmissible . we reach 's door . 's clock toll nine . at this hour , in this house , eighteen month since , have this man at my side bend before I , look into my face and eye , and arbiter my destiny . this very evening he have again stoop , gaze , and decree . how different the look -- how far otherwise the fate ! he deem I bear under he star : he seem to have spread over I its beam like a banner . once --unknown , and unloved , I hold he harsh and strange ; the low stature , the wiry make , the angles , the darkness , the manner , displease I . now , penetrat with he influence , and live by he affection , have he worth by intellect , and he goodness by heart -- I prefer he before all humanity . we part : he give I he pledge , and then he farewell . we part : the next day -- he sai . . Finis . Man can not prophesy . love be no oracle . fear sometimes imagine a vain thing . those year of absence ! how have I sicken over they anticipation ! the woe they must bring seem certain as death . I know the nature of they course : I never have doubt how it would harrow as it go . the juggernaut on he car towere there a grim load . see he draw nigh , bury he broad wheel in the oppress soil -- I , the prostrate votary -- feel beforehand the annihilating craunch . strange to say -- strange , yet true , and own many parallel in life 's experience -- that anticipatory craunch prove all -- yes -- nearly _all_ the torture . the great , in he great chariot , draw on lofty , loud , and sull . he pass quietly , like a shadow sweep the sky , at noon . nothing but a chilling dimness be see or feel . I look up . and charioteer be go by ; the votary still liv . be away three year . reader , they be the three happiest year of my life . do you scout the paradox ? . I commence my school ; I work -- I work hard . I deem myself the steward of he property , and determine , willing , to render a good account . Pupil come -- burgher at first -- a higher class ere long . about the middle of the second year a unexpected chance throw into my hand a additional hundred pound : one day I receive from a letter contain that sum . it come from , the cousin and heir of my dear and dead mistress . he be just recover from a dangerous illness ; the money be a peace -offering to he conscience , reproach he in the matter of , I know not what , papers or memoranda find after he kinswoman 's death -- name or recommend . have give he my address . how far he conscience have be sinn against , I never inquire . I ask no question , but take the cash and make it useful . with this hundred pound I venture to take the house adjoin mine . I would not leave that which m . have chosen , in which he have leave , and where he expect again to find I . my externat become a pensionnat ; that also prosper . the secret of my success do not lie so much in myself , in any endowment , any power of mine , as in a new state of circumstance , a wonderfully change life , a relieved heart . the spring which move my energie lay far away beyond seas , in a indian isle . at parting , I have be leave a legacy ; such a thought for the present , such a hope for the future , such a motive for a persevering , a laborious , a enterprising , a patient and a brave course -- I _could not flag . few thing shook I now ; few thing have importance to vex ,
, intimidate , or depress I : most thing pleased -- mere trifle have a charm . do not think that this genial flame sustain itself , or live wholly on a bequeathed hope or a part promise . a generous provider suppli bounteous fuel . I be spare all chill , all stint ; I be not suffer to fear penury ; I be not try with suspense . by every vessel he write ; he write as he give and as he love , in full - hand , full - hear plenitude . he write because he like to write ; he do not abridge , because he car not to abridge . he sit down , he take pen and paper , because he love and have much to say to she ; because he be faithful and thoughtful , because he be tender and true . there be no sham and no cheat , and no hollow unreal in he . never drop she slippery oil on he lip -- never proffer , by he pen , she coward feint and paltry nullity : he would give neither a stone , nor a excuse -- neither a scorpion ; nor a disappointment ; he letter be real food that nourished , liive water that refresh . and be I grateful ? know ! I believe that scarce a living be so remember , so sustained , deal with in kind so constant , honourable and noble , could be otherwise than grateful to the death . adherent to he own religion ( in he be not the stuff of which be make the facile apostate ) , he freely leave I my pure faith . he do not tease nor tempt . he say :-- " remain a Protestant . my little , I love in you . I own its severe charm . there be something in its ritual I can not receive myself , but it be the sole creed for ' . ' " all Rome could not put into he bigotry , nor the propaganda itself make he a real . he be bear honest , and not false -- artless , and not cunn -- a freeman , and not a slave . he tenderness have render he ductile in a priest 's hand , he affection , he devotedness , he sincere pious enthusiasm blinde he kind eye sometimes , make he abandon justice to himself to do the work of craft , and serve the end of selfishness ; but these be fault so rare to find , so costly to they owner to indulge , we scarce know whether they will not one day be reckon amongst the jewel . * * * * * and now the three year be past : 's return be fix . it be ; he be to be with I ere the mist of come . my school flourish , my house be ready : I have make he a little library , fill its shelf with the book he leave in my care : I have cultivate out of love for he ( I be naturally no florist ) the plant he prefer , and some of they be yet in bloom . I think I love he when he go away ; I love he now in another degree : he be more my own . the sun pass the equinox ; the day shorten , the leave grow sere ; but --- he be come . frosts appear at night ; have send he fog in advance ; the wind take its autumn moan ; but -- he be come . the sky hang full and dark -- a wrack sail from the west ; the cloud cast themselves into strange form --arch and broad radiations ; there rise resplendent morning -- glorious , royal , purple as monarch in he state ; the heaven be one flame ; so wild be they , they rival battle at its thickest -- so bloody , they shame in she pride . I know some sign of the sky ; I have not they ever since childhood . God watch that sail ! oh ! guard it ! the wind shift to the west . peace , peace , -- " keen " at every window ! it will rise -- it will swell -- it shriek out long : wander as I may through the house this night , I can not lull the blast . the advancing hour make it strong : by midnight , all sleepless watcher hear and fear a wild south - west storm . that storm roar frenzied , for seven day . it do not cease till the be strewn with wreck : it do not lull till the deep have gorge they full of sustenance . not till the destroy angel of tempest have achieve he perfect work , would he fold the wing whose waft be thunder -- the tremor of whose plume be storm . peace , be still ! oh ! a thousand weeper , pray in agony on waiting shore , listen for that voice , but it be not utter -- not utter till ; when the hush come , some could not feel it : till , when the sun return , he light be night to some ! here pause : pause at once . there be enough say . trouble no quiet , kind heart ; leave sunny imagination hope . let it be theirs to conceive the delight of joy bear again fresh out of great terror , the rapture of rescue from peril , the wondrous reprieve from dread , the fruition of return . let they picture union and a happy succeeding life . prosper all the day of she life ; so do ; fulfil she ninetieth year before she
