David Copperfield by to the Hon . and , of , . content I . I be . I observe iii . I have a change iv . I fall into . I be send . I Enlarge my of . my ' first half ' at . my holiday . especially one happy afternoon . I have a memorable birthday x . I , and Am provide for . I begin Life on my own account , and do not like it . Lik life on my own account no better , I form a great resolution xiii . the Sequel of my . my aunt make up she . I make another . I be a in than one . somebody Turns . a . I look about I and make a . 's . . some , and . I Corroborate , and choose a . my first dissipation . good and bad . I fall into . . 's . I visit at , . a loss . a greater loss . the beginning of a . . my aunt . . . a . a Dissolution of . and . the . 's . . another . we . 's . . . . I be involve in 's . the beginning of a . I assist at a . another . 's . . the , and the . the . . return . I be show two . a on my . a . a last retrospect Preface to 1850 Edition I do not find it easy to get sufficiently far away from this , in the first sensation of have finish it , to refer to it with the composure which this formal heading would seem to require . my interest in it , be so recent and strong ; and my mind be so divided between pleasure and regret - pleasure in the achievement of a long design , regret in the separation from many companion - that I be in danger of weary the reader whom I love , with personal confidence , and private emotion . besides which , all that I could say of the story , to any purpose , I have endeavoure to say in it . it would concern the reader little , perhaps , to know , how sorrowfully the pen be laid down at the close of a two - year ' imaginative task ; or how a Author feel as if he be dismiss some portion of himself into the shadowy world , when a crowd of the creature of he brain be go from he for ever . yet , I have nothing else to tell ; unless , indeed , I be to confess ( which might be of less moment still ) that no one can ever believe this Narrative , in the reading , more than I have believe it in the writing . instead of look back , therefore , I will look forward . I can not close this volume more agreeably to myself , than with a hopeful glance towards the time when I shall again put forth my two green leave once a month , and with a faithful remembrance of the genial sun and shower that have fall on these leaf of , and make I happy . , , 1850 . Preface to the I Remark in the original Preface to this , that I do not find it easy to get sufficiently far away from it , in the first sensation of have finish it , to refer to it with the composure which this formal heading would seem to require . my interest in it be so recent and strong , and my mind be so divide between pleasure and regret - pleasure in the achievement of a long design , regret in the separation from many companion - that I be in danger of weary the reader with personal confidence and private emotion . besides which , all that I could have say of the Story to any purpose , I have endeavoure to say in it . it would concern the reader little , perhaps , to know how sorrowfully the pen be laid down at the close of a two - year ' imaginative task ; or how a Author feel as if he be dismiss some portion of himself into the shadowy world , when a crowd of the creature of he brain be go from he for ever . yet , I have nothing else to tell ; unless , indeed , I be to confess ( which might be of less moment still ) , that no one can ever believe this Narrative , in the reading , more than I believe it in the writing . so true be these avowal at the present day , that I can now only take the reader into one confidence more . of all my book , I like this the best . it will be easily believe that I be a fond parent to every child of my fancy , and that no one can ever love that family as dearly as I love they . but , like many fond parent , I have in my heart of heart a favourite child . and he name be . 1869 the and of the 1 I be bear whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life , or whether that station will be hold by anybody else , these page must show . to begin my life with the beginning of my life , I record that I be bear ( as I have be inform and believe ) on a , at twelve o'clock at night . it be remark that the clock begin to strike , and I begin to cry , simultaneously . in consideration of the day
day and hour of my birth , it be declare by the nurse , and by some sage woman in the neighbourhood who have take a lively interest in I several month before there be any possibility of we become personally acquainted , first , that I be destin to be unlucky in life ; and secondly , that I be privileged to see ghost and spirit ; both these gift inevitably attach , as they believe , to all unlucky infant of either gender , bear towards the small hour on a night . I need say nothing here , on the first head , because nothing can show better than my history whether that prediction be verify or falsify by the result . on the second branch of the question , I will only remark , that unless I run through that part of my inheritance while I be still a baby , I have not come into it yet . but I do not at all complain of have be keep out of this property ; and if anybody else should be in the present enjoyment of it , he be heartily welcome to keep it . I be bear with a caul , which be advertise for sale , in the newspaper , at the low price of fifteen guinea . whether sea -going people be short of money about that time , or be short of faith and prefer cork jacket , I do not know ; all I know is , that there be but one solitary bidding , and that be from a attorney connect with the bill - brok business , who offer two pound in cash , and the balance in sherry , but decline to be guarantee from drown on any higher bargain . consequently the advertisement be withdraw at a dead loss - for as to sherry , my poor dear mother 's own sherry be in the market then - and ten year afterwards , the caul be put up in a raffle down in we part of the country , to fifty member at half - a - cry a head , the winner to spend five shilling . I be present myself , and I remember to have feel quite uncomfortable and confused , at a part of myself be dispose of in that way . the caul be win , I recollect , by a old lady with a hand - basket , who , very reluctantly , produce from it the stipulate five shilling , all in halfpence , and twopence halfpenny short - as it take a immense time and a great waste of arithmetic , to endeaavor without any effect to prove to she . it be a fact which will be long remember as remarkable down there , that she be never drown , but die triumphantly in bed , at ninety - two . I have understand that it be , to the last , she proudest boast , that she never have be on the water in she life , except upon a bridge ; and that over she tea ( to which she be extremely partial ) she , to the last , express she indignation at the impiety of mariner and other , who have the presumption to go ' meander ' about the world . it be in vain to represent to she that some convenience , tea perhaps include , result from this objectionable practice . she always return , with greater emphasis and with a instinctive knowledge of the strength of she objection , ' let we have no meandering . ' not to meander myself , at present , I will go back to my birth . I be bear at , in , or ' there by ' , as they say in . I be a posthumous child . my father 's eyes have close upon the light of this world six month , when mine open on it . there be something strange to I , even now , in the reflection that he never see I ; and something stranger yet in the shadowy remembrance that I have of my first childish associations with he white grave - stone in the churchyard , and of the indefinable compassion I use to feel for it lie out alone there in the dark night , when we little parlour be warm and bright with fire and candle , and the door of we house be - almost cruelly , it seem to I sometimes - bolt and lock against it . a aunt of my father 's , and consequently a great - aunt of mine , of whom I shall have more to relate by and by , be the principal magnate of we family . , or , as my poor mother always call she , when she sufficiently overcome she dread of this formidable personage to mention she at all ( which be seldom ) , have be marry to a husband younger than herself , who be very handsome , except in the sense of the homely adage , ' handsome be , that handsome do ' - for he be strongly suspect of have , and even of have once , on a dispute question of supplies , make some hasty but determined arrangement to throw she out of a two pair of stair ' window . these evidences of a incompatibility of temper induce to pay he off , and effect a separation by mutual consent . he go to with he capital , and there , accord to a wild legend in we family , he be once see ride on a elephant , in company with a Baboon ; but I think it must have be a - or a Begum . anyhow , from tiding of he death reach home , within ten
ten year . how they affec my aunt , nobody know ; for immediately upon the separation , she take she maiden name again , buy a cottage in a hamlet on the sea - coast a long way off , establish herself there as a single woman with one servant , and be understood to live secluded , ever afterwards , in a inflexible retirement . my father have once be a favourite of hers , I believe ; but she be mortally affront by he marriage , on the ground that my mother be 'a wax doll ' . she have never see my mother , but she know she to be not yet twenty . my father and never meet again . he be double my mother 's age when he marry , and of but a delicate constitution . he die a year afterwards , and , as I have say , six month before I come into the world . this be the state of matter , on the afternoon of , what I may be excuse for calling , that eventful and important . I can make no claim therefore to have know , at that time , how matter stand ; or to have any remembrance , found on the evidence of my own sense , of what follow . my mother be sit by the fire , but poorly in health , and very low in spirit , look at it through she tear , and despond heavily about herself and the fatherless little stranger , who be already welcome by some grosse of prophetic pins , in a drawer upstairs , to a world not at all excited on the subject of he arrival ; my mother , I say , be sit by the fire , that bright , windy afternoon , very timid and sad , and very doubtful of ever come alive out of the trial that be before she , when , lift she eye as she dry they , to the window opposite , she see a strange lady come up the garden . my mother have a sure foreboding at the second glance , that it be . the setting sun be glow on the strange lady , over the garden - fence , and she come walk up to the door with a fell rigidity of figure and composure of countenance that could have belong to nobody else . when she reach the house , she give another proof of she identity . my father have often hinte that she seldom conduct herself like any ordinary ; and now , instead of ring the bell , she come and look in at that identical window , press the end of she nose against the glass to that extent , that my poor dear mother use to say it become perfectly flat and white in a moment . she give my mother such a turn , that I have always be convince I be indebt to for have be bear on a . my mother have leave she chair in she agitation , and go behind it in the corner . , look round the room , slowly and inquiringly , begin on the other side , and carry she eye on , like a 's in a clock , until they reach my mother . then she make a frown and a gesture to my mother , like one who be accustom to be obey , to come and open the door . my mother go . ' . , I think , ' say ; the emphasis refer , perhaps , to my mother 's mourning weed , and she condition . ' yes , ' say my mother , faintly . ' , ' say the visitor . ' you have hear of she , I dare say ? ' my mother answer she have have that pleasure . and she have a disagreeable consciousness of not appear to imply that it have be a overpowering pleasure . ' now you see she , ' say . my mother bend she head , and beg she to walk in . they go into the parlour my mother have come from , the fire in the best room on the other side of the passage not be light - not have be light , indeed , since my father 's funeral ; and when they be both seate , and say nothing , my mother , after vainly try to restrain herself , begin to cry . ' oh tut , tut , tut ! ' say , in a hurry . ' do not do that ! come , come ! ' my mother could not help it notwithstand , so she cry until she have have she cry out . ' take off you cap , child , ' say , ' and let I see you . ' my mother be too much afraid of she to refuse compliance with this odd request , if she have any disposition to do so . therefore she do as she be tell , and do it with such nervous hand that she hair ( which be luxuriant and beautiful ) fell all about she face . ' why , bless my heart ! ' exclaim . ' you be a very baby ! ' my mother be , no doubt , unusually youthful in appearance even for she year ; she hang she head , as if it be she fault , poor thing , and say , sobb , that indeed she be afraid she be but a childish widow , and would be but a childish mother if she liv . in a short pause which ensue , she have a fancy that she feel touch she hair , and that with no ungentle hand ; but , look at she
she , in she timid hope , she find that lady sit with the skirt of she dress tuck up , she hand fold on one knee , and she foot upon the fender , frown at the fire . ' in the name of , ' say , suddenly , ' why ? ' ' do you mean the house , ma 'am ? ' ask my mother . ' why ? ' say . ' Cookery would have be more to the purpose , if you have have any practical idea of life , either of you . ' ' the name be 's choice , ' return my mother . ' when he buy the house , he like to think that there be rook about it . ' the evening wind make such a disturbance just now , among some tall old elm - tree at the bottom of the garden , that neither my mother nor could forbear glance that way . as the elm bend to one another , like giant who be whisper secret , and after a few seconds of such repose , fall into a violent flurry , toss they wild arm about , as if they late confidence be really too wicked for they peace of mind , some weatherbeaten rag old rook '- nests , burden they higher branch , swing like wreck upon a stormy sea . ' where be the bird ? ' ask . ' the -? ' my mother have be think of something else . ' the rook - what have become of they ? ' ask . ' there have not be any since we have liv here , ' say my mother . ' we think - think - it be quite a large rookery ; but the nests be very old one , and the bird have desert they a long while . ' ' all over ! ' cry . ' from head to foot ! call a house a rookery when there be not a rook near it , and take the bird on trust , because he see the nests ! ' ' , ' return my mother , ' be dead , and if you dare to speak unkindly of he to I -' my poor dear mother , I suppose , have some momentary intention of commit a assault and battery upon my aunt , who could easily have settle she with one hand , even if my mother have be in far better training for such a encounter than she be that evening . but it pass with the action of rising from she chair ; and she sit down again very meekly , and faint . when she come to herself , or when have restore she , whichever it be , she find the latter standing at the window . the twilight be by this time shade down into darkness ; and dimly as they see each other , they could not have do that without the aid of the fire . ' well ? ' say , come back to she chair , as if she have only be take a casual look at the prospect ; ' and when do you expect -' 'I be all in a tremble , ' falter my mother . 'I do not know what be the matter . I shall die , I be sure ! ' 'no , no , no , ' say . ' have some tea . ' ' oh dear I , dear I , do you think it will do I any good ? ' cry my mother in a helpless manner . ' of course it will , ' say . ' it be nothing but fancy . what do you call you girl ? ' 'I do not know that it will be a girl , yet , ma 'am , ' say my mother innocently . ' bless the ! ' exclaim , unconsciously quote the second sentiment of the pincushion in the drawer upstairs , but apply it to my mother instead of I , 'I do not mean that . I mean you servant - girl . ' ' , ' say my mother . ' ! ' repeat , with some indignation . ' do you mean to say , child , that any human be have go into a church , and get herself name ? ' ' it be she surname , ' say my mother , faintly . ' call she by it , because she christian name be the same as mine . ' 'Here ! ! ' cry , open the parlour door . ' . you mistress be a little unwell . do not dawdle . ' have issue this mandate with as much potentiality as if she have be a recognize authority in the house ever since it have be a house , and have look out to confront the amazed come along the passage with a candle at the sound of a strange voice , shut the door again , and sit down as before : with she foot on the fender , the skirt of she dress tuck up , and she hand fold on one knee . ' you be speak about it be be a girl , ' say . 'I have no doubt it will be a girl . I have a presentiment that it must be a girl . now child , from the moment of the birth of this girl -' ' perhaps boy , ' my mother take the liberty of put in . 'I tell you I have a presentiment that it must be a girl , ' return . ' do not contradict . from the moment of this girl 's birth , child , I intend to be she friend . I intend to be she
she godmother , and I beg you will call she . there must be no mistakes in life with this Betsey Trotwood . there must be no trifling with she affections , poor dear . she must be well bring up , and well guard from repose any foolish confidence where they be not deserve . I must make that my care . ' there be a twitch of 's head , after each of these sentence , as if she own old wrongs be work within she , and she repress any plainer reference to they by strong constraint . so my mother suspect , at least , as she observe she by the low glimmer of the fire : too much scared by , too uneasy in herself , and too subdue and bewilder altogether , to observe anything very clearly , or to know what to say . ' and be good to you , child ? ' ask , when she have be silent for a little while , and these motion of she head have gradually cease . ' be you comfortable together ? ' ' we be very happy , ' say my mother . ' be only too good to I . ' ' what , he spoild you , I suppose ? ' return . ' for be quite alone and dependent on myself in this rough world again , yes , I fear he do indeed , ' sob my mother . ' well ! do not cry ! ' say . ' you be not equally matched , child - if any two people can be equally match - and so I ask the question . you be a orphan , be not you ? ' 'yes . ' ' and a governess ? ' 'I be nursery - governess in a family where come to visit . be very kind to I , and take a great deal of notice of I , and pay I a good deal of attention , and at last propose to I . and I accept he . and so we be marry , ' say my mother simply . ! poor ! ' muse , with she frown still bend upon the fire . ' do you know anything ? ' 'I beg you pardon , ma 'am , ' falter my mother . ' about keep house , for instance , ' say . ' not much , I fear , ' return my mother . ' not so much as I could wish . but be teache I -' ( ' much he know about it himself ! ' ) say in a parenthesis . - ' and I hope I should have improve , be very anxious to learn , and he very patient to teach I , if the great misfortune of he death ' - my mother break down again here , and could get no farther . ' well , well ! ' say . -'I keep my housekeeping - book regularly , and balance it with every night , ' cry my mother in another burst of distress , and break down again . ' well , well ! ' say . ' do not cry any more . ' - ' and I be sure we never have a word of difference respect it , except when object to my three and fives be too much like each other , or to my put curly tail to my seven and nine , ' resume my mother in another burst , and break down again . ' you will make yourself ill , ' say , ' and you know that will not be good either for you or for my god - daughter . come ! you must not do it ! ' this argument have some share in quieting my mother , though she increase indisposition have a larger one . there be a interval of silence , only break by 's occasionally ejaculat ! ' as she sit with she foot upon the fender . ' have buy a annuity for himself with he money , I know , ' say she , by and by . ' what do he do for you ? ' ' , ' say my mother , answer with some difficulty , ' be so considerate and good as to secure the reversion of a part of it to I . ' ' how much ? ' ask . 'a hundred and five pound a year , ' say my mother . ' he might have do worse , ' say my aunt . the word be appropriate to the moment . my mother be so much worse that , come in with the teaboard and candle , and see at a glance how ill she be , - as might have do sooner if there have be light enough , - convey she upstairs to she own room with all speed ; and immediately dispatch , she nephew , who have be for some day past secret in the house , unknown to my mother , as a special messenger in case of emergency , to fetch the nurse and doctor . those allie power be considerably astonished , when they arrive within a few minute of each other , to find a unknown lady of portentous appearance , sit before the fire , with she bonnet tie over she left arm , stop she ear with jeweller ' cotton . know nothing about she , and my mother say nothing about she , she be quite a mystery in the parlour ; and the fact of she have a magazine of jeweller 's cotton in she pocket , and stick the article in she ear in that way , do not detract from the solemnity of she presence . the doctor have be upstairs and
and come down again , and have satisfy himself , I suppose , that there be a probability of this unknown lady and himself have to sit there , face to face , for some hour , laid himself out to be polite and social . he be the meekest of he sex , the mildest of little man . he sidle in and out of a room , to take up the less space . he walk as softly as the Ghost in , and more slowly . he carry he head on one side , partly in modest depreciation of himself , partly in modest propitiation of everybody else . it be nothing to say that he have not a word to throw at a dog . he could not have throw a word at a mad dog . he might have offer he one gently , or half a one , or a fragment of one ; for he speak as slowly as he walk ; but he would not have be rude to he , and he could not have be quick with he , for any earthly consideration . , look mildly at my aunt with he head on one side , and make she a little bow , say , in allusion to the jeweller ' cotton , as he softly touch he left ear : ' some local irritation , ma'am ? ' ' what ! ' reply my aunt , pull the cotton out of one ear like a cork . be so alarm by she abruptness - as he tell my mother afterwards - that it be a mercy he do not lose he presence of mind . but he repeat sweetly : ' some local irritation , ma'am ? ' ' Nonsense ! ' reply my aunt , and corke herself again , at one blow . could do nothing after this , but sit and look at she feebly , as she sit and look at the fire , until he be call upstairs again . after some quarter of a hour 's absence , he return . ' well ? ' say my aunt , take the cotton out of the ear nearest to he . ' well , ma 'am , ' return , 'we be - we be progress slowly , ma'am . ' ' -- a -- ah ! ' say my aunt , with a perfect shake on the contemptuous interjection . and corke herself as before . really - really - as tell my mother , he be almost shocked ; speak in a professional point of view alone , he be almost shocked . but he sit and look at she , notwithstand , for nearly two hour , as she sit look at the fire , until he be again call out . after another absence , he again return . ' well ? ' say my aunt , take out the cotton on that side again . ' well , ma 'am , ' return , 'we be - we be progress slowly , ma'am . ' ' ya -- a -- ah ! ' say my aunt . with such a snarl at he , that absolutely could not bear it . it be really calculate to break he spirit , he say afterwards . he prefer to go and sit upon the stair , in the dark and a strong dratch , until he be again send for . , who go to the national school , and be a very dragon at he catechism , and who may therefore be regard as a credible witness , report next day , that happen to peep in at the parlour - door a hour after this , he be instantly descry by , then walk to and for in a state of agitation , and pounce upon before he could make he escape . that there be now occasional sound of foot and voice overhead which he infer the cotton do not exclude , from the circumstance of he evidently be clutch by the lady as a victim on whom to expend she superabundant agitation when the sound be loudest . that , march he constantly up and down by the collar ( as if he have be take too much laudanum ) , she , at those time , shook he , rumple he hair , make light of he linen , stop he ear as if she confound they with she own , and otherwise tousl and maltreate he . this be in part confirm by he aunt , who see he at half past twelve o'clock , soon after he release , and affir that he be then as red as I be . the mild could not possibly bear malice at such a time , if at any time . he sidle into the parlour as soon as he be at liberty , and say to my aunt in he meekest manner : ' well , ma 'am , I be happy to congratulate you . ' ' what upon ? ' say my aunt , sharply . be flutter again , by the extreme severity of my aunt 's manner ; so he make she a little bow and give she a little smile , to mollify she . ' mercy on the man , what be he do ! ' cry my aunt , impatiently . ' can not he speak ? ' ' be calm , my dear ma 'am , ' say , in he softest accents . ' there be no longer any occasion for uneasiness , ma 'am . be calm . ' it have since be consider almost a miracle that my aunt do not shake he , and shake what he have to say , out of he . she only shook she own head at he ,
, but in a way that make he quail . ' well , ma 'am , ' resume , as soon as he have courage , 'I be happy to congratulate you . all be now over , ma 'am , and well over . ' during the five minute or so that devote to the delivery of this oration , my aunt eye he narrowly . ' how be she ? ' say my aunt , fold she arm with she bonnet still tie on one of they . ' well , ma 'am , she will soon be quite comfortable , I hope , ' return . ' quite as comfortable as we can expect a young mother to be , under these melancholy domestic circumstance . there can not be any objection to you see she presently , ma 'am . it may do she good . ' ' and She . how be she ? ' say my aunt , sharply . lay he head a little more on one side , and look at my aunt like a amiable bird . ' the baby , ' say my aunt . ' how be she ? ' ' ma 'am , ' return , 'I apprehend you have know . it be a boy . ' my aunt say never a word , but take she bonnet by the string , in the manner of a sling , aim a blow at 's head with it , put it on bent , walk out , and never come back . she vanish like a discontent fairy ; or like one of those supernatural being , whom it be popularly suppose I be entitled to see ; and never come back any more . no . I lay in my basket , and my mother lay in she bed ; but be for ever in the land of dream and shadows , the tremendous region whence I have so lately travel ; and the light upon the window of we room shone out upon the earthly bourne of all such traveller , and the mound above the ash and the dust that once be he , without whom I have never be . chapter 2 I observe the first object that assume a distinct presence before I , as I look far back , into the blank of my infancy , be my mother with she pretty hair and youthful shape , and with no shape at all , and eye so dark that they seem to darke they whole neighbourhood in she face , and cheek and arm so hard and red that I wonder the bird do not peck she in preference to apple . I believe I can remember these two at a little distance apart , dwarf to my sight by stoop down or knee on the floor , and I go unsteadily from the one to the other . I have a impression on my mind which I can not distinguish from actual remembrance , of the touch of 's forefinger as she use to hold it out to I , and of its be roughen by needlework , like a pocket nutmeg - grater . this may be fancy , though I think the memory of most of we can go farther back into such time than many of we suppose ; just as I believe the power of observation in number of very young child to be quite wonderful for its closeness and accuracy . indeed , I think that most grow man who be remarkable in this respect , may with greater propriety be say not to have lose the faculty , than to have acquire it ; the rather , as I generally observe such man to retain a certain freshness , and gentleness , and capacity of be pleas , which be also a inheritance they have preserve from they childhood . I might have a misgiving that I be 's meander ' in stopping to say this , but that it bring I to remark that I build these conclusion , in part upon my own experience of myself ; and if it should appear from anything I may set down in this narrative that I be a child of close observation , or that as a man I have a strong memory of my childhood , I undoubtedly lay claim to both of these characteristic . look back , as I be say , into the blank of my infancy , the first object I can remember as stand out by themselves from a confusion of thing , be my mother and . what else do I remember ? let I see . there come out of the cloud , we house - not new to I , but quite familiar , in its earliest remembrance . on the ground - floor be 's kitchen , open into a back yard ; with a pigeon - house on a pole , in the centre , without any pigeon in it ; a great dog - kennel in a corner , without any dog ; and a quantity of fowl that look terribly tall to I , walk about , in a menacing and ferocious manner . there be one cock who get upon a post to crow , and seem to take particular notice of I as I look at he through the kitchen window , who make I shiver , he be so fierce . of the geese outside the side - gate who come waddl after I with they long necks stretch out when I go that way , I dream at night : as a man environ by wild beasts might dream of lions . here be a long passage - what a enormous perspective I make of it ! - lead from 's kitchen to the front door . a dark store
store - room open out of it , and that be a place to be run past at night ; for I do not know what may be among those tubs and jar and old tea - chest , when there be nobody in there with a dimly - burn light , let a mouldy air come out of the door , in which there be the smell of soap , pickle , pepper , candle , and coffee , all at one whiff . then there be the two parlour : the parlour in which we sit of a evening , my mother and I and - for be quite we companion , when she work be do and we be alone - and the best parlour where we sit on a ; grandly , but not so comfortably . there be something of a doleful air about that room to I , for have tell I - I do not know when , but apparently age ago - about my father 's funeral , and the company have they black cloak put on . one night my mother read to and I in there , how be raise up from the dead . and I be so frightene that they be afterwards oblige to take I out of bed , and show I the quiet churchyard out of the bedroom window , with the dead all lie in they grave at rest , below the solemn moon . there be nothing half so green that I know anywhere , as the grass of that churchyard ; nothing half so shady as its tree ; nothing half so quiet as its tombstone . the sheep be feed there , when I kneel up , early in the morning , in my little bed in a closet within my mother 's room , to look out at it ; and I see the red light shin on the sun -dial , and think within myself , ' be the sun -dial glad , I wonder , that it can tell the time again ? ' here be we pew in the church . what a high - back pew ! with a window near it , out of which we house can be see , and be see many time during the morning 's service , by , who like to make herself as sure as she can that it be not be rob , or be not in flame . but though 's eye wander , she be much offended if mine do , and frown to I , as I stand upon the seat , that I be to look at the clergyman . but I can not always look at he - I know he without that white thing on , and I be afraid of he wonder why I stare so , and perhaps stop the service to inquire - and what be I to do ? it be a dreadful thing to gape , but I must do something . I look at my mother , but she pretend not to see I . I look at a boy in the aisle , and he make face at I . I look at the sunlight come in at the open door through the porch , and there I see a stray sheep - I do not mean a sinner , but mutton - half make up he mind to come into the church . I feel that if I look at he any longer , I might be temp to say something out loud ; and what would become of I then ! I look up at the monumental tablet on the wall , and try to think of late of this parish , and what the feeling of must have be , when affliction sore , long time bore , and physicians be in vain . I wonder whether they call in , and he be in vain ; and if so , how he like to be remind of it once a week . I look from , in he neckcloth , to the pulpit ; and think what a good place it would be to play in , and what a castle it would make , with another boy come up the stair to attack it , and have the velvet cushion with the tassel throw down on he head . in time my eyes gradually shut up ; and , from seem to hear the clergyman singe a drowsy song in the heat , I hear nothing , until I fall off the seat with a crash , and be take out , more dead than alive , by . and now I see the outside of we house , with the latticed bedroom - window stand open to let in the sweet - smell air , and the rag old rook '- nests still dangl in the elm - tree at the bottom of the front garden . now I be in the garden at the back , beyond the yard where the empty pigeon - house and dog - kennel be - a very preserve of butterfly , as I remember it , with a high fence , and a gate and padlock ; where the fruit cluster on the tree , riper and richer than fruit have ever be since , in any other garden , and where my mother gather some in a basket , while I stand by , bolt furtive gooseberry , and try to look unmoved . a great wind rise , and the summer be go in a moment . we be play in the winter twilight , dance about the parlour . when my mother be out of breath and rest herself in a elbow - chair , I watch she win she bright curl round she finger , and straiten she waist
waist , and nobody know better than I do that she like to look so well , and be proud of be so pretty . that be among my very earliest impressions . that , and a sense that we be both a little afraid of , and submit ourselves in most thing to she direction , be among the first opinion - if they may be so call - that I ever derive from what I see . and I be sit one night by the parlour fire , alone . I have be read to about crocodile . I must have read very perspicuously , or the poor soul must have be deeply interested , for I remember she have a cloudy impression , after I have do , that they be a sort of vegetable . I be tired of read , and dead sleepy ; but have leave , as a high treat , to sit up until my mother come home from spend the evening at a neighbour 's , I would rather have die upon my post ( of course ) than have go to bed . I have reach that stage of sleepiness when seem to swell and grow immensely large . I prop my eyelid open with my two forefinger , and look perseveringly at she as she sit at work ; at the little bit of wax - candle she keep for she thread - how old it look , be so wrinkle in all direction ! - at the little house with a thatch roof , where the yard - measure liv ; at she work - box with a slide lid , with a view of 's ( with a pink dome ) pain on the top ; at the brass thimble on she finger ; at herself , whom I think lovely . I feel so sleepy , that I know if I lose sight of anything for a moment , I be go . ' Peggotty , ' say I , suddenly , ' be you ever marry ? ' ' , , ' reply . ' what be put marriage in you head ? ' she answer with such a start , that it quite awoke I . and then she stop in she work , and look at I , with she needle draw out to its thread 's length . ' but be you ever marry , ? ' say I . ' you be a very handsome woman , a not you ? ' I think she in a different style from my mother , certainly ; but of another school of beauty , I consider she a perfect example . there be a red velvet footstool in the best parlour , on which my mother have pain a nosegay . the ground - work of that stool , and 's complexion appear to I to be one and the same thing . the stool be smooth , and be rough , but that make no difference . ' I handsome , ! ' say . ' Lawk , no , my dear ! but what put marriage in you head ? ' 'I do not know ! - you must not marry more than one person at a time , may you , ? ' ' certainly not , ' say , with the promptest decision . ' but if you marry a person , and the person die , why then you may marry another person , may not you , ? ' ' you May , ' say , ' if you choose , my dear . that be a matter of opinion . ' ' but what be you opinion , ? ' say I . I ask she , and look curiously at she , because she look so curiously at I . ' my opinion be , ' say , take she eye from I , after a little indecision and go on with she work , 'that I never be marry myself , , and that I do not expect to be . that be all I know about the subject . ' ' you a not cross , I suppose , , be you ? ' say I , after sit quiet for a minute . I really think she be , she have be so short with I ; but I be quite mistake : for she laid aside she work ( which be a stocking of she own ) , and open she arm wide , take my curly head within they , and give it a good squeeze . I know it be a good squeeze , because , be very plump , whenever she make any little exertion after she be dress , some of the buttons on the back of she gown fly off . and I recollect two bursting to the opposite side of the parlour , while she be hug I . ' now let I hear some more about the Crorkindill , ' say , who be not quite right in the name yet , ' for I can not hear half enough . ' I could not quite understand why look so queer , or why she be so ready to go back to the crocodile . however , we return to those monster , with fresh wakefulness on my part , and we leave they egg in the sand for the sun to hatch ; and we run away from they , and baffle they by constantly turn , which they be unable to do quickly , on account of they unwieldy make ; and we go into the water after they , as native , and put sharp piece of timber down they throat ; and in short we run the whole crocodile gauntlet . I do , at least ; but I have my
my doubt of , who be thoughtfully stick she needle into various part of she face and arm , all the time . we have exhaust the crocodile , and begin with the alligator , when the garden - bell rang . we go out to the door ; and there be my mother , look unusually pretty , I think , and with she a gentleman with beautiful black hair and whisker , who have walk home with we from church last . as my mother stoop down on the threshold to take I in she arm and kiss I , the gentleman say I be a more highly privilege little fellow than a monarch - or something like that ; for my later understanding come , I be sensible , to my aid here . ' what do that mean ? ' I ask he , over she shoulder . he patt I on the head ; but somehow , I do not like he or he deep voice , and I be jealous that he hand should touch my mother 's in touch I - which it do . I put it away , as well as I could . 'Oh , ! ' remonstrate my mother . ' dear boy ! ' say the gentleman . 'I can not wonder at he devotion ! ' I never see such a beautiful colour on my mother 's face before . she gently chide I for be rude ; and , keep I close to she shawl , turn to thank the gentleman for take so much trouble as to bring she home . she put out she hand to he as she speak , and , as he meet it with he own , she glance , I think , at I . ' let we say " good night " , my fine boy , ' say the gentleman , when he have bend he head - I see he ! - over my mother 's little glove . ' good night ! ' say I . ' come ! let we be the best friend in the world ! ' say the gentleman , laugh . ' shake hand ! ' my right hand be in my mother 's leave , so I give he the other . ' why , that be the hand , ! ' laugh the gentleman . my mother draw my right hand forward , but I be resolve , for my former reason , not to give it he , and I do not . I give he the other , and he shook it heartily , and say I be a brave fellow , and go away . at this minute I see he turn round in the garden , and give we a last look with he ill - omen black eye , before the door be shut . , who have not say a word or move a finger , secure the fastening instantly , and we all go into the parlour . my mother , contrary to she usual habit , instead of come to the elbow - chair by the fire , remain at the other end of the room , and sit singe to herself . - ' hope you have have a pleasant evening , ma 'am , ' say , stand as stiff as a barrel in the centre of the room , with a candlestick in she hand . ' Much oblige to you , , ' return my mother , in a cheerful voice , 'I have have a very pleasant evening . ' 'A stranger or so make a agreeable change , ' suggest . 'a very agreeable change , indeed , ' return my mother . continue to stand motionless in the middle of the room , and my mother resume she singe , I fall asleep , though I be not so sound asleep but that I could hear voice , without hear what they say . when I half awoke from this uncomfortable doze , I find and my mother both in tear , and both talking . ' not such a one as this , would not have like , ' say . ' that I say , and that I swear ! ' ' Good Heavens ! ' cry my mother , ' you will drive I mad ! be ever any poor girl so ill - use by she servants as I be ! why do I do myself the injustice of call myself a girl ? have I never be marry , ? ' ' know you have , ma 'am , ' return . ' then , how can you dare , ' say my mother - ' you know I do not mean how can you dare , , but how can you have the heart - to make I so uncomfortable and say such bitter thing to I , when you be well aware that I have not , out of this place , a single friend to turn to ? ' ' the more be the reason , ' return , ' for say that it will not do . no ! that it will not do . no ! no price could make it do . no !' - I think would have throw the candlestick away , she be so emphatic with it . ' how can you be so aggravating , ' say my mother , shed more tear than before , 'as to talk in such a unjust manner ! how can you go on as if it be all settle and arrange , , when I tell you over and over again , you cruel thing , that beyond the commonest civility nothing have pass ! you talk of admiration . what be I to do ? if people be so silly as
as to indulge the sentiment , be it my fault ? what be I to do , I ask you ? would you wish I to shave my head and black my face , or disfigure myself with a burn , or a scald , or something of that sort ? I dare say you would , . I dare say you would quite enjoy it . ' seem to take this aspersion very much to heart , I think . ' and my dear boy , ' cry my mother , come to the elbow - chair in which I be , and caresse I , 'my own little ! be it to be hint to I that I be want in affection for my precious treasure , the dearest little fellow that ever be ! ' ' nobody never go and hint no such a thing , ' say . ' you do , ! ' return my mother . ' you know you do . what else be it possible to infer from what you say , you unkind creature , when you know as well as I do , that on he account only last quarter I would not buy myself a new parasol , though that old green one be fray the whole way up , and the fringe be perfectly mangy ? you know it be , . you can not deny it . ' then , turn affectionately to I , with she cheek against mine , ' be I a naughty mama to you , ? be I a nasty , cruel , selfish , bad mama ? say I be , my child ; say " yes " , dear boy , and will love you ; and 's love be a great deal better than mine , . I do not love you at all , do I ? ' at this , we all fall a - cry together . I think I be the loudest of the party , but I be sure we be all sincere about it . I be quite heart - break myself , and be afraid that in the first transport of wounded tenderness I call a ' ' . that honest creature be in deep affliction , I remember , and must have become quite buttonless on the occasion ; for a little volley of those explosive go off , when , after have make it up with my mother , she knee down by the elbow - chair , and make it up with I . we go to be greatly deject . my sob keep wake I , for a long time ; and when one very strong sob quite hoist I up in bed , I find my mother sit on the coverlet , and lean over I . I fall asleep in she arm , after that , and sleep soundly . whether it be the follow when I see the gentleman again , or whether there be any greater lapse of time before he reappear , I can not recall . I do not profess to be clear about date . but there he be , in church , and he walk home with we afterwards . he come in , too , to look at a famious geranium we have , in the parlour -window . it do not appear to I that he take much notice of it , but before he go he ask my mother to give he a bit of the blossom . she beg he to choose it for himself , but he refuse to do that - I could not understand why - so she pluck it for he , and give it into he hand . he say he would never , never part with it any more ; and I think he must be quite a fool not to know that it would fall to piece in a day or two . begin to be less with we , of a evening , than she have always be . my mother defer to she very much - more than usual , it occur to I - and we be all three excellent friend ; still we be different from what we use to be , and be not so comfortable among ourselves . sometimes I fancie that perhaps object to my mother 's wear all the pretty dress she have in she drawer , or to she go so often to visit at that neighbour 's ; but I could not , to my satisfaction , make out how it be . gradually , I become used to see the gentleman with the black whisker . I like he no better than at first , and have the same uneasy jealousy of he ; but if I have any reason for it beyond a child 's instinctive dislike , and a general idea that and I could make much of my mother without any help , it certainly be not the reason that I might have find if I have be older . no such thing come into my mind , or near it . I could observe , in little piece , as it be ; but as to make a net of a number of these piece , and catch anybody in it , that be , as yet , beyond I . one autumn morning I be with my mother in the front garden , when - I know he by that name now - come by , on horseback . he reine up he horse to salute my mother , and say he be go to Lowestoft to see some friend who be there with a yacht , and merrily propose to take I on the saddle before he if I would like the ride . the air be so clear and pleasant , and
and the horse seem to like the idea of the ride so much himself , as he stand snort and paw at the garden - gate , that I have a great desire to go . so I be send upstairs to to be make spruce ; and in the meantime dismount , and , with he horse 's bridle draw over he arm , walk slowly up and down on the outer side of the sweetbriar fence , while my mother walk slowly up and down on the inner to keep he company . I recollect and I pee out at they from my little window ; I recollect how closely they seem to be examine the sweetbriar between they , as they stroll along ; and how , from be in a perfectly angelic temper , turn cross in a moment , and brush my hair the wrong way , excessively hard . and I be soon off , and trot along on the green turf by the side of the road . he hold I quite easily with one arm , and I do not think I be restless usually ; but I could not make up my mind to sit in front of he without turn my head sometimes , and look up in he face . he have that kind of shallow black eye - I want a better word to express a eye that have no depth in it to be look into - which , when it be abstract , seem from some peculiarity of light to be disfigure , for a moment at a time , by a cast . several time when I glance at he , I observe that appearance with a sort of awe , and wonder what he be think about so closely . he hair and whisker be blacker and thicker , look at so near , than even I have give they credit for being . a squareness about the lower part of he face , and the dot indication of the strong black beard he shave close every day , remind I of the wax - work that have travel into we neighbourhood some half - a - year before . this , he regular eyebrow , and the rich white , and black , and brown , of he complexion - confound he complexion , and he memory ! - make I think he , in spite of my misgiving , a very handsome man . I have no doubt that my poor dear mother think he so too . we go to a hotel by the sea , where two gentleman be smoke cigar in a room by themselves . each of they be lie on at least four chair , and have a large rough jacket on . in a corner be a heap of coat and boat - cloak , and a flag , all bundle up together . they both roll on to they foot in a untidy sort of manner , when we come in , and say , ' , ! we think you be dead ! ' ' not yet , ' say . ' and who be this shaver ? ' say one of the gentleman , take hold of I . ' that be , ' return . ' who ? ' say the gentleman . ' ? ' ' , ' say . ' what ! Bewitch 's encumbrance ? ' cry the gentleman . ' the pretty little widow ? ' ' , ' say , ' take care , if you please . somebody be sharp . ' ' who be ? ' ask the gentleman , laugh . I look up , quickly ; be curiious to know . ' only of , ' say . I be quite relieved to find that it be only Brook of ; for , at first , I really think it be I . there seem to be something very comical in the reputation of of , for both the gentleman laugh heartily when he be mention , and be a good deal amuse also . after some laughing , the gentleman whom he have call , say : ' and what be the opinion of of , in reference to the project business ? ' ' why , I do not know that understand much about it at present , ' reply ; ' but he be not generally favourable , I believe . ' there be more laughter at this , and say he would ring the bell for some sherry in which to drink to Brooks . this he do ; and when the wine came , he make I have a little , with a biscuit , and , before I drank it , stand up and say , ' confusion to Brooks of ! ' the toast be receive with great applause , and such hearty laughter that it make I laugh too ; at which they laugh the more . in short , we quite enjoy ourselves . we walk about on the cliff after that , and sit on the grass , and look at thing through a telescope - I could make out nothing myself when it be put to my eye , but I pretend I could - and then we come back to the hotel to a early dinner . all the time we be out , the two gentleman smoke incessantly - which , I think , if I might judge from the smell of they rough coat , they must have be do , ever since the coat have first come home from the tailor 's . I must not forget that we go on board the yacht , where they all three descende into the cabin , and be busy with some papers . I see they quite hard at work ,
, when I look down through the open skylight . they leave I , during this time , with a very nice man with a very large head of red hair and a very small shiny hat upon it , who have get a cross - barred shirt or waistcoat on , with ' ' in capital letter across the chest . I think it be he name ; and that as he live on board ship and have not a street door to put he name on , he put it there instead ; but when I call he , he say it mean the vessel . I observ all day that be graver and steadier than the two gentleman . they be very gay and careless . they joke freely with one another , but seldom with he . it appear to I that he be more clever and cold than they be , and that they regard he with something of my own feeling . I remarke that , once or twice when be talk , he look at sideway , as if to make sure of he not be displease ; and that once when ( the other gentleman ) be in high spirit , he trod upon he foot , and give he a secret caution with he eye , to observe , who be sit stern and silent . nor do I recollect that laugh at all that day , except at the joke - and that , by the by , be he own . we go home early in the evening . it be a very fine evening , and my mother and he have another stroll by the sweetbriar , while I be send in to get my tea . when he be go , my mother ask I all about the day I have have , and what they have say and do . I mention what they have say about she , and she laugh , and tell I they be impudent fellow who talk nonsense - but I know it pleas she . I know it quite as well as I know it now . I take the opportunity of ask if she be at all acquaint with of , but she answer no , only she suppose he must be a manufacturer in the knife and fork way . can I say of she face - alte as I have reason to remember it , perish as I know it be - that it be go , when here it come before I at this instant , as distinct as any face that I may choose to look on in a crowded street ? can I say of she innocent and girlish beauty , that it fad , and be no more , when its breath fall on my cheek now , as it fall that night ? can I say she ever change , when my remembrance bring she back to life , thus only ; and , truer to its loving youth than I have be , or man ever be , still hold fast what it cherish then ? I write of she just as she be when I have go to be after this talk , and she come to bid I good night . she knee down playfully by the side of the bed , and lay she ching upon she hand , and laugh , say : ' what be it they say , ? tell I again . I can not believe it . ' ' " -" ' I begin . my mother put she hand upon my lip to stop I . ' it be never bewitch , ' she say , laugh . ' it never could have be bewitch , . now I know it be not ! ' ' yes , it be . " Bewitch " ,' I repeat stoutly . ' and , " pretty . " ' 'no , no , it be never pretty . not pretty , ' interpose my mother , lay she finger on my lip again . ' yes it be . " pretty little widow . " ' ' what foolish , impudent creature ! ' cry my mother , laugh and cover she face . ' what ridiculous man ! a not they ? Davy dear -' ' well , Ma . ' ' do not tell Peggotty ; she might be angry with they . I be dreadfully angry with they myself ; but I would rather do not know . ' I promise , of course ; and we kiss one another over and over again , and I soon fall fast asleep . it seem to I , at this distance of time , as if it be the next day when broach the striking and adventurous proposition I be about to mention ; but it be probably about two month afterwards . we be sit as before , one evening ( when my mother be out as before ) , in company with the stocking and the yard - measure , and the bit of wax , and the box with 's on the lid , and the crocodile book , when , after look at I several time , and open she mouth as if she be go to speak , without do it - which I think be merely gape , or I should have be rather alarme - say coaxingly : ' , how should you like to go along with I and spend a fortnight at my brother 's at ? would not that be a treat ? ' ' be you brother a agreeable man , ? ' I inquire , provisionally . 'Oh , what a agreeable man he be ! ' cry , hold up she hand . ' then there be the sea ;
; and the boat and ship ; and the fisherman ; and the beach ; and to play with -' mean she nephew , mention in my first chapter ; but she speak of he as a morsel of . I be flush by she summary of delight , and reply that it would indeed be a treat , but what would my mother say ? ' why then I will as good as bet a guinea , ' say , intent upon my face , ' that she will let we go . I will ask she , if you like , as soon as ever she come home . there now ! ' ' but what be she to do while we be away ? ' say I , put my small elbow on the table to argue the point . ' she can not live by herself . ' if be look for a hole , all of a sudden , in the heel of that stocking , it must have be a very little one indeed , and not worth darning . 'I say ! Peggotty ! she can not live by herself , you know . ' 'Oh , bless you ! ' say , look at I again at last . ' do not you know ? she be go to stay for a fortnight with . have go to have a lot of company . ' oh ! if that be it , I be quite ready to go . I wait , in the utmost impatience , until my mother come home from 's ( for it be that identical neighbour ) , to ascertain if we could get leave to carry out this great idea . without be nearly so much surprised as I have expect , my mother enter into it readily ; and it be all arrange that night , and my board and lod during the visit be to be pay for . the day soon come for we go . it be such a early day that it come soon , even to I , who be in a fever of expectation , and half afraid that a earthquake or a fiery mountain , or some other great convulsion of nature , might interpose to stop the expedition . we be to go in a carrier 's cart , which depart in the morning after breakfast . I would have give any money to have be allow to wrap myself up over -night , and sleep in my hat and boot . it touch I nearly now , although I tell it lightly , to recollect how eager I be to leave my happy home ; to think how little I suspect what I do leave for ever . I be glad to recollect that when the carrier 's cart be at the gate , and my mother stand there kiss I , a grateful fondness for she and for the old place I have never turn my back upon before , make I cry . I be glad to know that my mother cry too , and that I feel she heart beat against mine . I be glad to recollect that when the carrier begin to move , my mother run out at the gate , and call to he to stop , that she might kiss I once more . I be glad to dwell upon the earnestness and love with which she lift up she face to mine , and do so . as we leave she stand in the road , come up to where she be , and seem to expostulate with she for be so move . I be look back round the awning of the cart , and wonder what business it be of he . , who be also look back on the other side , see anything but satisfied ; as the face she bring back in the cart denote . I sit look at for some time , in a reverie on this supposititious case : whether , if she be employ to lose I like the boy in the fairy tale , I should be able to track my way home again by the button she would she . chapter 3 I have a change the carrier 's horse be the laziest horse in the world , I should hope , and shuffle along , with he head down , as if he like to keep people wait to whom the package be direct . I fancie , indeed , that he sometimes chuckle audibly over this reflection , but the carrier say he be only trouble with a cough . the carrier have a way of keep he head down , like he horse , and of drooping sleepily forward as he drive , with one of he arm on each of he knee . I say ' drive ' , but it strike I that the cart would have go to quite as well without he , for the horse do all that ; and as to conversation , he have no idea of it but whistling . have a basket of refreshment on she knee , which would have last we out handsomely , if we have be go to by the same conveyance . we eat a good deal , and sleep a good deal . always go to sleep with she ching upon the handle of the basket , she hold of which never relax ; and I could not have believe unless I have hear she do it , that one defenceless woman could have snor so much . we make so many deviation up and down lane , and be such a long time deliver a bedstead at a public - house , and call at other place , that I be quite tired , and very glad ,
, when we see . it look rather spongy and soppy , I think , as I carry my eye over the great dull waste that lay across the river ; and I could not help wonder , if the world be really as round as my geography book say , how any part of it come to be so flat . but I reflect that might be situate at one of the pole ; which would account for it . as we draw a little nearer , and see the whole adjacent prospect lie a straight low line under the sky , I hint to that a mound or so might have improve it ; and also that if the land have be a little more separate from the sea , and the town and the tide have not be quite so much mix up , like toast and water , it would have be nicer . but say , with greater emphasis than usual , that we must take thing as we find they , and that , for she part , she be proud to call herself a . when we get into the street ( which be strange enough to I ) and smelt the fish , and pitch , and oakum , and tar , and see the sailor walk about , and the cart jingl up and down over the stone , I feel that I have do so busy a place a injustice ; and say as much to , who hear my expression of delight with great complacency , and tell I it be well know ( I suppose to those who have the good fortune to be bear ) that be , upon the whole , the finest place in the universe . ' here be my ! ' scream , ' grow out of knowledge ! ' he be wait for we , in fact , at the public - house ; and ask I how I find myself , like a old acquaintance . I do not feel , at first , that I know he as well as he know I , because he have never come to we house since the night I be bear , and naturally he have the advantage of I . but we intimacy be much advance by he take I on he back to carry I home . he be , now , a huge , strong fellow of six feet high , broad in proportion , and round - shoulder ; but with a simpering boy 's face and curly light hair that give he quite a sheepish look . he be dress in a canva jacket , and a pair of such very stiff trousers that they would have stand quite as well alone , without any leg in they . and you could not so properly have say he wear a hat , as that he be cover in a - top , like a old building , with something pitchy . carry I on he back and a small box of ours under he arm , and carry another small box of ours , we turn down lane bestrewn with bit of chip and little hillock of sand , and go past gas - work , rope -walk , boat- builder ' yard , shipwright ' yard , ship - breaker ' yard , caulker ' yard , rigger ' loft , smith ' forge , and a great litter of such place , until we come out upon the dull waste I have already see at a distance ; when say , ' be we house , ! ' I look in all direction , as far as I could stare over the wilderness , and away at the sea , and away at the river , but no house could I make out . there be a black barge , or some other kind of superannuate boat , not far off , high and dry on the ground , with a iron funnel stick out of it for a chimney and smoke very cosily ; but nothing else in the way of a habitation that be visible to I . ' that be not it ? ' say I . ' that ship - look thing ? ' ' that be it , Mas 'r , ' return . if it have be 's palace , roc 's egg and all , I suppose I could not have be more charme with the romantic idea of live in it . there be a delightful door cut in the side , and it be roof in , and there be little window in it ; but the wonderful charm of it be , that it be a real boat which have no doubt be upon the water hundred of time , and which have never be intend to be live in , on dry land . that be the captivation of it to I . if it have ever be mean to be live in , I might have think it small , or inconvenient , or lonely ; but never have be design for any such use , it become a perfect abode . it be beautifully clean inside , and as tidy as possible . there be a table , and a Dutch clock , and a chest of drawer , and on the chest of drawer there be a tea -tray with a painting on it of a lady with a parasol , take a walk with a military - look child who be trundl a hoop . the tray be keep from tumbl down , by a bible ; and the tray , if it have tumble down , would have smashed a quantity of cup and saucer and a teapot that be group around the book . on the walls there be some
some common coloured picture , fram and glaze , of scripture subject ; such as I have never see since in the hand of pedlar , without see the whole interior of 's brother 's house again , at one view . Abrahbe in red go to sacrifice in blue , and in yellow cast into a den of green lions , be the most prominent of these . over the little mantelshelf , be a picture of the ' 's lugger , build at , with a real little wooden stern stick on to it ; a work of art , combine composition with carpentry , which I consider to be one of the most enviable possession that the world could afford . there be some hook in the beams of the ceiling , the use of which I do not divine then ; and some locker and box and convenience of that sort , which serve for seat and ek out the chair . all this I see in the first glance after I cross the threshold - child - like , accord to my theory - and then open a little door and show I my bedroom . it be the completest and most desirable bedroom ever see - in the stern of the vessel ; with a little window , where the rudder use to go through ; a little look - glass , just the right height for I , nail against the wall , and fram with oyster - shell ; a little bed , which there be just room enough to get into ; and a nosegay of seaweed in a blue mug on the table . the walls be whitewash as white as milk , and the patchwork counterpane make my eye quite aco with its brightness . one thing I particularly notice in this delightful house , be the smell of fish ; which be so search , that when I take out my pocket - handkerchief to wipe my nose , I find it smelt exactly as if it have wrap up a lobster . on my impart this discovery in confidence to , she inform I that she brother deal in lobster , crab , and crawfish ; and I afterwards find that a heap of these creature , in a state of wonderful conglomeration with one another , and never leave off pinching whatever they laid hold of , be usually to be find in a little wooden outhouse where the pots and kettle be keep . we be welcome by a very civil woman in a white apron , whom I have see curtseying at the door when I be on 's back , about a quarter of a mile off . likewise by a most beautiful little girl ( or I think she so ) with a necklace of blue bead on , who would not let I kiss she when I offer to , but run away and hide herself . by and by , when we have dine in a sumptuous manner off boiled dabs , melte butter , and potatoe , with a chop for I , a hairy man with a very good - natured face come home . as he call ' ' , and give she a hearty smack on the cheek , I have no doubt , from the general propriety of she conduct , that he be she brother ; and so he turn out - be presently introduce to I as , the master of the house . ' to see you , sir , ' say . ' you will find we rough , sir , but you will find we ready . ' I thank he , and reply that I be sure I should be happy in such a delightful place . ' how be you ma , sir ? ' say . ' do you leave she pretty jolly ? ' I give to understand that she be as jolly as I could wish , and that she desire she compliment - which be a polite fiction on my part . 'I be much obleege to she , I be sure , ' say . ' well , sir , if you can make out here , fur a fortnut , ' long wi' she , ' nodd at he sister , , and little Em'ly , we shall be proud of you company . ' have do the honour of he house in this hospitable manner , go out to wash himself in a kettleful of hot water , remark that ' could would never get he muck off ' . he soon return , greatly improve in appearance ; but so rubicund , that I could not help think he face have this in common with the lobster , crab , and crawfish , - that it go into the hot water very black , and come out very red . after tea , when the door be shut and all be make snug ( the night be cold and misty now ) , it seem to I the most delicious retreat that the imagination of man could conceive . to hear the wind get up out at sea , to know that the fog be creepe over the desolate flat outside , and to look at the fire , and think that there be no house near but this one , and this one a boat , be like enchantment . 'ly have overcome she shyness , and be sit by my side upon the lowest and least of the locker , which be just large enough for we two , and just fitte into the chimney corner . with the white apron , be knitt on the opposite side of the fire . Peggotty at she needlework be as much at home with 's and the bit of wax -
- candle , as if they have never know any other roof . , who have be give I my first lesson in all - four , be try to recollect a scheme of tell fortune with the dirty card , and be print off fishy impressions of he thumb on all the card he turn . be smoke he pipe . I feel it be a time for conversation and confidence . ' ! ' say I . ' Sir ,' say he . ' do you give you son the name of , because you live in a sort of ark ? ' seem to think it a deep idea , but answer : ' no , sir . I never hagive he no name . ' ' who give he that name , then ? ' say I , put question number two of the catechism to . ' why , sir , he father hagive it he , ' say . 'I think you be he father ! ' 'my brother be he father , ' say . ' dead , ? ' I hint , after a respectful pause . ' , ' say . I be very much surprise that be not 's father , and begin to wonder whether I be mistaken about he relationship to anybody else there . I be so curious to know , that i make up my mind to have it out with . ' 'ly , ' I say , glance at she . ' she be you daughter , be not she , ? ' 'no , sir . my brother - in - law , , be she father . ' I could not help it . ' - dead , ? ' I hint , after another respectful silence . ' , ' say . I feel the difficulty of resum the subject , but have not get to the bottom of it yet , and must get to the bottom somehow . so I say : ' have not you any child , ? ' 'no , master ,' he answer with a short laugh . 'I be a bacheldore . ' 'A bachelor ! ' I say , astonished . ' why , who be that , ? ' point to the person in the apron who be knitt . ' that be , ' say . ' , ? ' but at this point - I mean my own peculiar Peggotty - make such impressive motion to I not to ask any more question , that I could only sit and look at all the silent company , until it be time to go to bed . then , in the privacy of my own little cabin , she inform I that and 'ly be a orphan nephew and niece , whom my host have at different time adopt in they childhood , when they be leave destitute : and that Mr . Gummidge be the widow of he partner in a boat , who have die very poor . he be but a poor man himself , say , but as good as gold and as true as steel - those be she simile . the only subject , she inform I , on which he ever show a violent temper or swore a oath , be this generosity of he ; and if it be ever refer to , by any one of they , he strike the table a heavy blow with he right hand ( have split it on one such occasion ) , and swore a dreadful oath that he would be ' Gorm ' if he do not cut and run for good , if it be ever mention again . it appear , in answer to my inquiry , that nobody have the least idea of the etymology of this terrible verb passive to be gorm ; but that they all regard it as constitute a most solemn imprecation . I be very sensible of my entertainer 's goodness , and listen to the woman 's go to be in another little crib like mine at the opposite end of the boat , and to he and hang up two hammock for themselves on the hook I have notice in the roof , in a very luxurious state of mind , enhance by my be sleepy . as slumber gradually steal upon I , I hear the wind how out at sea and come on across the flat so fiercely , that I have a lazy apprehension of the great deep rising in the night . but I bethotch myself that I be in a boat , after all ; and that a man like be not a bad person to have on board if anything do happen . nothing happen , however , worse than morning . almost as soon as it shine upon the oyster - shell frame of my mirror I be out of bed , and out with little Em'ly , pick up stone upon the beach . ' you be quite a sailor , I suppose ? ' I say to . I do not know that I suppose anything of the kind , but I feel it a act of gallantry to say something ; and a shining sail close to we make such a pretty little image of itself , at the moment , in she bright eye , that it come into my head to say this . ' no , ' reply Em'ly , shak she head , 'I be afraid of the sea. ' ' afraid ! ' I say , with a become air of boldness , and look very big at the mighty ocean . 'I a not ! ' 'Ah ! but it be cruel , ' say Em'ly . 'I have see it very cruel to some of we man .
. I have see it tear a boat as big as we house , all to piece . ' 'I hope it be not the boat that -' ' that father be drownd in ? ' say Em'ly . ' no . not that one , I never see that boat . ' ' nor he ? ' I ask she . 'ly shook she head . ' not to remember ! ' here be a coincidence ! I immediately go into a explanation how I have never see my own father ; and how my mother and I have always live by ourselves in the happiest state imaginable , and live so then , and always mean to live so ; and how my father 's grave be in the churchyard near we house , and shade by a tree , beneath the bough of which I have walk and hear the bird se many a pleasant morning . but there be some difference between 's orphanhood and mine , it appear . she have lose she mother before she father ; and where she father 's grave be no one know , except that it be somewhere in the depth of the sea . ' , ' say Em'ly , as she look about for shells and pebble , ' you father be a gentleman and you mother be a lady ; and my father be a fisherman and my mother be a fisherman 's daughter , and my uncle be a fisherman . ' ' be , be he ? ' say I . ' uncle - , ' answer Em'ly , nodd at the boat - house . ' yes . I mean he . he must be very good , I should think ? ' ' good ? ' say Em'ly . ' if I be ever to be a lady , I would give he a sky - blue coat with diamond button , nankeen trousers , a red velvet waistcoat , a cock hat , a large gold watch , a silver pipe , and a box of money . ' I say I have no doubt that well deserve these treasure . I must acknowledge that I feel it difficult to picture he quite at he ease in the raiment propose for he by he grateful little niece , and that I be particularly doubtful of the policy of the cock hat ; but I keep these sentiment to myself . 'ly have stop and look up at the sky in she enumeration of these article , as if they be a glorious vision . we go on again , pick up shells and pebble . ' you would like to be a lady ? ' I say . Emily look at I , and laugh and nod ' yes ' . 'I should like it very much . we would all be gentlefolk together , then . I , and uncle , and , and . we would not mind then , when there come stormy weather . - not for we own sake , I mean . we would for the poor fisherman 's , to be sure , and we would help th'ey with money when they come to any hurt . ' this seem to I to be a very satisfactory and therefore not at all improbable picture . I express my pleasure in the contemplation of it , and little 'ly be emboldened to say , shyly , ' do not you think you be afraid of the sea , now ? ' it be quiet enough to reassure I , but I have no doubt if I have see a moderately large wave come tumbl in , I should have take to my heel , with a awful recollection of she drown relation . however , I say ' no , ' and I add , ' you do not seem to be either , though you say you be , ' - for she be walk much too near the brink of a sort of old jetty or wooden causeway we have stroll upon , and I be afraid of she fall over . 'I be not afraid in this way , ' say little Em'ly . ' but I wake when it blow , and tremble to think of uncle and and believe I hear them cry out for help . that be why I should like so much to be a lady . but I be not afraid in this way . not a bit . look here ! ' she start from my side , and run along a jag timber which protrude from the place we stand upon , and overhng the deep water at some height , without the least defence . the incident be so impressed on my remembrance , that if I be a draughtsman I could draw it be form here , I dare say , accurately as it be that day , and little 'ly spring forward to she destruction ( as it appear to I ) , with a look that I have never forget , direct far out to sea . the light , bold , flutter little figure turn and come back safe to I , and I soon laugh at my fear , and at the cry I have utter ; fruitlessly in any case , for there be no one near . but there have be time since , in my manhood , many time there have been , when I have think , be it possible , among the possibility of hidden thing , that in the sudden rashness of the child and she wild look so far off , there be any merciful attraction of she into danger , any temp she towards he permit on the part of she dead father , that she life might have a chance
chance of ending that day ? there have be a time since when I have wonder whether , if the life before she could have be reveal to I at a glance , and so reveal as that a child could fully comprehend it , and if she preservation could have depend on a motion of my hand , I ought to have hold it up to save she . there have be a time since - I do not say it last long , but it have be - when I have ask myself the question , would it have be better for little 'ly to have have the water close above she head that morning in my sight ; and when I have answer yes , it would have be . this may be premature . I have set it down too soon , perhaps . but let it stand . we stroll a long way , and load ourselves with thing that we think curiious , and put some stranded starfish carefully back into the water - I hardly know enough of the race at this moment to be quite certain whether they have reason to feel obliged to we for do so , or the reverse - and then make we way home to 's dwelling . we stop under the lee of the lobster - outhouse to exchange a innocent kiss , and go in to breakfast glow with health and pleasure . ' like two young mavish , ' say . I know this mean , in we local dialect , like two young thrush , and receive it as a compliment . of course I be in love with little . I be sure I love that baby quite as truly , quite as tenderly , with greater purity and more disinterestedness , than can enter into the best love of a later time of life , high and ennobl as it be . I be sure my fancy raise up something round that blue - eyed mite of a child , which etherealize , and make a very angel of she . if , any sunny forenoon , she have spread a little pair of wing and fly away before my eye , I do not think I should have regard it as much more than I have have reason to expect . we use to walk about that dim old flat at in a loving manner , hour and hour . the day sport by we , as if have not grow up himself yet , but be a child too , and always at play . I tell 'ly I adore she , and that unless she confess she adore I I should be reduce to the necessity of kill myself with a sword . she say she do , and I have no doubt she do . as to any sense of inequality , or youthfulness , or other difficulty in we way , little 'ly and I have no such trouble , because we have no future . we make no more provision for grow older , than we do for grow younger . we be the admiration of and , who use to whisper of a evening when we sit , lovingly , on we little locker side by side , ' ! be not it beautiful ! ' smile at we from behind he pipe , and grin all the evening and do nothing else . they have something of the sort of pleasure in we , I suppose , that they might have have in a pretty toy , or a pocket model of the . I soon find out that . do not always make herself so agreeable as she might have be expect to do , under the circumstance of she residence with . 's be rather a fretful disposition , and she whimper more sometimes than be comfortable for other party in so small a establishment . I be very sorry for she ; but there be moment when it would have be more agreeable , I think , if Mrs . have have a convenient apartment of she own to retire to , and have stop there until she spirit revive . go occasionally to a public - house call the . I discover this , by he be out on the second or third evening of we visit , and by 's look up at the clock , between eight and nine , and say he be there , and that , what be more , she have know in the morning he would go there . have be in a low state all day , and have burst into tear in the forenoon , when the fire smoke . 'I be a lone lorn creetur', ' be 's word , when that unpleasant occurrence take place , ' and everythink go contrary with I . ' 'Oh , it will soon leave off , ' say - I again mean we Peggotty - ' and beside , you know , it be not more disagreeable to you than to we . ' 'I feel it more , ' say . it be a very cold day , with cut blast of wind . 's peculiar corner of the fireside seem to I to be the warmest and snuggest in the place , as she chair be certainly the easiest , but it do not suit she that day at all . she be constantly complain of the cold , and of its occasion a visitation in she back which she call ' the creep ' . at last she shed tear on that subject , and say again that she be 'a lone lorn creetur ' and everythink go contrary with she ' . ' it be certainly very cold , ' say . ' everybody must feel it so
so . ' 'I feel it more than other people , ' say . so at dinner ; when . be always help immediately after I , to whom the preference be give as a visitor of distinction . the fish be small and bony , and the potatoe be a little burnt . we all acknowledge that we feel this something of a disappointment ; but . say she feel it more than we do , and she tear again , and make that former declaration with great bitterness . accordingly , when come home about nine o'clock , this unfortunate be knitt in she corner , in a very wretched and miserable condition . have be work cheerfully . have be patch up a great pair of waterboot ; and I , with little 'ly by my side , have be read to they . have never make any other remark than a forlorn sigh , and have never raise she eye since tea . ' well , , ' say , take he seat , 'and how be you ? ' we all say something , or look something , to welcome he , except , who only shook she head over she knitting . ' what be amiss ? ' say , with a clap of he hand . ' cheer up , old ! ' ( mean old girl . ) do not appear to be able to cheer up . she take out a old black silk handkerchief and wip she eye ; but instead of put it in she pocket , keep it out , and wip they again , and still keep it out , ready for use . ' what be amiss , dame ? ' say . ' nothing , ' return . ' you have come from the , ? ' ' why yes , I have take a short spell at the tonight , ' say . 'I be sorry I should drive you there , ' say . ' ! I do not want no driving , ' return with a honest laugh . 'I only go too ready . ' ' very ready , ' say , shak she head , and wip she eye . ' yes , yes , very ready . I be sorry it should be along of I that you be so ready . ' ' along of ' you ! it a not along of ' you ! ' say . ' do not ye believe a bit on it . ' ' yes , yes , it be , ' cry . 'I know what I be . I know that I be a lone lorn creetur ' , and not only that everythink go contrary with I , but that I go contrary with everybody . yes , yes . I feel more than other people do , and I show it more . it be my misfortun '. ' I really could not help think , as I sit take in all this , that the misfortune extend to some other member of that family besides . but make no such retort , only answer with another entreaty to to cheer up . 'I a not what I could wish myself to be , ' say . 'I be far from it . I know what I be . my trouble have make I contrary . I feel my trouble , and they make I contrary . I wish I do not feel th'ey , but I do . I wish I could be harden to th'ey , but I a not . I make the house uncomfortable . I do not wonder at it . I have make you sister so all day , and . ' here I be suddenly melt , and roar out , ' no , you have not , , ' in great mental distress . ' it be far from right that I should do it , ' say . ' it can not a fit return . I have better go into the house and die . I be a lone lorn creetur ' , and have much better not make myself contrary here . if think must go contrary with I , and I must go contrary myself , let I go contrary in my parish . n'l , I would better go into the house , and die and be a riddance ! ' retir with these word , and betake herself to bed . when she be gone , , who have not exhibit a trace of any feeling but the profoundest sympathy , look round upon we , and nodd he head with a lively expression of that sentiment still anima he face , say in a whisper : ' she be be think of the old 'un ! ' I do not quite understand what old one be suppose to have fix she mind upon , until , on see I to bed , explain that it be the late ; and that she brother always take that for a receive truth on such occasion , and that it always have a move effect upon he . some time after he be in he hammock that night , I hear he myself repeat to , ' poor thing ! she be be think of the old 'un ! ' and whenever be overcome in a similar manner during the remainder of we stay ( which happen some few time ) , he always say the same thing in extenuation of the circumstance , and always with the tenderest commiseration . so the fortnight slip away , vari by nothing but the variation of the tide , which alte 's time of go out and come in , and alte 's engagement also . when the latter be unemployed , he sometimes walk with we to
to show we the boat and ship , and once or twice he take we for a row . I do not know why one slight set of impressions should be more particularly associate with a place than another , though I believe this obtain with most people , in reference especially to the associations of they childhood . I never hear the name , or read the name , of , but I be remind of a certain morning on the beach , the bell ring for church , little 'ly lean on my shoulder , lazily drop stone into the water , and the sun , away at sea , just break through the heavy mist , and show we the ship , like they own shadow . at last the day come for go home . I bear up against the separation from and , but my agony of mind at leave little 'ly be piercing . we go arm - in - arm to the public - house where the carrier put up , and I promise , on the road , to write to she . ( I redeem that promise afterwards , in character larger than those in which apartment be usually announce in manuscript , as be to let . ) we be greatly overcome at parting ; and if ever , in my life , I have have a void make in my heart , I have one make that day . now , all the time I have be on my visit , I have be ungrateful to my home again , and have think little or nothing about it . but I be no sooner turn towards it , than my reproachful young conscience seem to point that way with a ready finger ; and I feel , all the more for the sinking of my spirit , that it be my nest , and that my mother be my comforter and friend . this gain upon I as we go along ; so that the nearer we draw , the more familiar the object become that we pass , the more excited I be to get there , and to run into she arm . but , instead of sharing in those transport , try to check they ( though very kindly ) , and look confused and out of sort . would come , however , in spite of she , when the carrier 's horse please - and do . how well I recollect it , on a cold grey afternoon , with a dull sky , threaten rain ! the door open , and I look , half laughing and half cry in my pleasant agitation , for my mother . it be not she , but a strange servant . ' why , ! ' I say , ruefully , ' be not she come home ? ' ' yes , yes , , ' say . ' she have come home . wait a bit , master , and I will - I will tell you something . ' between she agitation , and she natural awkwardness in get out of the cart , be make a most extraordinary festoon of herself , but I feel too blank and strange to tell she so . when she have get down , she take I by the hand ; lead I , wonder , into the kitchen ; and shut the door . ' ! ' say I , quite frightened . ' what be the matter ? ' ' nothing be the matter , bless you , master Davy dear ! ' she answer , assume a air of sprightliness . ' something be the matter , I be sure . where 's mama ? ' ' where 's mama , ? ' repeat . ' yes . why have not she come out to the gate , and what have we come in here for ? oh , ! ' my eye be full , and I feel as if I be go to tumble down . ' bless the precious boy ! ' cry , take hold of I . ' what be it ? , my pet ! ' ' not dead , too ! oh , she be not dead , ? ' cry out no ! with a astonish volume of voice ; and then sit down , and begin to pant , and say I have give she a turn . I give she a hug to take away the turn , or to give she another turn in the right direction , and then stand before she , look at she in anxious inquiry . ' you see , dear , I should have tell you before now , ' say , ' but I have not a opportunity . I ought to have make it , perhaps , but I could not azackly ' - that be always the substitute for exactly , in 's militia of word - ' bring my mind to it . ' 'Go on , , ' say I , more frightened than before . ' master , ' say , unty she bonnet with a shaking hand , and speak in a breathless sort of way . ' what do you think ? you have get a pa ! ' I tremble , and turn white . something - I do not know what , or how - connect with the grave in the churchyard , and the raising of the dead , seem to strike I like a unwholesome wind . 'a new one , ' say . 'a new one ? ' I repeat . give a gasp , as if she be swallow something that be very hard , and , put out she hand , say : ' come and see he . ' 'I do not
not want to see he . ' - ' and you mama , ' say . I cease to draw back , and we go straight to the best parlour , where she leave I . on one side of the fire , sit my mother ; on the other , . my mother drop she work , and arise hurriedly , but timidly I think . ' now , my dear , ' say . ' Recollect ! control yourself , always control yourself ! Davy boy , how do you do ? ' I give he my hand . after a moment of suspense , I go and kiss my mother : she kiss I , pat I gently on the shoulder , and sit down again to she work . I could not look at she , I could not look at he , I know quite well that he be look at we both ; and I turn to the window and look out there , at some shrub that be droop they head in the cold . as soon as I could creep away , I creep upstairs . my old dear bedroom be change , and I be to lie a long way off . I ramble downstairs to find anything that be like itself , so alte it all see ; and roam into the yard . I very soon start back from there , for the empty dog - kennel be fill up with a great dog - deep mouthed and black - haire like - and he be very angry at the sight of I , and spring out to get at I . chapter 4 I if the room to which my bed be remove be a sentient thing that could give evidence , I might appeal to it at this day - who sleep there now , I wonder ! - to bear witness for I what a heavy heart I carry to it . I go up there , hear the dog in the yard bark after I all the way while I climb the stair ; and , look as blank and strange upon the room as the room look upon I , sit down with my small hand cross , and think . I think of the oddest thing . of the shape of the room , of the cracks in the ceiling , of the paper on the walls , of the flaw in the window - glass make ripple and dimple on the prospect , of the washing - stand be rickety on its three leg , and have a discontent something about it , which remind I of under the influence of the old one . I be cry all the time , but , except that I be conscious of be cold and deject , I be sure I never think why I cry . at last in my desolation I begin to consider that I be dreadfully in love with little , and have be tear away from she to come here where no one seem to want I , or to care about I , half as much as she do . this make such a very miserable piece of business of it , that I roll myself up in a corner of the counterpane , and cry myself to sleep . I be awoke by somebody say ' here he be ! ' and uncover my hot head . my mother and have come to look for I , and it be one of they who have do it . ' , ' say my mother . ' what be the matter ? ' I think it be very strange that she should ask I , and answer , ' Nothing . ' I turn over on my face , I recollect , to hide my trembling lip , which answer she with greater truth . ' , ' say my mother . ' Davy , my child ! ' I dare say no word she could have utter would have affect I so much , then , as she call I she child . I hide my tear in the bedclothes , and press she from I with my hand , when she would have raise I up . ' this be you do , Peggotty , you cruel thing ! ' say my mother . 'I have no doubt at all about it . how can you reconcile it to you conscience , I wonder , to prejudice my own boy against I , or against anybody who be dear to I ? what do you mean by it , ? ' poor Peggotty lift up she hand and eye , and only answer , in a sort of paraphrase of the grace I usually repeat after dinner , ' forgive you , , and for what you have say this minute , may you never be truly sorry ! ' ' it be enough to distract I , ' cry my mother . ' in my honeymoon , too , when my most inveterate enemy might relent , one would think , and not envy I a little peace of mind and happiness . Davy , you naughty boy ! Peggotty , you savage creature ! oh , dear I ! ' cry my mother , turn from one of we to the other , in she pettish wilful manner , ' what a troublesome world this be , when one have the most right to expect it to be as agreeable as possible ! ' I feel the touch of a hand that I know be neither hers nor 's , and slipp to my foot at the bed - side . it be 's hand , and he keep it on my arm as he say : ' what be this ? , my love
love , have you forget ? - Firmness , my dear ! ' 'I be very sorry , , ' say my mother . 'I mean to be very good , but I be so uncomfortable . ' ' indeed ! ' he answer . ' that be a bad hearing , so soon , . ' 'I say it be very hard I should be make so now , ' return my mother , pout ; ' and it be - very hard - be not it ? ' he draw she to he , whisper in she ear , and kiss she . I know as well , when I see my mother 's head lean down upon he shoulder , and she arm touch he neck - I know as well that he could mould she pliant nature into any form he choose , as I know , now , that he do it . ' go you below , my love , ' say . ' and I will come down , together . my friend , ' turn a darkening face on , when he have watch my mother out , and dismiss she with a nod and a smile ; 'do you know you mistress 's name ? ' ' she have be my mistress a long time , sir , ' answer , 'I ought to know it . ' ' that be true ,' he answer . ' but I think I hear you , as I come upstairs , address she by a name that be not hers . she have take mine , you know . will you remember that ? ' Peggotty , with some uneasy glance at I , curtsey herself out of the room without reply ; see , I suppose , that she be expect to go , and have no excuse for remaining . when we two be leave alone , he shut the door , and sit on a chair , and hold I stand before he , look steadily into my eye . I feel my own attract , no less steadily , to he . as I recall we be oppose thus , face to face , I seem again to hear my heart beat fast and high . ' ,' he say , make he lip thing , by press they together , ' if I have a obstinate horse or dog to deal with , what do you think I do ? ' 'I do not know . ' 'I beat he . ' I have answer in a kind of breathless whisper , but I feel , in my silence , that my breath be shorter now . ' I make he wince , and smart . I say to myself , " I will conquer that fellow " ; and if it be to cost he all the blood he have , I should do it . what be that upon you face ? ' ' dirt ,' I say . he know it be the mark of tear as well as I . but if he have ask the question twenty time , each time with twenty blow , I believe my baby heart would have burst before I would have tell he so . ' you have a good deal of intelligence for a little fellow , ' he say , with a grave smile that belong to he , ' and you understand I very well , I see . wash that face , sir , and come down with I . ' he point to the washing - stand , which I have make out to be like , and motion I with he head to obey he directly . I have little doubt then , and I have less doubt now , that he would have knock I down without the least compunction , if I have hesitate . ' , my dear , ' he say , when I have do he bidding , and he walk I into the parlour , with he hand still on my arm ; ' you will not be make uncomfortable any more , I hope . we shall soon improve we youthful humours . ' help I , I might have be improve for my whole life , I might have be make another creature perhaps , for life , by a kind word at that season . a word of encouragement and explanation , of pity for my childish ignorance , of welcome home , of reassurance to I that it be home , might have make I dutiful to he in my heart henceforth , instead of in my hypocritical outside , and might have make I respect instead of hate he . I think my mother be sorry to see I stand in the room so scared and strange , and that , presently , when I steal to a chair , she follow I with she eye more sorrowfully still - missing , perhaps , some freedom in my childish tread - but the word be not speak , and the time for it be gone . we dine alone , we three together . he seem to be very fond of my mother - I be afraid I like he no the better for that - and she be very fond of he . I gather from what they say , that a elder sister of he be come to stay with they , and that she be expect that evening . I be not certain whether I find out then , or afterwards , that , without be actively concerned in any business , he have some share in , or some annual charge upon the profit of , a wine - merchant 's house in , with which he family have be connect from he great - grandfather 's
's time , and in which he sister have a similar interest ; but I may mention it in this place , whether or no . after dinner , when we be sit by the fire , and I be meditat a escape to without have the hardihood to slip away , lest it should offend the master of the house , a coach drive up to the garden - gate and he go out to receive the visitor . my mother follow he . I be timidly follow she , when she turn round at the parlour door , in the dusk , and take I in she embrace as she have be use to do , whisper I to love my new father and be obedient to he . she do this hurriedly and secretly , as if it be wrong , but tenderly ; and , put out she hand behind she , hold mine in it , until we come near to where he be stand in the garden , where she let mine go , and draw hers through he arm . it be who be arrive , and a gloomy - look lady she be ; dark , like she brother , whom she greatly resemble in face and voice ; and with very heavy eyebrow , nearly meet over she large nose , as if , be disable by the wrongs of she sex from wear whisker , she have carry they to that account . she bring with she two uncompromising hard black box , with she initial on the lid in hard brass nail . when she pay the coachman she take she money out of a hard steel purse , and she keep the purse in a very jail of a bag which hang upon she arm by a heavy chain , and shut up like a bite . I have never , at that time , see such a metallic lady altogether as be . she be brotch into the parlour with many token of welcome , and there formally recognize my mother as a new and near relation . then she look at I , and say : ' be that you boy , sister - in - law ? ' my mother acknowledge I . ' generally speak , ' say , 'I do not like boy . how would 'ye do , boy ? ' under these encourage circumstance , I reply that I be very well , and that I hope she be the same ; with such a indifferent grace , that dispose of I in two word : ' want manner ! ' have utter which , with great distinctness , she beg the favour of be show to she room , which become to I from that time forth a place of awe and dread , wherein the two black box be never see open or kny to be leave unlocked , and where ( for I pee in once or twice when she be out ) numerous little steel fetter and rivet , with which embellish herself when she be dress , generally hang upon the look - glass in formidable array . as well as I could make out , she have come for good , and have no intention of ever go again . she begin to ' help ' my mother next morning , and be in and out of the store - closet all day , put thing to rights , and make havoc in the old arrangement . almost the first remarkable thing I observ in be , she be constantly haunt by a suspicion that the servants have a man secret somewhere on the premise . under the influence of this delusion , she div into the coal - cellar at the most untimely hour , and scarcely ever open the door of a dark cupboard without clapp it to again , in the belief that she have get he . though there be nothing very airy about , she be a perfect Lark in point of get up . she be up ( and , as I believe to this hour , look for that man ) before anybody in the house be stirr . give it as she opinion that she even sleep with one eye open ; but I could not concur in this idea ; for I try it myself after hear the suggestion throw out , and find it could not be do . on the very first morning after she arrival she be up and ring she bell at cock - crow . when my mother come down to breakfast and be go to make the tea , give she a kind of peck on the cheek , which be she nearest approach to a kiss , and say : ' now , , my dear , I be come here , you know , to relieve you of all the trouble I can . you be much too pretty and thoughtless ' - my mother blush but laugh , and see not to dislike this character - 'to have any duty impos upon you that can be undertake by I . if you will be so good as give I you key , my dear , I will attend to all this sort of thing in future . ' from that time , keep the key in she own little jail all day , and under she pillow all night , and my mother have no more to do with they than I have . my mother do not suffer she authority to pass from she without a shadow of protest . one night when have be develop certain household plan to she brother , of which he signify he approbation , my mother suddenly begin to cry , and say she think she might have be consult .
. ' ! ' say sternly . ' ! I wonder at you . ' 'Oh , it be very well to say you wonder , ! ' cry my mother , ' and it be very well for you to talk about firmness , but you would not like it yourself . ' Firmness , I may observe , be the grand quality on which both and take they stand . however I might have express my comprehension of it at that time , if I have be call upon , I nevertheless do clearly comprehend in my own way , that it be another name for tyranny ; and for a certain gloomy , arrogant , 's humour , that be in they both . the creed , as I should state it now , be this . be firm ; nobody in he world be to be so firm as ; nobody else in he world be to be firm at all , for everybody be to be bend to he firmness . be a exception . she might be firm , but only by relationship , and in a inferior and tributary degree . my mother be another exception . she might be firm , and must be ; but only in bear they firmness , and firmly believe there be no other firmness upon earth . ' it be very hard , ' say my mother , ' that in my own house -' ' my own house ? ' repeat . ' ! ' ' we own house , I mean , ' falter my mother , evidently frightened - ' I hope you must know what i mean , - it be very hard that in you own house I may not have a word to say about domestic matters . I be sure I manage very well before we be marry . there be evidence , ' say my mother , sobb ; ' ask if I do not do very well when I be not interfere with ! ' ' , ' say , ' let there be a end of this . I go tomorrow . ' ' , ' say she brother , ' be silent ! how dare you to insinuate that you do not know my character better than you word imply ? ' 'I be sure , ' my poor mother go on , at a grievous disadvantage , and with many tear , 'I do not want anybody to go . I should be very miserable and unhappy if anybody be to go . I do not ask much . I be not unreasonable . I only want to be consult sometimes . I be very much oblige to anybody who assist I , and I only want to be consult as a mere form , sometimes . I think you be pleased , once , with my be a little inexperienced and girlish , - I be sure you say so - but you seem to hate I for it now , you be so severe . ' ' , ' say , again , ' let there be a end of this . I go tomorrow . ' ' ,' thunder . ' will you be silent ? how dare you ? ' make a jail - delivery of she pocket - handkerchief , and hold it before she eye . ' ,' he continue , look at my mother , ' you surprise I ! you astound I ! yes , I have a satisfaction in the thought of marry a inexperienced and artless person , and form she character , and infus into it some amount of that firmness and decision of which it stand in need . but when be kind enough to come to my assistance in this endeavour , and to assume , for my sake , a condition something like a housekeeper 's , and when she meet with a base return -' 'Oh , pray , pray , , ' cry my mother , ' do not accuse I of be ungrateful . I be sure I be not ungrateful . no one ever say I be before . I have many fault , but not that . oh , do not , my dear ! ' ' when meet , I say ,' he go on , after wait until my mother be silent , ' with a base return , that feeling of mine be chill and alte . ' ' do not , my love , say that ! ' implor my mother very piteously . 'Oh , do not , ! I can not bear to hear it . whatever I be , I be affectionate . I know I be affectionate . I would not say it , if I be not sure that I be . ask . I be sure she will tell you I be affectionate . ' ' there be no extent of mere weakness , , ' say in reply , ' that can have the least weight with I . you lose breath . ' ' pray let we be friend , ' say my mother , ' I could not live under coldness or unkindness . I be so sorry . I have a great many defect , I know , and it be very good of you , , with you strength of mind , to endeaavor to correct they for I . , I do not object to anything . I should be quite broken - hear if you think of leave -' my mother be too much overcome to go on . ' , ' say to he sister , ' any harsh word between we be , I hope , uncommon . it be not my fault that so unusual a occurrence have take place tonight . I be betraye into
into it by another . be it you fault . you be betraye into it by another . let we both try to forget it . and as this ,' he add , after these magnanimous word , 'is not a fit scene for the boy - , go to bed ! ' I could hardly find the door , through the tear that stand in my eye . I be so sorry for my mother 's distress ; but I grope my way out , and grope my way up to my room in the dark , without even have the heart to say good night to , or to get a candle from she . when she come up to look for I , a hour or so afterwards , awoke I , she say that my mother have go to be poorly , and that and be sit alone . go down next morning rather earlier than usual , I pause outside the parlour door , on hear my mother 's voice . she be very earnestly and humbly entreat 's pardon , which that lady grant , and a perfect reconciliation take place . I never know my mother afterwards to give a opinion on any matter , without first appeal to , or without have first ascertain by some sure mean , what 's opinion be ; and I never see , when out of temper ( she be infirm that way ) , move she hand towards she bag as if she be go to take out the key and offer to resign they to my mother , without see that my mother be in a terrible fright . the gloomy taint that be in the blood , darken the religion , which be austere and wrathful . I have think , since , that its assume that character be a necessary consequence of 's firmness , which would not allow he to let anybody off from the utmost weight of the severest penalties he could find any excuse for . be this as it may , I well remember the tremendous visage with which we use to go to church , and the change air of the place . again , the dread come round , and I file into the old pew first , like a guard captive bring to a condemn service . again , , in a black velvet gow , that look as if it have be make out of a pall , follow close upon I ; then my mother ; then she husband . there be no Peggotty now , as in the old time . again , I listen to mumbl the response , and emphasize all the dread word with a cruel relish . again , I see she dark eye roll round the church when she say ' miserable sinner ' , as if she be call all the congregation name . again , I catch rare glimpse of my mother , move she lip timidly between the two , with one of they mutter at each ear like low thunder . again , I wonder with a sudden fear whether it be likely that we good old clergyman can be wrong , and and right , and that all the angels in can be destroy angel . again , if I move a finger or relax a muscle of my face , poke I with she prayer - book , and make my side ache . yes , and again , as we walk home , I note some neighbour look at my mother and at I , and whispering . again , as the three go on arm -in - arm , and I linger behind alone , I follow some of those look , and wonder if my mother 's step be really not so light as I have see it , and if the gaiety of she beauty be really almost worried away . again , I wonder whether any of the neighbour call to mind , as I do , how we use to walk home together , she and I ; and I wonder stupidly about that , all the dreary dismal day . there have be some talk on occasion of my go to boar - school . and have originate it , and my mother have of course agree with they . nothing , however , be conclude on the subject yet . in the meantime , I lear not lesson at home . shall I ever forget those lesson ! they be preside over nominally by my mother , but really by and he sister , who be always present , and find they a favourable occasion for give my mother lesson in that miscalled firmness , which be the bane of both we life . I believe I be keep at home for that purpose . I have be apt enough to learn , and willing enough , when my mother and I have liv alone together . I can faintly remember learn the alphabet at she knee . to this day , when I look upon the fat black letter in the primer , the puzzling novelty of they shape , and the easy good - nature of O and and , seem to present themselves again before I as they use to do . but they recall no feeling of disgust or reluctance . on the contrary , I seem to have walk along a path of flowers as far as the crocodile - book , and to have be cheer by the gentleness of my mother 's voice and manner all the way . but these solemn lesson which succeed those , I remember as the death - blow of my peace , and a grievous daily drudgery and misery . they be very long , very numerous , very hard -
- perfectly unintelligible , some of they , to I - and I be generally as much bewilder by they as I believe my poor mother be herself . let I remember how it use to be , and bring one morning back again . I come into the second - best parlour after breakfast , with my book , and a exercise - book , and a slate . my mother be ready for I at she writing - desk , but not half so ready as in he easy - chair by the window ( though he pretend to be read a book ) , or as , sit near my mother string steel bead . the very sight of these two have such a influence over I , that I begin to feel the word I have be at infinite pain to get into my head , all slide away , and go I do not know where . I wonder where they do go , by the by ? I hand the first book to my mother . perhaps it be a grammar , perhaps a history , or geography . I take a last drowning look at the page as I give it into she hand , and start off aloud at a racing pace while I have get it fresh . I trip over a word . look up . I trip over another word . look up . I rede , tumble over half - a - dozen word , and stop . I think my mother would show I the book if she da , but she do not dare , and she say softly : 'Oh , , ! ' ' now , , ' say , ' be firm with the boy . do not say , " oh , , ! " that be childish . he know he lesson , or he do not know it . ' ' he do not know it , ' interpose awfully . 'I be really afraid he do not , ' say my mother . ' then , you see , , ' return , ' you should just give he the book back , and make he know it . ' ' yes , certainly , ' say my mother ; ' that be what I intend to do , my dear . now , , try once more , and do not be stupid . ' I obey the first clause of the injunction by try once more , but be not so successful with the second , for I be very stupid . I tumble down before I get to the old place , at a point where I be all right before , and stop to think . but I can not think about the lesson . I think of the number of yard of net in 's cap , or of the price of 's dressing - gown , or any such ridiculous problem that I have no business with , and do not want to have anything at all to do with . make a movement of impatience which I have be expect for a long time . do the same . my mother glance submissively at they , shut the book , and lay it by as a arrear to be work out when my other task be done . there be a pile of these arrear very soon , and it swell like a rolling snowball . the bigger it get , the more stupid I get . the case be so hopeless , and I feel that I be wallow in such a bog of nonsense , that I give up all idea of get out , and abandon myself to my fate . the despaire way in which my mother and I look at each other , as I blunder on , be truly melancholy . but the greatest effect in these miserable lesson be when my mother ( think nobody be observe she ) try to give I the cue by the motion of she lip . at that instant , , who have be lie in wait for nothing else all along , say in a deep warning voice : ' ! ' my mother start , colour , and smile faintly . come out of he chair , take the book , throw it at I or box my ear with it , and turn I out of the room by the shoulders . even when the lesson be do , the worst be yet to happen , in the shape of a appalling sum . this be invent for I , and deliver to I orally by , and begin , ' if I go into a cheesemonger 's shop , and buy five thousand double - Gloucester cheese at fourpence - halfpenny each , present payment ' - at which I see secretly overjoy . I pore over these cheese without any result or enlightenment until dinner - time , when , have make a of myself by get the dirt of the slate into the pore of my skin , I have a slice of bread to help I out with the cheese , and be consider in disgrace for the rest of the evening . it seem to I , at this distance of time , as if my unfortunate study generally take this course . I could have do very well if I have be without the ; but the influence of the upon I be like the fascination of two snake on a wretch young bird . even when I do get through the morning with tolerable credit , there be not much gain but dinner ; for never could endure to see I untasked , and if I rashly make any show of be unemployed , call she brother 's attention to
to I by say , ' , my dear , there be nothing like work - give you boy a exercise ' ; which cause I to be clap down to some new labour , there and then . as to any recreation with other child of my age , I have very little of that ; for the gloomy theology of the make all child out to be a swarm of little viper ( though there be a child once set in the midst of the Disciple ) , and hold that they contaminate one another . the natural result of this treatment , continue , I suppose , for some six month or more , be to make I sull , dull , and dog . I be not make the less so by my sense of be daily more and more shut out and alienate from my mother . I believe I should have be almost stupefy but for one circumstance . it be this . my father have leave a small collection of book in a little room upstairs , to which I have access ( for it adjoin my own ) and which nobody else in we house ever trouble . from that bless little room , , , , , the of , , , and , come out , a glorious host , to keep I company . they keep alive my fancy , and my hope of something beyond that place and time , - they , and the Arabian night , and the tale of the , - and do I no harm ; for whatever harm be in some of they be not there for I ; I know nothing of it . it be astonish to I now , how I find time , in the midst of my poring and blundering over heavier theme , to read those book as I do . it be curious to I how I could ever have consol myself under my small trouble ( which be great trouble to I ) , by impersonat my favourite character in they - as I do - and by put and into all the bad one - which I do too . I have be ( a child 's , a harmless creature ) for a week together . I have sustain my own idea of for a month at a stretch , I verily believe . I have a greedy relish for a few volume of Voyages and Travels - I forget what , now - that be on those shelf ; and for day and day I can remember to have go about my region of we house , arm with the centre - piece out of a old set of boot - tree - the perfect realization of , of the , in danger of be beset by savage , and resolve to sell he life at a great price . the never lose dignity , from have he ear box with the . I do ; but the be a captain and a hero , in despite of all the grammar of all the language in the world , dead or alive . this be my only and my constant comfort . when I think of it , the picture always rise in my mind , of a summer evening , the boy at play in the churchyard , and I sit on my bed , reade as if for life . every barn in the neighbourhood , every stone in the church , and every foot of the churchyard , have some association of its own , in my mind , connect with these book , and stand for some locality make famous in they . I have see go climbe up the church - steeple ; I have watch , with the knapsack on he back , stop to rest himself upon the wicket - gate ; and I know that hold that club with , in the parlour of we little village alehouse . the reader now understand , as well as I do , what I be when I come to that point of my youthful history to which I be now come again . one morning when I go into the parlour with my book , I find my mother look anxious , look firm , and bind something round the bottom of a cane - a lithe and limber cane , which he leave off bind when I come in , and poise and switch in the air . 'I tell you , , ' say , 'I have be often flog myself . ' 'To be sure ; of course , ' say . ' certainly , my dear , ' falter my mother , meekly . ' but - but do you think it do Edward good ? ' ' do you think it do harm , ? ' ask , gravely . ' that be the point , ' say he sister . to this my mother return , ' certainly , my dear , ' and say no more . I feel apprehensive that I be personally interested in this dialogue , and seek 's eye as it light on mine . ' now , ,' he say - and I see that cast again as he say it - ' you must be far more careful today than usual . ' he give the cane another poise , and another switch ; and have finish he preparation of it , lay it down beside he , with a impressive look , and take up he book . this be a good freshener to my presence of mind , as a beginning . I feel the word of my lesson slip off , not one by one , or line by line , but by the entire page ; I try to
to lay hold of they ; but they seem , if I may so express it , to have put skate on , and to skim away from I with a smoothness there be no checking . we begin badly , and go on worse . I have come in with a idea of distinguishe myself rather , conceive that I be very well prepare ; but it turn out to be quite a mistake . after book be add to the heap of failure , be firmly watchful of we all the time . and when we come at last to the five thousand cheese ( cane he make it that day , I remember ) , my mother burst out crying . ' ! ' say , in she warning voice . 'I be not quite well , my dear , I think , ' say my mother . I see he wink , solemnly , at he sister , as he rise and say , take up the cane : ' why , , we can hardly expect to bear , with perfect firmness , the worry and torment that have occasion she today . that would be stoical . be greatly strengthen and improve , but we can hardly expect so much from she . , you and I will go upstairs , boy . ' as he take I out at the door , my mother run towards we . say , ' ! be you a perfect fool ? ' and interfere . I see my mother stop she ear then , and I hear she cry . he walk I up to my room slowly and gravely - I be certain he have a delight in that formal parade of execute justice - and when we get there , suddenly twist my head under he arm . ' ! ! ' I cry to he . ' do not ! pray do not beat I ! I have try to learn , sir , but I can not learn while you and be by . I can not indeed ! ' ' can not you , indeed , ? ' he say . ' we will try that . ' he have my head as in a vice , but I twin round he somehow , and stop he for a moment , entreat he not to beat I . it be only a moment that I stop he , for he cut I heavily a instant afterwards , and in the same instant I catch the hand with which he hold I in my mouth , between my tooth , and bit it through . it set 's my tooth on edge to think of it . he beat I then , as if he would have beat I to death . above all the noise we make , I hear they run up the stair , and cry out - I hear my mother cry out - and . then he be gone ; and the door be lock outside ; and I be lie , fevere and hot , and tear , and sore , and rage in my puny way , upon the floor . how well I recollect , when I become quiet , what a unnatural stillness seem to reign through the whole house ! how well I remember , when my smart and passion begin to cool , how wicked I begin to feel ! I sit listen for a long while , but there be not a sound . I crawl up from the floor , and see my face in the glass , so swollen , red , and ugly that it almost frightene I . my stripe be sore and stiff , and make I cry afresh , when I move ; but they be nothing to the guilt I feel . it lay heavier on my breast than if I have be a most atrocious criminal , I dare say . it have begin to grow dark , and I have shut the window ( I have be lie , for the most part , with my head upon the sill , by turn cry , do , and look listlessly out ) , when the key be turn , and come in with some bread and meat , and milk . these she put down upon the table without a word , glar at I the while with exemplary firmness , and then retire , lock the door after she . long after it be dark I sit there , wonder whether anybody else would come . when this appear improbable for that night , I undress , and go to bed ; and , there , I begin to wonder fearfully what would be do to I . whether it be a criminal act that I have committ ? whether I should be take into custody , and send to prison ? whether I be at all in danger of be hang ? I never shall forget the waking , next morning ; the be cheerful and fresh for the first moment , and then they be weigh down by the stale and dismal oppression of remembrance . reappear before I be out of bed ; tell I , in so many word , that I be free to walk in the garden for half a hour and no longer ; and retire , leave the door open , that I might avail myself of that permission . I do so , and do so every morning of my imprisonment , which last five day . if I could have see my mother alone , I should have go down on my knee to she and besotch she forgiveness ; but I see no one , accept , during the whole time - except at evening prayer in the parlour ;
; to which I be escort by after everybody else be place ; where I be station , a young outlaw , all alone by myself near the door ; and whence I be solemnly conduct by my jailer , before any one arose from the devotional posture . I only observ that my mother be as far off from I as she could be , and keep she face another way so that I never see it ; and that 's hand be bound up in a large linen wrapper . the length of those five day I can convey no idea of to any one . they occupy the place of year in my remembrance . the way in which I listen to all the incident of the house that make themselves audible to I ; the ringing of bell , the opening and shutting of door , the murmuring of voice , the footstep on the stair ; to any laughing , whistling , or singing , outside , which seem more dismal than anything else to I in my solitude and disgrace - the uncertain pace of the hour , especially at night , when I would wake think it be morn , and find that the family be not yet go to bed , and that all the length of night have yet to come - the depressed dream and nightmare I have - the return of day , noon , afternoon , evening , when the boy play in the churchyard , and I watch they from a distance within the room , be asham to show myself at the window lest they should know I be a prisoner - the strange sensation of never hear myself speak - the fleeting interval of something like cheerfulness , which come with eating and drinking , and go away with it - the setting in of rain one evening , with a fresh smell , and its come down faster and faster between I and the church , until it and gather night seem to quench I in gloom , and fear , and remorse - all this appear to have go round and round for year instead of day , it be so vividly and strongly stamp on my remembrance . on the last night of my restraint , I be awaken by hear my own name speak in a whisper . I start up in bed , and put out my arm in the dark , say : ' be that you , ? ' there be no immediate answer , but presently I hear my name again , in a tone so very mysterious and awful , that I think I should have go into a fit , if it have not occur to I that it must have come through the keyhole . I grope my way to the door , and put my own lip to the keyhole , whisper : ' be that you , dear ? ' ' yes , my own precious , ' she reply . ' be as soft as a mouse , or the cat will hear we . ' I understand this to mean , and be sensible of the urgency of the case ; she room be close by . ' how be mama , dear ? be she very angry with I ? ' I could hear cry softly on she side of the keyhole , as I be do on mine , before she answer . ' no . not very . ' ' what be go to be do with I , Peggotty dear ? do you know ? ' ' . , ' be 's answer . I be oblige to get she to repeat it , for she speak it the first time quite down my throat , in consequence of my have forget to take my mouth away from the keyhole and put my ear there ; and though she word tick I a good deal , I do not hear they . ' when , ? ' ' . ' ' be that the reason why take the clothes out of my drawer ? ' which she have do , though I have forget to mention it . ' yes , ' say . ' box . ' ' not I see mama? ' ' yes , ' say . ' . ' then fitte she mouth close to the keyhole , and deliver these word through it with as much feeling and earnestness as a keyhole have ever be the medium of communicating , I will venture to assert : shoot in each break little sentence in a convulsive little burst of its own . ' Davy , dear . if I be not be azackly as intimate with you . lately , as I use to be . it be not because I do not love you . just as well and more , my pretty poppet . it be because I think it better for you . and for someone else beside . Davy , my darling , be you listen ? can you hear ? ' 'ye - ye - ye - yes , ! ' I sob . ' my own ! ' say , with infinite compassion . ' what I want to say , be . that you must never forget I . for I will never forget you . and I will take as much care of you mama , . as ever I take of you . and I will not leave she . the day may come when she will be glad to lay she poor head . on she stupid , cross old Peggotty's arm again . and I will write to you , my dear . though I be not no scholar . and I will - I will -' fall to kiss the keyhole
keyhole , as she could not kiss I . ' thank you , dear ! ' say I . 'Oh , thank you ! thank you ! will you promise I one thing , ? will you write and tell and little Em'ly , and and , that I be not so bad as they might suppose , and that I send th'ey all my love - especially to little ? will you , if you please , ? ' the kind soul promise , and we both of we kiss the keyhole with the greatest affection - I pat it with my hand , I recollect , as if it have be she honest face - and part . from that night there grow up in my breast a feeling for which I can not very well define . she do not replace my mother ; no one could do that ; but she come into a vacancy in my heart , which close upon she , and I feel towards she something I have never feel for any other human being . it be a sort of comical affection , too ; and yet if she have die , I can not think what I should have do , or how I should have act out the tragedy it would have be to I . in the morning appear as usual , and tell I I be go to school ; which be not altogether such news to I as she suppose . she also inform I that when I be dress , I be to come downstairs into the parlour , and have my breakfast . there , I find my mother , very pale and with red eye : into whose arm I run , and beg she pardon from my suffering soul . 'Oh , ! ' she say . ' that you could hurt anyone I love ! try to be better , pray to be better ! I forgive you ; but I be so grieved , , that you should have such bad passion in you heart . ' they have persuade she that I be a wicked fellow , and she be more sorry for that than for my go away . I feel it sorely . I try to eat my parting breakfast , but my tear drop upon my bread - and - butter , and trickle into my tea . I see my mother look at I sometimes , and then glance at the watchful , and than look down , or look away . ' master 's box there ! ' say , when wheel be hear at the gate . I look for , but it be not she ; neither she nor appear . my former acquaintance , the carrier , be at the door . the box be take out to he cart , and lift in . ' ! ' say , in she warning note . ' , my dear , ' return my mother . ' good - bye , . you be go for you own good . good - bye , my child . you will come home in the holiday , and be a better boy . ' ' ! ' repeat . ' certainly , my dear , ' reply my mother , who be hold I . 'I forgive you , my dear boy . bless you ! ' ' ! ' repeat . be good enough to take I out to the cart , and to say on the way that she hope I would repent , before I come to a bad end ; and then I get into the cart , and the lazy horse walk off with it . chapter 5 I be send away from we might have go about half a mile , and my pocket - handkerchief be quite wet through , when the carrier stop short . look out to ascertain for what , I see , to my amazement , burst from a hedge and climb into the cart . she take I in both she arm , and squeeze I to she stay until the pressure on my nose be extremely painful , though I never think of that till afterwards when I find it very tender . not a single word do speak . release one of she arm , she put it down in she pocket to the elbow , and bring out some paper bag of cake which she cramm into my pocket , and a purse which she put into my hand , but not one word do she say . after another and a final squeeze with both arm , she get down from the cart and run away ; and , my belief be , and have always be , without a solitary button on she gown . I pick up one , of several that be roll about , and treasure it as a keepake for a long time . the carrier look at I , as if to inquire if she be come back . I shook my head , and say I think not . ' then come up , ' say the carrier to the lazy horse ; who come up accordingly . have by this time cry as much as I possibly could , I begin to think it be of no use cry any more , especially as neither , nor that in the , have ever cry , that I could remember , in try situation . the carrier , see I in this resolution , propose that my pocket - handkerchief should be spread upon the horse 's back to dry . I thank he , and assent ; and particularly small it look , under those circumstance . I have now leisure to examine the purse . it be a stiff leather
leather purse , with a snap , and have three bright shilling in it , which have evidently polish up with whitening , for my greater delight . but it be most precious contents be two half - crown fold together in a bit of paper , on which be write , in my mother 's hand , ' for . with my love . ' I be so overcome by this , that I ask the carrier to be so good as to reach I my pocket - handkerchief again ; but he say he think I have better do without it , and I think I really have , so I wip my eye on my sleeve and stop myself . for good , too ; though , in consequence of my previous emotion , I be still occasionally seize with a stormy sob . after we have jog on for some little time , I ask the carrier if he be go all the way . ' all the way where ? ' inquire the carrier . ' there ,' I say . ' where 's there ? ' inquire the carrier . ' ,' I say . ' why that horse , ' say the carrier , jerk the rein to point he out , ' would be deader than pork afore he get over half the ground . ' ' be you only go to then ? ' I ask . ' that be about it , ' say the carrier . ' and there I shall take you to the stage - cutch , and the stage - cutch that will take you to - wherever it be . ' as this be a great deal for the carrier ( whose name be ) to say - he be , as I observe in a former chapter , of a phlegmatic temperament , and not at all conversational - I offer he a cake as a mark of attention , which he eat at one gulp , exactly like a elephant , and which make no more impression on he big face than it would have do on a elephant 's . ' do she make th'ey , now ? ' say , always lean forward , in he slouching way , on the footboard of the cart with a arm on each knee . ' Peggotty , do you mean , sir ? ' 'Ah ! ' say . . ' ' yes . she make all we pastry , and do all we cooking . ' ' do she though ? ' say . he make up he mouth as if to whistle , but he do not whistle . he sit look at the horse 's ears , as if he see something new there ; and sit so , for a considerable time . by and by , he say : ' no sweetheart , I b'lieve ? ' ' do you say , ? ' for I think he want something else to eat , and have pointedly alluded to that description of refreshment . ' heart , ' say . ' sweet heart ; no person walk with she ! ' ' with ? ' 'Ah ! ' he say . . ' 'Oh , no . she never have a sweetheart . ' ' do not she , though ! ' say . again he make up he mouth to whistle , and again he do not whisle , but sit look at the horse 's ear . ' so she make , ' say , after a long interval of reflection , ' all the apple parsty , and doo all the cooking , do she ? ' I reply that such be the fact . ' well . I will tell you what , ' say . ' Pg rap you might be writin ' to she ? ' 'I shall certainly write to she ,' I rejoin . ' ah ! ' he say , slowly turn he eye towards I . ' well ! if you be writin ' to she , p'raps you would recollect to say that be willin ' ; would you ? ' ' that be willing ,' I repeat , innocently . ' be that all the message ? ' 'ye - es , ' he say , consider . 'ye - es . Barkis be willin '. ' ' but you will be at again tomorrow , ,' I say , falter a little at the idea of my be far away from it then , and could give you own message so much better . ' as he repudiate this suggestion , however , with a jerk of he head , and once more confirm he previous request by say , with profound gravity , ' be willin ' . that be the message ,' I readily undertake its transmission . while I be wait for the coach in the hotel at that very afternoon , I procure a sheet of paper and a inkstand , and write a note to , which run thus : ' my dear Peggotty . I have come here safe . Barkis be willing . my love to . you be affectionately . p.s. he say he particularly want you to know - Barkis be willing . ' when I have take this commission on myself prospectively , relapse into perfect silence ; and I , feel quite wear out by all that have happen lately , lay down on a sack in the cart and fall asleep . I sleep soundly until we get to ; which be so entirely new and strange to I in the inn - yard to which we drive , that I at once abandon a latent hope I have have of meeting with some of 's family there , perhaps even with little 'ly
'ly herself . the coach be in the yard , shin very much all over , but without any horse to it as yet ; and it look in that state as if nothing be more unlikely than its ever go to . I be think this , and wonder what would ultimately become of my box , which have put down on the yard - pavement by the pole ( he have drive up the yard to turn he cart ) , and also what would ultimately become of I , when a lady look out of a bow - window where some fowl and joints of meat be hang up , and say : ' be that the little gentleman from ? ' ' yes , ma 'am ,' I say . ' what name ? ' inquire the lady . ' Copperfield , ma 'am ,' I say . ' that will not do , ' return the lady . ' 's dinner be pay for here , in that name . ' ' be it , ? ' I say . ' if you be , ' say the lady , ' why do you go and give another name , first ? ' I explain to the lady how it be , who than ring a bell , and call out , ' ! show the coffee - room ! ' upon which a waiter come run out of a kitchen on the opposite side of the yard to show it , and see a good deal surprise when he be only to show it to I . it be a large long room with some large map in it . I doubt if I could have feel much stranger if the map have be real foreign country , and I cast away in the middle of they . I feel it be take a liberty to sit down , with my cap in my hand , on the corner of the chair nearest the door ; and when the waiter lay a cloth on purpose for I , and put a set of castor on it , I think I must have turn red all over with modesty . he bring I some chop , and vegetable , and take the cover off in such a bouncing manner that I be afraid I must have give he some offence . but he greatly relieve my mind by put a chair for I at the table , and say , very affably , ' now , six - foot ! come on ! ' I thank he , and take my seat at the board ; but find it extremely difficult to handle my knife and fork with anything like dexterity , or to avoid splash myself with the gravy , while he be stand opposite , stare so hard , and make I blush in the most dreadful manner every time I catch he eye . after watch I into the second chop , he say : ' there be half a pint of ale for you . will you have it now ? ' I thank he and say , ' yes . ' upon which he pour it out of a jug into a large tumbler , and hold it up against the light , and make it look beautiful . 'My eye ! ' he say . ' it seem a good deal , do not it ? ' ' it do seem a good deal ,' I answer with a smile . for it be quite delightful to I , to find he so pleasant . he be a twinkling - ey , pimple - face man , with he hair stand upright all over he head ; and as he stand with one arm a - kimbo , hold up the glass to the light with the other hand , he look quite friendly . ' there be a gentleman here , yesterday , ' he say - 'a stout gentleman , by the name of - perhaps you know he ? ' ' no ,' I say , 'I do not think -' ' in breech and gaiter , broad - brim hat , grey coat , speckle choker , ' say the waiter . ' no ,' I say bashfully , 'I have not the pleasure -' ' he come in here , ' say the waiter , look at the light through the tumbler , ' order a glass of this ale - would order it - I tell he not - drank it , and fall dead . it be too old for he . it ought not to be draw ; that be the fact . ' I be very much shocked to hear of this melancholy accident , and say I think I have better have some water . ' why you see , ' say the waiter , still look at the light through the tumbler , with one of he eye shut up , 'ou people do not like thing be order and leave . it offend th'ey . but I will drink it , if you like . I be use to it , and use be everything . I do not think it will hurt I , if I throw my head back , and take it off quick . shall I ? ' I reply that he would much oblige I by drink it , if he think he could do it safely , but by no means otherwise . when he do throw he head back , and take it off quick , I have a horrible fear , I confess , of see he meet the fate of the lamented , and fall lifeless on the carpet . but it do not hurt he . on the contrary , I think he seem the fresher for it
it . ' what have we get here ? ' he say , put a fork into my dish . ' not chop ? ' ' Chops ,' I say . ' bless my soul ! ' he exclaim , 'I do not know they be chop . why , a chop be the very thing to take off the bad effect of that beer ! be not it lucky ? ' so he take a chop by the bone in one hand , and a potato in the other , and eat away with a very good appetite , to my extreme satisfaction . he afterwards take another chop , and another potato ; and after that , another chop and another potato . when we have do , he bring I a pudding , and have set it before I , seem to ruminate , and to become absent in he mind for some moment . ' how be the pie ? ' he say , rouse himself . ' it be a pudding ,' I make answer . ' Pudding ! ' he exclaim . ' why , bless I , so it be ! what ! ' look at it nearer . ' you do not mean to say it be a batter - pudding ! ' ' yes , it be indeed . ' ' why , a batter - pudding ,' he say , take up a table - spoon , 'i my favourite pudding ! be not that lucky ? come on , little 'un , and let 's see who will get most . ' the waiter certainly get most . he entreate I more than once to come in and win , but what with he table - spoon to my tea - spoon , he dispatch to my dispatch , and he appetite to my appetite , I be leave far behind at the first mouthful , and have no chance with he . I never see anyone enjoy a pudding so much , I think ; and he laugh , when it be all gone , as if he enjoyment of it last still . find he so very friendly and companionable , it be then that I ask for the pen and ink and paper , to write to . he not only bring it immediately , but be good enough to look over I while I write the letter . when I have finish it , he ask I where I be go to school . I say , ' , ' which be all I know . 'Oh ! my eye ! ' he say , look very low - spirit , 'I be sorry for that . ' ' why ? ' I ask he . 'Oh , ! ' he say , shak he head , ' that be the school where they break the boy 's rib - two rib - a little boy he be . I should say he be - let I see - how old be you , about ? ' I tell he between eight and nine . ' that be just he age ,' he say . ' he be eight year and six month old when they break he first rib ; eight year and eight month old when they break he second , and do for he . ' I could not disguise from myself , or from the waiter , that this be a uncomfortable coincidence , and inquire how it be done . he answer be not cheer to my spirit , for it consiste of two dismal word , ' with whopping . ' the blowing of the coach - horn in the yard be a seasonable diversion , which make I get up and hesitatingly inquire , in the mingled pride and diffidence of have a purse ( which I take out of my pocket ) , if there be anything to pay . ' there be a sheet of letter - paper , ' he return . ' do you ever buy a sheet of letter - paper ? ' I could not remember that I ever have . ' it be dear ,' he say , 'on account of the duty . Threepence . that be the way we be tax in this country . there be nothing else , except the waiter . never mind the ink . I lose by that . ' ' what should you - what should I - how much ought I to - what would it be right to pay the waiter , if you please ? ' I stammer , blush . ' if I have not a family , and that family have not the cowpock , ' say the waiter , ' I would not take a sixpence . if I do not support a aged pairint , and a lovely sister , ' - here the waiter be greatly agitate - ' I would not take a farthing . if I have a good place , and be treat well here , I should beg acceptance of a trifle , instead of take of it . but I live on broken wittle - and I sleep on the coal ' - here the waiter burst into tear . I be very much concerned for he misfortune , and feel that any recognition short of ninepence would be mere brutality and hardness of heart . therefore I give he one of my three bright shilling , which he receive with much humility and veneration , and spun up with he thumb , directly afterwards , to try the goodness of . it be a little disconcerting to I , to find , when I be be help up behind the coach , that I be suppose to have eat all the dinner without any assistance . I discover this ,
, from overhear the lady in the bow - window say to the guard , ' take care of that child , , or he will burst ! ' and from observe that the woman - servants who be about the place come out to look and giggle at I as a young phenomenon . my unfortunate friend the waiter , who have quite recover he spirits , do not appear to be disturb by this , but join in the general admiration without be at all confused . if I have any doubt of he , I suppose this half awaken it ; but I be inclin to believe that with the simple confidence of a child , and the natural reliance of a child upon superior year ( quality I be very sorry any child should prematurely change for worldly wisdom ) , I have no serious mistrust of he on the whole , even then . I feel it rather hard , I must own , to be make , without deserve it , the subject of joke between the coachman and guard as to the coach draw heavy behind , on account of my sit there , and as to the greater expediency of my travelling by waggon . the story of my suppose appetite get wind among the outside passenger , they be merry upon it likewise ; and ask I whether I be go to be pay for , at school , as two brothers or three , and whether I be contract for , or go upon the regular term ; with other pleasant question . but the worst of it be , that I know I should be asham to eat anything , when a opportunity offer , and that , after a rather light dinner , I should remain hungry all night - for I have leave my cake behind , at the hotel , in my hurry . my apprehension be realize . when we stop for supper I could not muster courage to take any , though I should have like it very much , but sit by the fire and say I do not want anything . this do not save I from more joke , either ; for a husky - voice gentleman with a rough face , who have be eat out of a sandwich - box nearly all the way , except when he have be drink out of a bottle , say I be like a boa-constrictor who take enough at one meal to last he a long time ; after which , he actually bring a rash out upon himself with boiled beef . we have start from at three o'clock in the afternoon , and we be due in about eight next morning . it be mid - summer weather , and the evening be very pleasant . when we pass through a village , I picture to myself what the inside of the house be like , and what the inhabitant be about ; and when boy come run after we , and get up behind and swing there for a little way , I wonder whether they fathers be alive , and whether they be happy at home . I have plenty to think of , therefore , besides my mind run continually on the kind of place I be go to - which be a awful speculation . sometimes , I remember , I resign myself to thought of home and Peggotty ; and to endeavour , in a confused blind way , to recall how I have feel , and what sort of boy I use to be , before I bit : which i could not satisfy myself about by any means , I seem to have bite he in such a remote antiquity . the night be not so pleasant as the evening , for it get chilly ; and be put between two gentleman ( the rough - faced one and another ) to prevent my tumbling off the coach , I be nearly smother by they falling asleep , and completely block I up . they squeeze I so hard sometimes , that I could not help cry out , ' oh ! if you please ! ' - which they do not like at all , because it wake they . opposite I be a elderly lady in a great fur cloak , who look in the dark more like a haystack than a lady , she be wrap up to such a degree . this lady have a basket with she , and she have not know what to do with it , for a long time , until she find that on account of my leg be short , it could go underneath I . it cramp and hurt I so , that it make I perfectly miserable ; but if I move in the least , and make a glass that be in the basket rattle against something else ( as it be sure to do ) , she give I the cruellest poke with she foot , and say , ' come , do not you fidget . you bone be young enough , I be sure ! ' at last the sun rise , and then my companion seem to sleep easier . the difficulty under which they have laboure all night , and which have find utterance in the most terrific gasp and snort , be not to be conceive . as the sun get higher , they sleep become lighter , and so they gradually one by one awoke . I recollect be very much surprised by the feint everybody make , then , of not have be to sleep at all , and by the uncommon indignation with which everyone repell the charge . I labour under the same kind of astonishment to this day ,
, have invariably observe that of all human weakness , the one to which we common nature be the least dispose to confess ( I can not imagine why ) be the weakness of have go to sleep in a coach . what a amazing place be to I when I see it in the distance , and how I believe all the adventur of all my favourite hero to be constantly enact and re-enact there , and how I vaguly make it out in my own mind to be fuller of wonder and wickedness than all the city of the earth , I need not stop here to relate . we approach it by degree , and get , in due time , to the inn in the district , for which we be bound . I forget whether it be the , or the ; but I know it be the , and that its likeness be pain up on the back of the coach . the guard 's eye lighte on I as he be get down , and he say at the booking -office door : ' be there anybody here for a yoongster book in the name of , from , , to be leave till call for ? ' nobody answer . ' try , if you please , sir , ' say I , look helplessly down . ' be there anybody here for a yoongster , book in the name of , from , , but own to the name of , to be leave till call for ? ' say the guard . ' come ! be there anybody ? ' no . there be nobody . I look anxiously around ; but the inquiry make no impression on any of the bystander , if I except a man in gaiter , with one eye , who suggest that they have better put a brass collar round my neck , and tie I up in the stable . a ladder be bring , and I get down after the lady , who be like a haystack : not da to stir , until she basket be remove . the coach be clear of passenger by that time , the luggage be very soon clear out , the horse have be take out before the luggage , and now the coach itself be wheel and back off by some hostler , out of the way . , nobody appear , to claim the dusty youngster from , . more solitary than , who have nobody to look at he and see that he be solitary , I go into the booking - office , and , by invitation of the clerk on duty , pass behind the counter , and sit down on the scale at which they weigh the luggage . here , as I sit look at the parcel , package , and book , and inhal the smell of stable ( ever since associate with that morning ) , a procession of most tremendous consideration begin to march through my mind . Suppose nobody should ever fetch I , how long would they consent to keep I there ? would they keep I long enough to spend seven shilling ? should I sleep at night in one of those wooden bins , with the other luggage , and wash myself at the pump in the yard in the morning ; or should I be turn out every night , and expect to come again to be leave till call for , when the office open next day ? Suppose there be no mistake in the case , and have devise this plan to get rid of I , what should I do ? if they allow I to remain there until my seven shilling be spend , I could not hope to remain there when I begin to starve . that would obviously be inconvenient and unpleasant to the customer , besides entailing on the - it - be , the risk of funeral expensis . if I start off at once , and try to walk back home , how could I ever find my way , how could I ever hope to walk so far , how could I make sure of anyone but , even if I get back ? if I find out the nearest proper authority , and offer myself to go for a soldier , or a sailor , I be such a little fellow that it be most likely they would not take I in . these thought , and a hundred other such thought , turn I burn hot , and make I giddy with apprehension and dismay . I be in the height of my fever when a man enter and whisper to the clerk , who presently slant I off the scale , and push I over to he , as if I be weigh , buy , deliver , and pay for . as I go out of the office , hand in hand with this new acquaintance , I steal a look at he . he be a gaunt , sallow young man , with hollow cheek , and a ching almost as black as 's ; but there the likeness end , for he whisker be shave off , and he hair , instead of be glossy , be rusty and dry . he be dress in a suit of black clothes which be rather rusty and dry too , and rather short in the sleeve and leg ; and he have a white neck - kerchief on , that be not over-clean . I do not , and do not , suppose that this neck -kerchief be all the linen he wear , but it be all he show or give any hint of . ' you be the new boy ? ' he say .
. ' yes , sir ,' I say . I suppose I be . I do not know . 'I be one of the master at , ' he say . I make he a bow and feel very much overawed . I be so asham to allude to a commonplace thing like my box , to a scholar and a master at , that we have go some little distance from the yard before I have the hardihood to mention it . we turn back , on my humbly insinuat that it might be useful to I hereafter ; and he tell the clerk that the carrier have instruction to call for it at noon . ' if you please , sir ,' I say , when we have accomplish about the same distance as before , 'i it far ? ' ' it be down by , ' he say . ' be that far , sir ? ' I diffidently ask . ' it be a good step ,' he say . ' we shall go by the stage - coach . it be about six mile . ' I be so faint and tired , that the idea of hold out for six mile more , be too much for I . I take heart to tell he that I have have nothing all night , and that if he would allow I to buy something to eat , I should be very much obliged to he . he appear surprised at this - I see he stop and look at I now - and after consider for a few moment , say he want to call on a old person who live not far off , and that the best way would be for I to buy some bread , or whatever I like best that be wholesome , and make my breakfast at she house , where we could get some milk . accordingly we look in at a baker 's window , and after I have make a series of proposal to buy everything that be bilious in the shop , and he have reject they one by one , we decide in favour of a nice little loaf of brown bread , which cost I threepence . then , at a grocer 's shop , we buy a egg and a slice of streaky bacon ; which still leave what I think a good deal of change , out of the second of the bright shilling , and make I consider a very cheap place . these provision lay in , we go on through a great noise and uproar that confuse my weary head beyond description , and over a bridge which , no doubt , be ( indeed I think he tell I so , but I be half asleep ) , until we come to the poor person 's house , which be a part of some alm - house , as I know by they look , and by a inscription on a stone over the gate which say they be establish for twenty - five poor woman . the master at lift the latch of one of a number of little black door that be all alike , and have each a little diamond - pa window on one side , and another little diamond - pa window above ; and we go into the little house of one of these poor old woman , who be blow a fire to make a little saucepan boil . on see the master enter , the old woman stoppe with the bellow on she knee , and say something that I think sound like ' my ! ' but on see I come in too , she get up , and rub she hand make a confused sort of half curtsey . ' can you cake this young gentleman 's breakfast for he , if you please ? ' say the master at . ' can I ? ' say the old woman . ' yes can I , sure ! ' ' how be today ? ' say the master , look at another old woman in a large chair by the fire , who be such a bundle of clothes that I feel grateful to this hour for not have sit upon she by mistake . 'Ah , she be poorly , ' say the first old woman . ' it be one of she bad day . if the fire be to go out , through any accident , I verily believe she would go out too , and never come to life again . ' as they look at she , I look at she also . although it be a warm day , she seem to think of nothing but the fire . I fancie she be jealous even of the saucepan on it ; and I have reason to know that she take its impressment into the service of boil my egg and broil my bacon , in dudgeon ; for I see she , with my own discomfited eye , shake she fist at I once , when those culinary operation be go on , and no one else be look . the sun stream in at the little window , but she sit with she own back and the back of the large chair towards it , screen the fire as if she be sedulously keep it warm , instead of it keep she warm , and watch it in a most distrustful manner . the completion of the preparation for my breakfast , by relieive the fire , give she such extreme joy that she laugh aloud - and a very unmelodious laugh she have , I must say . I sit down to my brown loaf , my egg , and my rasher of bacon , with a basin of
of milk besides , and make a most delicious meal . while I be yet in the full enjoyment of it , the old woman of the house say to the master : ' have you get you flute with you ? ' ' yes , ' he return . ' have a blow at it , ' say the old woman , coaxingly . ' do ! ' the master , upon this , put he hand underneath the skirt of he coat , and bring out he flute in three piece , which he screw together , and begin immediately to play . my impression be , after many year of consideration , that there never can have be anybody in the world who play worse . he make the most dismal sound I have ever hear produce by any means , natural or artificial . I do not know what the tune be - if there be such thing in the performance at all , which I doubt - but the influence of the strain upon I be , first , to make I think of all my sorrow until I could hardly keep my tear back ; then to take away my appetite ; and lastly , to make I so sleepy that I could not keep my eye open . they begin to close again , and I begin to nod , as the recollection rise fresh upon I . once more the little room , with its open corner cupboard , and its square - back chair , and its angular little staircase lead to the room above , and its three peacock 's feather display over the mantelpiece - I remember wonder when I first go in , what that peacock would have think if he have know what he finery be doom to come to - fades from before I , and I nod , and sleep . the flute become inaudible , the wheel of the coach be hear instead , and I be on my journey . the coach jolt , I wake with a start , and the flute have come back again , and the master at be sit with he leg cross , play it dolefully , while the old woman of the house look on delighted . she fade in she turn , and he fade , and all fades , and there be no flute , no master , no , no , no anything but heavy sleep . I dream , I think , that once while he be blow into this dismal flute , the old woman of the house , who have go nearer and nearer to he in she ecstatic admiration , lean over the back of he chair and give he a affectionate squeeze round the neck , which stop he play for a moment . I be in the middle state between sleeping and wake , either then or immediately afterwards ; for , as he resume - it be a real fact that he have stop play - I see and hear the same old woman ask if it be not delicious ( mean the flute ) , to which reply , , ay ! yes ! ' and nod at the fire : to which , I be persuade , she give the credit of the whole performance . when I seem to have be do a long while , the master at unscrew he flute into the three piece , put they up as before , and take I away . we find the coach very near at hand , and get upon the roof ; but I be so dead sleepy , that when we stop on the road to take up somebody else , they put I inside where there be no passenger , and where I sleep profoundly , until I find the coach go at a footpace up a steep hill among green leave . presently , it stop , and have come to its destination . a short walk bring we - I mean the master and I - to , which be enclose with a high brick wall , and look very dull . over a door in this wall be a board with upon it ; and through a grating in this door we be survey when we ring the bell by a surly face , which I find , on the door be open , belong to a stout man with a bull - neck , a wooden leg , overhange temple , and he hair cut close all round he head . ' the new boy , ' say the master . the man with the wooden leg ey I all over - it do not take long , for there be not much of I - and lock the gate behind we , and take out the key . we be go up to the house , among some dark heavy tree , when he call after my conductor . ' Hallo ! ' we look back , and he be stand at the door of a little lodge , where he liv , with a pair of boot in he hand . ' Here ! the cobbler have be ,' he say , ' since you have be out , , and he say he can not mmend th'ey any more . he say there be not a bit of the original boot leave , and he wonder you expect it . ' with these word he throw the boot towards , who go back a few pace to pick they up , and look at they ( very disconsolately , I be afraid ) , as we go on together . I observ then , for the first time , that the boot he have on be a good deal the worse for wear ,
, and that he stocking be just break out in one place , like a bud . be a square brick building with wing ; of a bare and unfurnished appearance . all about it be so very quiet , that I say to I suppose the boy be out ; but he seem surprised at my not know that it be holiday - time . that all the boy be at they several home . that , the proprietor , be down by the sea -side with and ; and that I be send in holiday - time as a punishment for my misdoing , all of which he explain to I as we go along . I gaze upon the schoolroom into which he take I , as the most forlorn and desolate place I have ever see . I see it now . a long room with three long row of desk , and six of form , and bristl all round with peg for hat and slate . scrap of old copy - book and exercise litter the dirty floor . some silkworm ' house , make of the same material , be scatter over the desk . two miserable little white mouse , leave behind by they owner , be run up and down in a fusty castle make of pasteboard and wire , look in all the corner with they red eye for anything to eat . a bird , in a cage very little bigger than himself , make a mournful rattle now and then in hopping on he perch , two inch high , or drop from it ; but neither sings nor chirp . there be a strange unwholesome smell upon the room , like mildew corduroy , sweet apple want air , and rotten book . there could not well be more ink splashed about it , if it have be roofless from its first construction , and the sky have rain , snow , haile , and blow ink through the varying season of the year . have leave I while he take he irreparable boot upstairs , I go softly to the upper end of the room , observe all this as I creep along . suddenly I come upon a pasteboard placard , beautifully write , which be lie on the desk , and bear these word : ' take care of . he bite . ' I get upon the desk immediately , apprehensive of at least a great dog underneath . but , though I look all round with anxious eye , I could see nothing of he . I be still engage in pee about , when come back , and ask I what I do up there ? 'I beg you pardon , sir , ' say I , ' if you please , I be look for the dog . ' ' dog ? ' he say . ' what dog ? ' ' be not it a dog , sir ? ' ' be not what a dog ? ' ' that be to be take care of , sir ; that bite . ' 'no , , ' say he , gravely , ' that be not a dog . that be a boy . my instructions be , , to put this placard on you back . I be sorry to make such a beginning with you , but I must do it . ' with that he take I down , and tie the placard , which be neatly construct for the purpose , on my shoulders like a knapsack ; and wherever I go , afterwards , I have the consolation of carry it . what I suffer from that placard , nobody can imagine . whether it be possible for people to see I or not , I always fancie that somebody be read it . it be no relief to turn round and find nobody ; for wherever my back be , there I imagine somebody always to be . that cruel man with the wooden leg aggravate my suffering . he be in authority ; and if he ever see I lean against a tree , or a wall , or the house , he roar out from he lodge door in a stupendous voice , ' Hallo , you sir ! you Copperfield ! show that badge conspicuous , or I will report you ! ' the playground be a bare gravell yard , open to all the back of the house and the office ; and I know that the servants read it , and the butcher read it , and the baker read it ; that everybody , in a word , who come backwards and forward to the house , of a morning when I be order to walk there , read that I be to be take care of , for I bit , I recollect that I positively begin to have a dread of myself , as a kind of wild boy who do bite . there be a old door in this playground , on which the boy have a custom of carve they name . it be completely covered with such inscription . in my dread of the end of the vacation and they come back , I could not read a boy 's name , without inquire in what tone and with what emphasis he would read , ' take care of he . he bite . ' there be one boy - a certain - who cut he name very deep and very often , who , I conceive , would read it in a rather strong voice , and afterwards pull my hair . there be another boy , one Tommy Traddles , who I dread would make game of it , and pretend to be dreadfully frightene of I . there be a
a third , , who I fancie would s it . I have look , a little shrinking creature , at that door , until the owner of all the name - there be five - and - forty of they in the school then , say - seem to send I to Coventry by general acclamation , and to cry out , each in he own way , ' take care of he . he bite ! ' it be the same with the place at the desk and form . it be the same with the grove of desert bedstead I pee at , on my way to , and when I be in , my own bed . I remember dream night after night , of be with my mother as she use to be , or of go to a party at 's , or of travel outside the stage - coach , or of dining again with my unfortunate friend the waiter , and in all these circumstance make people scream and stare , by the unhappy disclosure that I have nothing on but my little night - shirt , and that placard . in the monotony of my life , and in my constant apprehension of the re-opening of the school , it be such a insupportable affliction ! I have long task every day to do with ; but I do they , there be no and here , and get through they without disgrace . before , and after they , I walk about - supervise , as I have mention , by the man with the wooden leg . how vividly I call to mind the damp about the house , the green crack flagstone in the court , a old leaky water - butt , and the discoloured trunk of some of the grim tree , which seem to have drip more in the rain than other tree , and to have blow less in the sun ! at one we dine , and I , at the upper end of a long bare dining - room , full of deal table , and smell of fat . then , we have more task until tea , which drank out of a blue teacup , and I out of a tin pot . all day long , and until seven or eight in the evening , , at he own detach desk in the schoolroom , work hard with pen , ink , ruler , book , and write - paper , make out the bill ( as I find ) for last half - year . when he have put up he thing for the night he take out he flute , and blow at it , until I almost think he would gradually blow he whole be into the large hole at the top , and ooze away at the key . I picture my small self in the dimly - lighted room , sit with my head upon my hand , listen to the doleful performance of , and con tomorrow 's lesson . I picture myself with my book shut up , still listen to the doleful performance of , and listen through it to what use to be at home , and to the blowing of the wind on flat , and feel very sad and solitary . I picture myself go up to bed , among the unused room , and sit on my bed - side cry for a comfortable word from . I picture myself come downstairs in the morning , and look through a long ghastly gash of a staircase window at the school - bell hang on the top of a out - house with a weathercock above it ; and dread the time when it shall ring and the rest to work : which be only second , in my foreboding apprehension , to the time when the man with the wooden leg shall unlock the rusty gate to give admission to the awful . I can not think I be a very dangerous character in any of these aspect , but in all of they I carry the same warning on my back . never say much to I , but he be never harsh to I . I suppose we be company to each other , without talk . I forget to mention that he would talk to himself sometimes , and grin , and clench he fist , and grind he tooth , and pull he hair in a unaccountable manner . but he have these peculiarity : and at first they frightene I , though I soon get used to they . chapter 6 I Enlarge my circle of I have lead this life about a month , when the man with the wooden leg begin to stump about with a mop and a bucket of water , from which I infer that preparations be make to receive and the boy . I be not mistaken ; for the mop come into the schoolroom before long , and turn out and I , who liv where we could , and get on how we could , for some day , during which we be always in the way of two or three young woman , who have rarely show themselves before , and be so continually in the midst of dust that I sneeze almost as much as if have be a great snuff - box . one day I be inform by that would be home that evening . in the evening , after tea , I hear that he be come . before bedtime , I be fetch by the man with the wooden leg to appear before he . 's part of the house be a good deal more comfortable than ours , and he have a snug bit of garden that look
look pleasant after the dusty playground , which be such a desert in miniature , that I think no one but a camel , or a dromedary , could have feel at home in it . it seem to I a bold thing even to take notice that the passage look comfortable , as I go on my way , trembl , to 's presence : which so abash I , when I be usher into it , that I hardly see or ( who be both there , in the parlour ) , or anything but , a stout gentleman with a bunch of watch - chain and seal , in a arm -chair , with a tumbler and bottle beside he . 'So ! ' say . ' this be the young gentleman whose tooth be to be file ! turn he round . ' the wooden - leg man turn I about so as to exhibit the placard ; and have afforde time for a full survey of it , turn I about again , with my face to , and post himself at 's side . 's face be fiery , and he eye be small , and deep in he head ; he have thick vein in he forehead , a little nose , and a large ching . he be bald on the top of he head ; and have some thin wet - look hair that be just turn grey , brush across each temple , so that the two side interlace on he forehead . but the circumstance about he which impress I most , be , that he have no voice , but speak in a whisper . the exertion this cost he , or the consciousness of talk in that feeble way , make he angry face so much more angry , and he thick vein so much thicker , when he speak , that I be not surprised , on look back , at this peculiarity strike I as he chief one . ' now , ' say . ' what be the report of this boy ? ' ' there be nothing against he yet , ' return the man with the wooden leg . ' there have be no opportunity . ' I think be disappoint . I think and ( at whom I now glance for the first time , and who be , both , thing and quiet ) be not disappoint . ' come here , sir ! ' say , beckon to I . ' come here ! ' say the man with the wooden leg , repeat the gesture . 'I have the happiness of know you father - in - law , ' whisper , take I by the ear ; ' and a worthy man he be , and a man of a strong character . he know I , and I know he . do you know I ? hey ? ' say , pinch my ear with ferocious playfulness . ' not yet , sir ,' I say , flinch with the pain . ' not yet ? hey ? ' repeat . ' but you will soon . hey ? ' ' you will soon . hey ? ' repeat the man with the wooden leg . I afterwards find that he generally ac , with he strong voice , as 's interpreter to the boy . I be very much frightened , and say , I hope so , if he please . I feel , all this while , as if my ear be blaze ; he pinch it so hard . 'I will tell you what I be , ' whisper , let it go at last , with a screw at parting that bring the water into my eye . 'I be a . ' , ' say the man with the wooden leg . ' when I say I will do a thing , I do it , ' say ; ' and when I say I will have a thing do , I will have it do .' ' - will have a thing do , I will have it do , ' repeat the man with the wooden leg . 'I be a determined character , ' say . ' that be what I be . I do my duty . that be what I do . my flesh and blood ' - he look at . as he say this - ' when it rise against I , be not my flesh and blood . I discard it . have that fellow ' - to the man with the wooden leg -' be here again ? ' ' no , ' be the answer . ' no , ' say . ' he know better . he know I . let he keep away . I say let he keep away , ' say , strike he hand upon the table , and look at , ' for he know I . now you have begin to know I too , my young friend , and you may go . take he away . ' I be very glad to be order away , for and be both wip they eye , and I feel as uncomfortable for they as I do for myself . but I have a petition on my mind which concern I so nearly , that I could not help say , though I wonder at my own courage : ' if you please , sir -' whisper , ' Hah ! what be this ? ' and bend he eye upon I , as if he would have bur not I up with they . ' if you please , sir ,' I falter , ' if I might be allow ( I be very sorry indeed , sir , for what I do )
) to take this write off , before the boy come back -' whether be in earnest , or whether he only do it to frighten I , I do not know , but he make a burst out of he chair , before which I precipitately retreate , without wait for the escort of the man with the wooden leg , and never once stop until I reach my own bedroom , where , finde I be not pursue , I go to bed , as it be time , and lay quaking , for a couple of hour . next morning come back . be the first master , and superior to . take he meal with the boy , but dine and sup at 's table . he be a limp , delicate - look gentleman , I think , with a good deal of nose , and a way of carry he head on one side , as if it be a little too heavy for he . he hair be very smooth and wavy ; but I be inform by the very first boy who come back that it be a wig ( a second - hand one he say ) , and that go out every afternoon to get it curl . it be no other than who give I this piece of intelligence . he be the first boy who return . he introduce himself by inform I that I should find he name on the right - hand corner of the gate , over the top - bolt ; upon that I say , ' ? ' to which he reply , ' the same , ' and then he ask I for a full account of myself and family . it be a happy circumstance for I that come back first . he enjoy my placard so much , that he save I from the embarrassment of either disclosure or concealment , by present I to every other boy who come back , great or small , immediately on he arrival , in this form of introduction , ' look here ! here be a game ! ' happily , too , the greater part of the boy come back low - spirited , and be not so boisterous at my expense as I have expect . some of they certainly do dance about I like wild , and the greater part could not resist the temptation of pretending that I be a dog , and pat and soothe I , lest I should bite , and say , ' lie down , sir ! ' and call I . this be naturally confusing , among so many stranger , and cost I some tear , but on the whole it be much better than I have anticipate . I be not consider as be formally receive into the school , however , until arrive . before this boy , who be repute to be a great scholar , and be very good -looking , and at least half - a - dozen year my senior , I be carry as before a magistrate . he inquire , under a shed in the playground , into the particular of my punishment , and be pleased to express he opinion that it be 'a jolly shame ' ; for which I become bound to he ever afterwards . ' what money have you get , ? ' he say , walk aside with I when he have dispose of my affair in these term . I tell he seven shilling . ' you have better give it to I to take care of ,' he say . ' at least , you can if you like . you need not if you do not like . ' I hasten to comply with he friendly suggestion , and open 's purse , turn it upside down into he hand . ' do you want to spend anything now ? ' he ask I . ' no thank you ,' I reply . ' you can , if you like , you know , ' say . ' say the word . ' ' no , thank you , sir ,' I repeat . ' perhaps you would like to spend a couple of shilling or so , in a bottle of currant wine by and by , up in the bedroom ? ' say . ' you belong to my bedroom , I find . ' it certainly have not occur to I before , but I say , yes , I should like that . ' very good , ' say . ' you will be glad to spend another shilling or so , in almond cake , I dare say ? ' I say , yes , I should like that , too . ' and another shilling or so in biscuit , and another in fruit , eh ? ' say . 'I say , young Copperfield , you be go it ! ' I smile because he smile , but I be a little trouble in my mind , too . ' well ! ' say . ' we must make it stretch as far as we can ; that be all . I will do the best in my power for you . I can go out when I like , and I will smuggle the prog in . ' with these word he put the money in he pocket , and kindly tell I not to make myself uneasy ; he would take care it should be all right . he be as good as he word , if that be all right which I have a secret misgiving be nearly all wrong - for I fear it be a waste of my mother 's two half - crown - though I have preserve the piece of paper
paper they be wrap in : which be a precious saving . when we go upstairs to bed , he produce the whole seven shilling ' worth , and lay it out on my bed in the moonlight , say : ' there you be , young , and a royal spread you have get . ' I could not think of do the honour of the feast , at my time of life , while he be by ; my hand shook at the very thought of it . I beg he to do I the favour of presiding ; and my request be seconde by the other boy who be in that room , he acced to it , and sit upon my pillow , hand round the viand - with perfect fairness , I must say - and dispense the currant wine in a little glass without a foot , which be he own property . as to I , I sit on he left hand , and the rest be group about we , on the nearest bed and on the floor . how well I recollect we sit there , talk in whisper ; or they talk , and my respectfully listen , I ought rather to say ; the moonlight fall a little way into the room , through the window , pain a pale window on the floor , and the greater part of we in shadow , except when dip a match into a phosphorus - box , when he want to look for anything on the board , and she a blue glare over we that be go directly ! a certain mysterious feeling , consequent on the darkness , the secrecy of the revel , and the whisper in which everything be say , steal over I again , and I listen to all they tell I with a vague feeling of solemnity and awe , which make I glad that they be all so near , and frighten I ( though I feign to laugh ) when Traddles pretend to see a ghost in the corner . I hear all kind of thing about the school and all belong to it . I hear that have not prefer he claim to be a Tartar without reason ; that he be the sternest and most severe of master ; that he lay about he , right and leave , every day of he life , charge in among the boy like a trooper , and slash away , unmercifully . that he know nothing himself , but the art of slashing , be more ignorant ( say ) than the lowest boy in the school ; that he have be , a good many year ago , a small hop - dealer in the , and have take to the schooling business after be bankrupt in hops , and make away with 's money . with a good deal more of that sort , which I wonder how they know . I hear that the man with the wooden leg , whose name be , be a obstinate barbarian who have formerly assist in the hop business , but have come into the scholastic line with , in consequence , as be suppose among the boy , of he have break he leg in 's service , and have do a deal of dishonest work for he , and know he secret . I hear that with the single exception of , consider the whole establishment , master and boy , as he natural enemie , and that the only delight of he life be to be sour and malicious . I hear that have a son , who have not be 's friend , and who , assist in the school , have once hold some remonstrance with he father on a occasion when its discipline be very cruelly exercise , and be suppose , besides , to have protest against he father 's usage of he mother . I hear that have turn he out of door , in consequence ; and that and have be in a sad way , ever since . but the greatest wonder that I hear of be , there be one boy in the school on whom he never venture to lay a hand , and that boy be . himself confirm this when it be state , and say that he should like to begin to see he do it . on be ask by a mild boy ( not I ) how he would proceed if he do begin to see he do it , he dip a match into he phosphorus - box on purpose to shed a glare over he reply , and say he would commence by knock he down with a blow on the forehead from the seven - and - sixpenny ink - bottle that be always on the mantelpiece . we sit in the dark for some time , breathless . I hear that and be both suppose to be wretchedly pay ; and that when there be hot and cold meat for dinner at 's table , be always expect to say he preferre cold ; which be again corroborate by , the only parlour - boarder . I hear that 's wig do not fit he ; and that he need not be so ' bounceable ' - somebody else say ' bumptious ' - about it , because he own red hair be very plainly to be see behind . I hear that one boy , who be a coal -merchant 's son , come as a set - off against the coal - bill , and be call , on that account , ' or ' - a name select from the arithmetic book as express this arrangement . I hear that the table beer be a robbery of parent ,
, and the pudding a imposition . I hear that be regard by the school in general as be in love with ; and I be sure , as I sit in the dark , think of he nice voice , and he fine face , and he easy manner , and he curl hair , I think it very likely . I hear that be not a bad sort of fellow , but have not a sixpence to bless himself with ; and that there be no doubt that old , he mother , be as poor as job . I think of my breakfast then , and what have sound like ' ! ' but I be , I be glad to remember , as mute as a mouse about it . the hearing of all this , and a good deal more , outlast the banquet some time . the greater part of the guest have go to bed as soon as the eating and drinking be over ; and we , who have remain whisper and listen half - undressed , at last betook ourselves to bed , too . ' good night , young , ' say . 'I will take care of you . ' ' you be very kind ,' I gratefully return . 'I be very much oblige to you . ' ' you have not get a sister , have you ? ' say , yawn . ' no ,' I answer . ' that be a pity , ' say . ' if you have have one , I should think she would have be a pretty , timid , little , bright - eye sort of girl . I should have like to know she . good night , young . ' ' good night , sir ,' I reply . I think of he very much after I go to bed , and raise myself , I recollect , to look at he where he lay in the moonlight , with he handsome face turn up , and he head recline easily on he arm . he be a person of great power in my eyes ; that be , of course , the reason of my mind run on he . no veil future dimly glance upon he in the moonbeam . there be no shadowy picture of he footstep , in the garden that I dream of walking in all night . chapter 7 my ' ' at begin in earnest next day . a profound impression be make upon I , I remember , by the roar of voice in the schoolroom suddenly become hushed as death when enter after breakfast , and stand in the doorway look round upon we like a giant in a story - book survey he captive . stand at 's elbow . he have no occasion , I think , to cry out ' Silence ! ' so ferociously , for the boy be all strike speechless and motionless . be see to speak , and be hear , to this effect . ' now , boy , this be a new half . take care what you be about , in this new half . come fresh up to the lesson , I advise you , for I come fresh up to the punishment . I will not flinch . it will be of no use you rub yourselves ; you will not rub the mark out that I shall give you . now get to work , every boy ! ' when this dreadful exordium be over , and have stump out again , come to where I sit , and tell I that if I be famous for biting , he be famous for biting , too . he then show I the cane , and ask I what I think of that , for a tooth ? be it a sharp tooth , hey ? be it a double tooth , hey ? have it a deep prong , hey ? do it bite , hey ? do it bite ? at every question he give I a fleshy cut with it that make I writo ; so I be very soon make free of ( as say ) , and be very soon in tear also . not that I mean to say these be special mark of distinction , which only I receive . on the contrary , a large majority of the boy ( especially the smaller one ) be visit with similar instance of notice , as make the round of the schoolroom . half the establishment be writh and cry , before the day 's work begin ; and how much of it have writh and cry before the day 's work be over , I be really afraid to recollect , lest I should seem to exaggerate . I should think there never can have be a man who enjoy he profession more than do . he have a delight in cutting at the boy , which be like the satisfaction of a craving appetite . I be confident that he could not resist a chubby boy , especially ; that there be a fascination in such a subject , which make he restless in he mind , until he have score and mark he for the day . I be chubby myself , and ought to know . I be sure when I think of the fellow now , my blood rise against he with the disinterested indignation I should feel if I could have know all about he without have ever be in he power ; but it rise hotly , because I know he to have be a incapable brute , who have no more right to be possess of the great trust he hold , than to be , or - in - - in either
either of which capacity it be probable that he would have do infinitely less mischief . miserable little propitiator of a remorseless , how abject we be to he ! what a launch in life I think it now , on look back , to be so mean and servile to a man of such part and pretension ! here I sit at the desk again , watch he eye - humbly watch he eye , as he rule a ciphering - book for another victim whose hand have just be flatten by that identical ruler , and who be try to wipe the sting out with a pocket - handkerchief . I have plenty to do . I do not watch he eye in idleness , but because I be morbidly attract to it , in a dread desire to know what he will do next , and whether it will be my turn to suffer , or somebody else 's . a lane of small boy beyond I , with the same interest in he eye , watch it too . I think he know it , though he pretend he do not . he make dreadful mouths as he rule the ciphering - book ; and now he throw he eye sideway down we lane , and we all droop over we book and tremble . a moment afterwards we be again eyee he . a unhappy culprit , find guilty of imperfect exercise , approaches at he command . the culprit falter excuse , and profess a determination to do better tomorrow . cut a joke before he beat he , and we laugh at it , - miserable little dog , we laugh , with we visage as white as ash , and we heart sinke into we boot . here I sit at the desk again , on a drowsy summer afternoon . a buzz and hum go up around I , as if the boy be so many bluebottle . a cloggy sensation of the lukewarm fat of meat be upon I ( we dine a hour or two ago ) , and my head be as heavy as so much lead . I would give the world to go to sleep . I sit with my eye on , blink at he like a young owl ; when sleep overpowers I for a minute , he still loom through my slumber , rule those ciphering - book , until he softly come behind I and wake I to plainer perception of he , with a red ridge across my back . here I be in the playground , with my eye still fascinate by he , though I can not see he . the window at a little distance from which I know he be have he dinner , stand for he , and I eye that instead . if he show he face near it , mine assume a imploring and submissive expression . if he look out through the glass , the boldest boy ( Steerforth accept ) stop in the middle of a shout or yell , and become contemplative . one day , Traddles ( the most unfortunate boy in the world ) break that window accidentally , with a ball . I shudder at this moment with the tremendous sensation of see it do , and feel that the ball have bound on to 's sacred head . poor Traddle ! in a tight sky - blue suit that make he arm and leg like german sausage , or roly - poly pudding , he be the merriest and most miserable of all the boy . he be always be can - I think he be cane every day that half - year , except one holiday when he be only ruler would on both hand - and be always go to write to he uncle about it , and never do . after lay he head on the desk for a little while , he would cheer up , somehow , begin to laugh again , and draw skeleton all over he slate , before he eye be dry . I use at first to wonder what comfort Traddle find in draw skeleton ; and for some time look upon he as a sort of hermit , who remind himself by those symbol of mortality that cane could not last for ever . but I believe he only do it because they be easy , and do not want any feature . he be very honourable , Traddle be , and hold it as a solemn duty in the boy to stand by one another . he suffer for this on several occasion ; and particularly once , when laugh in church , and the think it be Traddles , and take he out . I see he now , go away in custody , despise by the congregation . he never say who be the real offender , though he smart for it next day , and be imprison so many hour that he come forth with a whole churchyard - full of skeleton swarm all over he . but he have he reward . say there be nothing of the sneak in Traddles , and we all felt that to be the highest praise . for my part , I could have go through a good deal ( though I be much less brave than Traddles , and nothing like so old ) to have won such a recompense . to see walk to church before we , arm -in - arm with , be one of the great sight of my life . I do not think equal to little 'ly in point of beauty , and I do not love she ( I do not dare ) ; but I think she a young lady of extraordinary attraction , and in point of
of gentility not to be surpass . when , in white trousers , carry she parasol for she , I feel proud to know he ; and believe that she could not choose but adore he with all she heart . and be both notable personage in my eyes ; but be to they what the sun be to two star . continue he protection of I , and prove a very useful friend ; since nobody da to annoy one whom he honoure with he countenance . he could not - or at all event he do not - defend I from , who be very severe with I ; but whenever I have be treat worse than usual , he always tell I that I want a little of he pluck , and that he would not have stood it himself ; which I feel he intend for encouragement , and consider to be very kind of he . there be one advantage , and only one that I know of , in 's severity . he find my placard in he way when he come up or down behind the form on which I sit , and want to make a cut at I in passing ; for this reason it be soon take off , and I see it no more . a accidental circumstance cement the intimacy between and I , in a manner that inspire I with great pride and satisfaction , though it sometimes lead to inconvenience . it happen on one occasion , when he be do I the honour of talk to I in the playground , that I hazard the observation that something or somebody - I forget what now - be like something or somebody in . he say nothing at the time ; but when I be go to be at night , ask I if I have get that book ? I tell he no , and explain how it be that I have read it , and all those other book of which I have make mention . ' and do you recollect they ? ' say . ' oh yes ,' I reply ; I have a good memory , and I believe I recollect they very well . ' then I tell you what , young , ' say , ' you shall tell them to I . I can not get to sleep very early at night , and I generally wake rather early in the morning . we will go over 'em one after another . we will make some regular arabian night of it . ' I feel extremely flatter by this arrangement , and we commence carry it into execution that very evening . what ravage I commit on my favourite author in the course of my interpretation of they , I be not in a condition to say , and should be very unwilling to know ; but I have a profound faith in they , and I have , to the best of my belief , a simple , earnest manner of narrating what I do narrate ; and these qualitie go a long way . the drawback be , that I be often sleepy at night , or out of spirit and indispose to resume the story ; and then it be rather hard work , and it must be do ; for to disappoint or to displease be of course out of the question . in the morning , too , when I feel weary , and should have enjoy another hour 's repose very much , it be a tiresome thing to be rouse , like the , and force into a long story before the get - up bell rang ; but be resolute ; and as he explain to I , in return , my sum and exercise , and anything in my tasnks that be too hard for I , I be no loser by the transaction . let I do myself justice , however . I be move by no interested or selfish motive , nor be I move by fear of he . I admire and love he , and he approval be return enough . it be so precious to I that I look back on these trifle , now , with a ach heart . be considerate , too ; and show he consideration , in one particular instance , in a unflinching manner that be a little tantalizing , I suspect , to poor Traddle and the rest . 's promise letter - what a comfortable letter it be ! - arrive before ' the half ' be many week old ; and with it a cake in a perfect nest of orang , and two bottle of cowslip wine . this treasure , as in duty bound , I lay at the foot of , and beg he to dispense . ' now , I will tell you what , young , ' say he : ' the wine shall be keep to wet you whistle when you be story - tell . ' I blush at the idea , and beg he , in my modesty , not to think of it . but he say he have observe I be sometimes hoarse - a little roopy be he exact expression - and it should be , every drop , devote to the purpose he have mention . accordingly , it be lock up in he box , and draw off by himself in a phial , and administer to I through a piece of quill in the cork , when I be suppose to be in want of a restorative . sometimes , to make it a more sovereign specific , he be so kind as to squeeze orange juice into it , or to stir it up with ginger , or dissolve a peppermint
peppermint drop in it ; and although I can not assert that the flavour be improve by these experiment , or that it be exactly the compound one would have choose for a stomachic , the last thing at night and the first thing in the morning , I drank it gratefully and be very sensible of he attention . we seem , to I , to have be month over , and month more over the other story . the institution never flag for want of a story , I be certain ; and the wine last out almost as well as the matter . poor Traddle - I never think of that boy but with a strange disposition to laugh , and with tear in my eye - be a sort of chorus , in general ; and affect to be convulse with mirth at the comic part , and to be overcome with fear when there be any passage of a alarming character in the narrative . this rather put I out , very often . it be a great jest of he , I recollect , to pretend that he could not keep he tooth from chattering , whenever mention be make of a in connexion with the adventur of ; and I remember that when meet the captain of the robber in , this unlucky joker counterfeit such a ague of terror , that he be overhear by , who be prowl about the passage , and handsomely flog for disorderly conduct in the bedroom . whatever I have within I that be romantic and dreamy , be encourage by so much story - tell in the dark ; and in that respect the pursuit may not have be very profitable to I . but they be cherish as a kind of plaything in my room , and the consciousness that this accomplishment of mine be bruit about among the boy , and attract a good deal of notice to I though I be the youngest there , stimulate I to exertion . in a school carry on by sheer cruelty , whether it be preside over by a dunce or not , there be not likely to be much learn . I believe we boy be , generally , as ignorant a set as any schoolboy in existence ; they be too much trouble and knock about to learn ; they could no more do that to advantage , than any one can do anything to advantage in a life of constant misfortune , torment , and worry . but my little vanity , and 's help , urge I on somehow ; and without save I from much , if anything , in the way of punishment , make I , for the time I be there , a exception to the general body , insomuch that I do steadily pick up some crumb of knowledge . in this I be much assist by , who have a liking for I that I be grateful to remember . it always give I pain to observe that treat he with systematic disparagement , and seldom lose a occasion of wounde he feeling , or induce other to do so . this troublead I the more for a long time , because I have soon tell , from whom I could no more keep such a secret , than I could keep a cake or any other tangible possession , about the two old woman have take I to see ; and I be always afraid that would let it out , and twit he with it . we little thought , any one of we , I dare say , when I eat my breakfast that first morning , and go to sleep under the shadow of the peacock 's feather to the sound of the flute , what consequence would come of the introduction into those alm - house of my insignificant person . but the visit have its unforeseen consequence ; and of a serious sort , too , in they way . one day when keep the house from indisposition , which naturally diffuse a lively joy through the school , there be a good deal of noise in the course of the morning 's work . the great relief and satisfaction experience by the boy make they difficult to manage ; and though the dread bring he wooden leg in twice or thrice , and take note of the principal offender ' name , no great impression be make by it , as they be pretty sure of get into trouble tomorrow , do what they would , and think it wise , no doubt , to enjoy themselves today . it be , properly , a half - holiday ; be . but as the noise in the playground would have disturb , and the weather be not favourable for go out walk , we be order into school in the afternoon , and set some lighter task than usual , which be make for the occasion . it be the day of the week on which go out to get he wig curl ; so , who always do the drudgery , whatever it be , keep school by himself . if I could associate the idea of a bull or a bear with anyone so mild as , I should think of he , in connexion with that afternoon when the uproar be at it be height , as of one of those animal , bait by a thousand dog . I recall he bend he aching head , support on he bony hand , over the book on he desk , and wretchedly endeavour to get on with he tiresome work , amidst a uproar that might have make the speaker of the of giddy . start in and out of they place , play at puss
puss in the corner with other boy ; there be laugh boy , singe boy , talk boy , dancing boy , how boy ; boy shuffle with they foot , boy whir about he , grinn , make face , mimick he behind he back and before he eye ; mimick he poverty , he boot , he coat , he mother , everything belong to he that they should have have consideration for . ' Silence ! ' cry , suddenly rise up , and strike he desk with the book . ' what do this mean ! it be impossible to bear it . it be madden . how can you do it to I , boy ? ' it be my book that he struck he desk with ; and as I stand beside he , follow he eye as it glance round the room , I see the boy all stop , some suddenly surprised , some half afraid , and some sorry perhaps . 's place be at the bottom of the school , at the opposite end of the long room . he be lounge with he back against the wall , and he hand in he pocket , and look at with he mouth shut up as if he be whistl , when look at he . ' Silence , ! ' say . ' Silence yourself , ' say , turn red . ' whom be you talk to ? ' ' sit down , ' say . ' sit down yourself , ' say , ' and mind you business . ' there be a titter , and some applause ; but be so white , that silence immediately succeed ; and one boy , who have dart out behind he to imitate he mother again , change he mind , and pretend to want a pen mende . ' if you think , , ' say , 'that I be not acquaint with the power you can establish over any mind here ' - he lay he hand , without consider what he do ( as I suppose ) , upon my head - 'or that I have not observe you , within a few minute , urge you juniors on to every sort of outrage against I , you be mistaken . ' 'I do not give myself the trouble of think at all about you , ' say , coolly ; 'so I be not mistaken , as it happen . ' ' and when you make use of you position of favouritism here , sir , ' pursue , with he lip trembl very much , 'to insult a gentleman -' 'a what ? - where be he ? ' say . here somebody cry out , ' shame , ! too bad ! ' it be Traddles ; whom instantly discomfit by bid he hold he tongue . - insult one who be not fortunate in life , sir , and who never give you the least offence , and the many reason for not insult whom you be old enough and wise enough to understand , ' say , with he lip trembl more and more , ' you commit a mean and base action . you can sit down or stand up as you please , sir . Copperfield , go on . ' ' yong , ' say , come forward up the room , ' stop a bit . I tell you what , , once for all . when you take the liberty of call I mean or base , or anything of that sort , you be a impudent beggar . you be always a beggar , you know ; but when you do that , you be a impudent beggar . ' I be not clear whether he be go to strike , or be go to strike he , or there be any such intention on either side . I see a rigidity come upon the whole school as if they have be turn into stone , and find in the midst of we , with at he side , and and look in at the door as if they be frightene . , with he elbow on he desk and he face in he hand , sit , for some moment , quite still . ' , ' say , shak he by the arm ; and he whisper be so audible now , that feel it unnecessary to repeat he word ; ' you have not forget yourself , I hope ? ' 'no , sir , no , ' return the master , show he face , and shake he head , and rub he hand in great agitation . ' no , sir . no . I have remembe myself , I - no , , I have not forget myself , I - I have remember myself , sir . I - I - could wish you have remember I a little sooner , . it - it - would have be more kind , sir , more just , sir . it would have save I something , sir . ' , look hard at , put he hand on 's shoulder , and get he foot upon the form close by , and sit upon the desk . after still look hard at from he throne , as he shook he head , and rub he hand , and remain in the same state of agitation , turn to , and say : ' now , sir , as he do not condescmend to tell I , what be this ? ' evad the question for a little while ; look in scorn and anger on he opponent , and remain silent . I could not help think even in that interval , I remember , what a noble fellow he
he be in appearance , and how homely and plain look opposed to he . ' what do he mean by talk about favourite , then ? ' say at length . ' Favourites ? ' repeat , with the vein in he forehead swell quickly . ' who talk about favourite ? ' 'o do , ' say . ' and pray , what do you mean by that , sir ? ' demand , turn angrily on he assistant . 'I mean , , ' he return in a low voice , 'as I say ; that no pupil have a right to avail himself of he position of favouritism to degrade I . ' 'To degray you ? ' say . 'My star ! but give I leave to ask you , what 's - you - name ' ; and here fold he arm , cane and all , upon he chest , and make such a knot of he brows that he little eye be hardly visible below they ; ' whether , when you talk about favourite , you show proper respect to I ? to I , sir , ' say , dart he head at he suddenly , and draw it back again , ' the principal of this establishment , and you employer . ' ' it be not judicious , sir , I be willing to admit , ' say . 'I should not have do so , if I have be cool . ' here Steerforth strike in . ' then he say I be mean , and then he say I be base , and then I call he a beggar . if I have be cool , perhaps I should not have call he a beggar . but I do , and I be ready to take the consequence of it . ' without consider , perhaps , whether there be any consequence to be take , I feel quite in a glow at this gallant speech . it make a impression on the boy too , for there be a low stir among they , though no one speak a word . 'I be surprised , - although you candour do you honour , ' say , ' do you honour , certainly - I be surprised , Steerforth , I must say , that you should attach such a epithet to any person employ and pay in , . ' give a short laugh . ' that be not a answer , sir , ' say , 'to my remark . I expect more than that from you , . ' if look homely , in my eye , before the handsome boy , it would be quite impossible to say how homely look . ' let he deny it , ' say . ' deny that he be a beggar , ? ' cry . ' why , where do he go a - begging ? ' ' if he be not a beggar himself , he near relation 's one , ' say . ' it be all the same . ' he glance at I , and 's hand gently pat I upon the shoulder . I look up with a flush upon my face and remorse in my heart , but 's eye be fix on . he continue to pat I kindly on the shoulder , but he look at he . ' since you expect I , , to justify myself , ' say , ' and to say what I mean , - what I have to say be , that he mother life on charity in a alm - house . ' still look at he , and still pat I kindly on the shoulder , and say to himself , in a whisper , if I hear right : ' yes , I think so . ' turn to he assistant , with a severe frown and laboure politeness : ' now , you hear what this gentleman say , . have the goodness , if you please , to set he right before the assembled school . ' ' he be right , sir , without correction , ' return , in the midst of a dead silence ; ' what he have say be true . ' ' be so good then as declare publicly , will you , ' say , put he head on one side , and roll he eye round the school , ' whether it ever come to my knowledge until this moment ? ' 'I believe not directly , ' he return . ' why , you know not , ' say . ' do not you , man ? ' 'I apprehend you never suppose my worldly circumstance to be very good , ' reply the assistant . ' you know what my position be , and always have be , here . ' 'I apprehend , if you come to that , ' say , with he vein swell again bigger than ever , ' that you have be in a wrong position altogether , and mistake this for a charity school . , we will part , if you please . the sooner the better . ' ' there be no time , ' answer , rise , ' like the present . ' ' Sir , to you ! ' say . 'I take my leave of you , , and all of you , ' say , glance round the room , and again pat I gently on the shoulders . ' , the best wish I can leave you be that you may come to be asham of what you have do today . at present I would prefer to see you anything rather than a friend , to I , or to anyone in whom I feel a interest . ' once
once more he lay he hand upon my shoulder ; and then take he flute and a few book from he desk , and leave the key in it for he successor , he go out of the school , with he property under he arm . then make a speech , through , in which he thank for assert ( though perhaps too warmly ) the independence and respectability of ; and which he wound up by shaking hand with , while we give three cheer - I do not quite know what for , but I suppose for , and so join in they ardently , though I feel miserable . then can Traddles for be discover in tear , instead of cheer , on account of 's departure ; and go back to he sofa , or he bed , or wherever he have come from . we be leave to ourselve now , and look very blank , I recollect , on one another . for myself , I feel so much self - reproach and contrition for my part in what have happen , that nothing would have enable I to keep back my tear but the fear that , who often look at I , I see , might think it unfriendly - or , I should rather say , consider we relative age , and the feeling with which I regard he , undutiful - if I show the emotion which distress I . he be very angry with Traddles , and say he be glad he have catch it . poor Traddle , who have pass the stage of lie with he head upon the desk , and be relieive himself as usual with a burst of skeleton , say he do not care . be ill - use . ' who have ill - use he , you girl ? ' say . ' why , you have , ' return Traddles . ' what have I do ? ' say . ' what have you do ? ' retort Traddles . ' hurt he feeling , and lose he he situation . ' ' he feeling ? ' repeat disdainfully . ' he feeling will soon get the better of it , I will be bound . he feeling be not like yours , . as to he situation - which be a precious one , be not it ? - do you suppose I be not go to write home , and take care that he get some money ? Polly ? ' we think this intention very noble in , whose mother be a widow , and rich , and would do almost anything , it be say , that he ask she . we be all extremely glad to see Traddles so put down , and exalt to the sky : especially when he tell we , as he condescende to do , that what he have do have be do expressly for we , and for we cause ; and that he have confer a great boon upon we by unselfishly do it . but I must say that when I be go on with a story in the dark that night , 's old flute seem more than once to sound mournfully in my ear ; and that when at last be tired , and I lay down in my bed , I fancie it play so sorrowfully somewhere , that I be quite wretch . I soon forget he in the contemplation of , who , in a easy amateur way , and without any book ( he seem to I to know everything by heart ) , take some of he class until a new master be find . the new master come from a grammar school ; and before he enter on he duty , dine in the parlour one day , to be introduce to . approve of he highly , and tell we he be a . without exactly understand what learn distinction be mean by this , I respecte he greatly for it , and have no doubt whatever of he superior knowledge : though he never take the pain with I - not that I be anybody - that have take . there be only one other event in this half - year , out of the daily school - life , that make a impression upon I which still survive . it survive for many reason . one afternoon , when we be all harass into a state of dire confusion , and be lay about he dreadfully , come in , and call out in he usual strong way : ' visitor for ! ' a few word be interchange between he and , as , who the visitor were , and what room they be to be show into ; and then I , who have , accord to , stand up on the announcement be make , and feel quite faint with astonishment , be tell to go by the back stair and get a clean frill on , before I repair to the dining - room . these order I obey , in such a flutter and hurry of my young spirit as I have never know before ; and when I get to the parlour door , and the thought come into my head that it might be my mother - I have only thought of or until then - I draw back my hand from the lock , and stop to have a sob before I go in . at first I see nobody ; but feel a pressure against the door , I look round it , and there , to my amazement , be and , duck at I with they hat , and squeeze one another against the wall . I could not help laugh ; but it be
be much more in the pleasure of see they , than at the appearance they make . we shook hand in a very cordial way ; and I laugh and laugh , until I pull out my pocket - handkerchief and wip my eye . ( who never shut he mouth once , I remember , during the visit ) show great concern when he see I do this , and nudge to say something . ' cheer up , bor '! ' say , in he simpering way . ' why , how you have grow ! ' ' be I grow ? ' I say , dry my eye . I be not cry at anything in particular that I know of ; but somehow it make I cry , to see old friend . ' , bor ' ? be not he grow ! ' say . ' be not he grow ! ' say . they make I laugh again by laugh at each other , and then we all three laugh until I be in danger of cry again . ' do you know how mama be , ? ' I say . ' and how my dear , dear , old be ? ' ' , ' say . ' and little , and ? ' 'On - common , ' say . there be a silence . , to relieve it , take two prodigious lobster , and a enormous crab , and a large canva bag of shrimp , out of he pocket , and pile they up in 's arm . ' you see , ' say , ' know as you be partial to a little relish with you wittle when you be along with we , we take the liberty . the old Mawther bile th'ey , she do . bile th'ey . yes , ' say , slowly , who I think appear to stick to the subject on account of have no other subject ready , ' . , I do assure you , she bile th'ey . ' I express my thanks ; and , after look at , who stand smile sheepishly over the shellfish , without make any attempt to help he , say : ' we come , you see , the wind and tide make in we favour , in one of we Yarmouth lug to ' . my sister she write to I the name of this here place , and write to I as if ever I chance to come to ' , I be to come over and inquire for and give she dooty , humbly wish he well and report of the fam 'ly as they be oncommon toe - be - sure . 'ly , you see , she will write to my sister when I go back , as I see you and as you be similarly oncommon , and so we make it quite a merry - go - rounder . ' I be oblige to consider a little before I understand what mean by this figure , expressive of a complete circle of intelligence . I then thank he heartily ; and say , with a consciousness of reddening , that I suppose little 'ly be alte too , since we use to pick up shells and pebble on the beach ? ' she be get to be a woman , that be wot she be get to be , ' say . ' ask he . ' he mean , who beam with delight and assent over the bag of shrimp . 'her pretty face ! ' say , with he own shining like a light . ' she learn ! ' say . 'her writing ! ' say . ' why it be as black as jet ! and so large it be , you might see it anywhere . ' it be perfectly delightful to behold with what enthusiasm become inspire when he think of he little favourite . he stand before I again , he bluff hairy face irradiat with a joyful love and pride , for which I can find no description . he honest eye fire up , and sparkle , as if they depth be stir by something bright . he broad chest heafe with pleasure . he strong loose hand clench themselves , in he earnestness ; and he emphasize what he say with a right arm that show , in my pigmy view , like a sledge - hammer . be quite as earnest as he . I dare say they would have say much more about she , if they have not be abash by the unexpected come in of , who , see I in a corner speak with two stranger , stop in a song he be singe , and say : 'I do not know you be here , young ! ' ( for it be not the usual visiting room ) and cross by we on he way out . I be not sure whether it be in the pride of have such a friend as , or in the desire to explain to he how I come to have such a friend as , that I call to he as he be go away . but I say , modestly - good Heaven , how it all come back to I this long time afterwards ! - ' do not go , , if you please . these be two boatman - very kind , good people - who be relation of my nurse , and have come from to see I . ' ' aye , aye ? ' say , return . 'I be glad to see they . how be you both ? ' there be a ease in he manner - a gay and light manner it be , but not swagger - which I still
still believe to have borne a kind of enchantment with it . I still believe he , in virtue of this carriage , he animal spirit , he delightful voice , he handsome face and figure , and , for atch I know , of some inborn power of attraction besides ( which I think a few people possess ) , to have carry a spell with he to which it be a natural weakness to yield , and which not many person could withstand . I could not but see how pleased they be with he , and how they seem to open they heart to he in a moment . ' you must let they know at home , if you please , ,' I say , ' when that letter be send , that be very kind to I , and that I do not know what I should ever do here without he . ' ' Nonsense ! ' say , laugh . ' you must not tell they anything of the sort . ' ' and if ever come into or , ,' I say , ' while I be there , you may depend upon it I shall bring he to , if he will let I , to see you house . you never see such a good house , . it be make out of a boat ! ' ' may out of a boat , be it ? ' say . ' it be the right sort of a house for such a thorough - build boatman . ' ' so ' tis , sir , so ' tis , sir , ' say , grinn . ' you be right , young gen'l be 'n ! bor ' , gen 'l be 'n 's right . a thorough - build boatman ! Hor , hor ! that be what he be , too ! ' be no less pleased than he nephew , though he modesty forbade he to claim a personal compliment so vociferously . ' well , sir ,' he say , bow and chuckl , and tuck in the end of he neckerchief at he breast : 'i thankee , sir , I thankee ! I do my endeavour in my line of life , sir . ' ' the best of man can do no more , , ' say . he have get he name already . 'I will pound it , it be wot you do yourself , sir , ' say , shak he head , ' and wot you do well - right well ! I thankee , sir . I be obleege to you , sir , for you welcoming manner of I . I be rough , sir , but I be ready - least way , I hope I be ready , you unnerstand . my house be not much for to see , sir , but it be hearty at you service if ever you should come along with to see it . I be a reg'lar , I be , ' say , by which he mean snail , and this be in allusion to he be slow to go , for he have attempt to go after every sentence , and have somehow or other come back again ; ' but I wish you both well , and I wish you happy ! ' echo this sentiment , and we part with they in the heartiest manner . I be almost tempt that evening to tell about pretty little Em'ly , but I be too timid of mention she name , and too much afraid of he laugh at I . I remember that I think a good deal , and in a uneasy sort of way , about have say that she be get on to be a woman ; but I decide that be nonsense . we transport the shellfish , or the ' relish ' as have modestly call it , up into we room unobserved , and make a great supper that even . but Traddle could not get happily out of it . he be too unfortunate even to come through a supper like anybody else . he be take ill in the night - quite prostrate he be - in consequence of crab ; and after be drug with black draught and blue pill , to a extent which ( whose father be a doctor ) say be enough to undermine a horse 's constitution , receive a caning and six chapter of testament for refuse to confess . the rest of the half - year be a jumble in my recollection of the daily strife and struggle of we life ; of the wane summer and the change season ; of the frosty morning when we be ring out of bed , and the cold , cold smell of the dark night when we be ring into bed again ; of the evening schoolroom dimly light and indifferently warm , and the morning schoolroom which be nothing but a great shivering - machine ; of the alternation of boiled beef with roast beef , and boil mutton with roast mutton ; of clod of bread - and - butter , dog 's - eare lesson - book , crack slate , tear - blot copy - book , caning , rulering , hair - cutting , rainy Sunday , suet - pudding , and a dirty atmosphere of ink , surround all . I well remember though , how the distant idea of the holiday , after see for a immense time to be a stationary speck , begin to come towards we , and to grow and grow . how from counting month , we come to week , and then to day ; and how I then begin to be afraid that I should not be send for
for and when I learn from that I have be send for , and be certainly to go home , have dim foreboding that I might break my leg first . how the breaking - up day change it be place fast , at last , from the week after next to next week , this week , the day after tomorrow , tomorrow , today , tonight - when I be inside the mail , and go home . I have many a broken sleep inside the mail , and many a incoherent dream of all these thing . but when I awoke at interval , the ground outside the window be not the playground of , and the sound in my ear be not the sound of Creakle give it to Traddles , but the sound of the coachman touch up the horse . chapter 8 my holiday . especially one when we arrive before day at the inn where the mail stop , which be not the inn where my friend the waiter liv , I be show up to a nice little bedroom , with pain on the door . very cold I be , I know , notwithstand the hot tea they have give I before a large fire downstairs ; and very glad I be to turn into the 's bed , pull the Dolphin 's blanket round my head , and go to sleep . the carrier be to call for I in the morning at nine o'clock . I get up at eight , a little giddy from the shortness of my night 's rest , and be ready for he before the appointed time . he receive I exactly as if not five minute have elapse since we be last together , and I have only be into the hotel to get change for sixpence , or something of that sort . as soon as I and my box be in the cart , and the carrier seat , the lazy horse walk away with we all at he accustom pace . ' you look very well , ,' I say , think he would like to know it . rub he cheek with he cuff , and then look at he cuff as if he expect to find some of the bloom upon it ; but make no other acknowledgement of the compliment . 'I give you message , ,' I say : 'I write to . ' 'Ah ! ' say . seem gruff , and answer drily . ' be not it right , ? ' I ask , after a little hesitation . ' why , no , ' say . ' not the message ? ' ' the message be right enough , perhaps , ' say ; ' but it come to a end there . ' not understand what he mean , I repeat inquisitively : ' come to a end , ? ' ' nothing come of it ,' he explain , look at I sideway . ' no answer . ' ' there be a answer expect , be there , ? ' say I , open my eye . for this be a new light to I . ' when a man say he be willin ' , ' say Barkis , turn he glance slowly on I again , ' it be as much as to say , that man 's a - waitin ' for a answer . ' ' well , ? ' ' well , ' say , carry he eye back to he horse 's ears ; ' that man be be a - waitin ' for a answer ever since . ' ' have you tell she so , ? ' 'no - no ,' grow , reflec about it . 'I be not get no call to go and tell she so . I never say six word to she myself , I be not a - goin ' to tell she so . ' ' would you like I to do it , ? ' say I , doubtfully . ' you might tell she , if you would , ' say , with another slow look at I , ' that be a - waitin ' for a answer . say you - what name be it ? ' 'her name ? ' 'Ah ! ' say , with a nod of he head . ' . ' ' Chrisen name ? or nat'ral name ? ' say . 'Oh , it be not she Christian name . she christian name be . ' ' be it though ? ' say . he seem to find a immense fund of reflection in this circumstance , and sit pondering and inwardly whistling for some time . ' well ! ' he resume at length . ' say you , " Peggotty ! be waitin ' for a answer . " say she , perhaps , " answer to what ? " say you , " to what I tell you . " " what be that ? " say she . " be willin ' , " say you . ' this extremely artful suggestion accompany with a nudge of he elbow that give I quite a stitch in my side . after that , he slouch over he horse in he usual manner ; and make no other reference to the subject except , half a hour afterwards , take a piece of chalk from he pocket , and write up , inside the tilt of the cart , ' ' - apparently as a private memorandum . ah , what a strange feeling it be to be go home when it be not home , and to find that every object I look at , remind I of the happy old home , which be like a dream I could never dream
dream again ! the day when my mother and I and be all in all to one another , and there be no one to come between we , rise up before I so sorrowfully on the road , that I be not sure I be glad to be there - not sure but that I would rather have remain away , and forget it in 's company . but there I be ; and soon I be at we house , where the bare old elm - tree wrng they many hand in the bleak wintry air , and shred of the old rook '- nest drift away upon the wind . the carrier put my box down at the garden - gate , and leave I . I walk along the path towards the house , glance at the window , and fear at every step to see or lower out of one of they . no face appear , however ; and be come to the house , and know how to open the door , before dark , without knock , I go in with a quiet , timid step . know how infantine the memory may have been , that be awaken within I by the sound of my mother 's voice in the old parlour , when I set foot in the hall . she be singe in a low tone . I think I must have lain in she arm , and hear she singe so to I when I be but a baby . the strain be new to I , and yet it be so old that it fill my heart brim - full ; like a friend come back from a long absence . I believe , from the solitary and thoughtful way in which my mother murmure she song , that she be alone . and I go softly into the room . she be sit by the fire , suck a infant , whose tiny hand she hold against she neck . she eye be look down upon its face , and she sit singe to it . I be so far right , that she have no other companion . I speak to she , and she start , and cry out . but see I , she call I she dear Davy , she own boy ! and come half across the room to meet I , knee down upon the ground and kiss I , and lay my head down on she bosom near the little creature that be nestle there , and put it be hand to my lip . I wish I have die . I wish I have die then , with that feeling in my heart ! I should have be more fit for than i ever have be since . ' he be you brother , ' say my mother , fond I . ' Davy , my pretty boy ! my poor child ! ' then she kiss I more and more , and clasp I round the neck . this she be do when come run in , and bounce down on the ground beside we , and go mad about we both for a quarter of a hour . it seem that I have not be expect so soon , the carrier be much before he usual time . it seem , too , that and have go out upon a visit in the neighbourhood , and would not return before night . I have never hope for this . I have never think it possible that we three could be together undisturbed , once more ; and I feel , for the time , as if the old day be come back . we dine together by the fireside . be in attendance to wait upon we , but my mother would not let she do it , and make she dine with we . I have my own old plate , with a brown view of a man - of - war in full sail upon it , which have hoard somewhere all the time I have be away , and would not have have broken , she say , for a hundred pound . I have my own old mug with on it , and my own old little knife and fork that would not cut . while we be at table , I think it a favourable occasion to tell about , who , before I have finish what I have to tell she , begin to laugh , and throw she apron over she face . ' , ' say my mother . ' what be the matter ? ' only laugh the more , and hold she apron tight over she face when my mother try to pull it away , and sit as if she head be in a bag . ' what be you do , you stupid creature ? ' say my mother , laugh . 'Oh , drat the man ! ' cry . ' he want to marry I . ' ' it would be a very good match for you ; would not it ? ' say my mother . 'Oh ! I do not know , ' say . ' do not ask I . I would not have he if he be make of gold . nor I would not have anybody . ' ' then , why do not you tell he so , you ridiculous thing ? ' say my mother . ' tell he so , ' retort , look out of she apron . ' he have never say a word to I about it . he know better . if he be to make so bold as say a word to I , I should slap he face . ' she own be as red as ever I see
see it , or any other face , I think ; but she only cover it again , for a few moment at a time , when she be take with a violent fit of laughter ; and after two or three of those attack , go on with she dinner . I remarke that my mother , though she smile when look at she , become more serious and thoughtful . I have see at first that she be change . she face be very pretty still , but it look careworn , and too delicate ; and she hand be so thin and white that it see to I to be almost transparent . but the change to which I now refer be superadded to this : it be in she manner , which become anxious and fluttered . at last she say , put out she hand , and lay it affectionately on the hand of she old servant , ' Peggotty , dear , you be not go to be married ? ' , ? ' return , stare . ' bless you , no ! ' ' not just yet ? ' say my mother , tenderly . ' never ! ' cry . my mother take she hand , and say : ' do not leave I , . stay with I . it will not be for long , perhaps . what should I ever do without you ! ' ' I leave you , my precious ! ' cry . ' not for all the world and he wife . why , what be put that in you silly little head ? ' - for have be use of old to talk to my mother sometimes like a child . but my mother make no answer , except to thank she , and go run on in she own fashion . ' I leave you ? I think I see myself . Peggotty go away from you ? I should like to catch she at it ! no , no , no , ' say , shak she head , and fold she arm ; ' not she , my dear . it be not that there be not some cat that would be well enough please if she do , but they sha ' not be pleased . they shall be aggravate . I will stay with you till I be a cross cranky old woman . and when I be too deaf , and too lame , and too blind , and too mumbly for want of tooth , to be of any use at all , even to be find fault with , than I shall go to my , and ask he to take I in . ' ' and , , ' say I , 'I shall be glad to see you , and I will make you as welcome as a queen . ' ' bless you dear heart ! ' cry . 'I know you will ! ' and she kiss I beforehand , in grateful acknowledgement of my hospitality . after that , she cover she head up with she apron again and have another laugh about . after that , she take the baby out of its little cradle , and nurse it . after that , she clear the dinner table ; after that , come in with another cap on , and she work - box , and the yard - measure , and the bit of wax - candle , all just the same as ever . we sit round the fire , and talk delightfully . I tell they what a hard master be , and they pitie I very much . I tell they what a fine fellow be , and what a patron of mine , and say she would walk a score of mile to see he . I take the little baby in my arm when it be awake , and nurse it lovingly . when it be asleep again , I creep close to my mother 's side accord to my old custom , break now a long time , and sit with my arm embrace she waist , and my little red cheek on she shoulder , and once more feel she beautiful hair droop over I - like a angel 's wing as I use to think , I recollect - and be very happy indeed . while I sit thus , look at the fire , and see picture in the red - hot coal , I almost believe that I have never be away ; that and be such picture , and would vanish when the fire get low ; and that there be nothing real in all that I remember , save my mother , , and I . darn away at a stocking as long as she could see , and then sit with it draw on she left hand like a glove , and she needle in she right , ready to take another stitch whenever there be a blaze . I can not conceive whose stocking they can have be that be always darn , or where such a unfailing supply of stocking in want of darning can have come from . from my earliest infancy she seem to have be always employ in that class of needlework , and never by any chance in any other . 'I wonder , ' say , who be sometimes seize with a fit of wonder on some most unexpected topic , ' what be become of 's great- aunt ? ' ' , ! ' observ my mother , rouse herself from a reverie , ' what nonsense you talk ! ' ' well , but I really do wonder , ma 'am , ' say . ' what can have put such a person in you head ?
? ' inquire my mother . ' be there nobody else in the world to come there ? ' 'I do not know how it be , ' say , ' unless it be on account of be stupid , but my head never can pick and choose it be people . they come and they go , and they do not come and they do not go , just as they like . I wonder what be become of she ? ' ' how absurd you be , ! ' return my mother . ' one would suppose you want a second visit from she . ' ' forbid ! ' cry . ' well then , do not talk about such uncomfortable thing , there be a good soul , ' say my mother . ' be shut up in she cottage by the sea , no doubt , and will remain there . at all event , she be not likely ever to trouble we again . ' ' no ! ' muse . ' no , that be not likely at all . - I wonder , if she be to die , whether she would leave anything ? ' ' good gracious I , , ' return my mother , ' what a nonsensical woman you be ! when you know that she take offence at the poor dear boy be ever be bear at all . ' 'I suppose she would not be inclin to forgive he now , ' hint . ' why should she be inclin to forgive he now ? ' say my mother , rather sharply . ' now that he have get a brother , I mean , ' say . my mother immediately begin to cry , and wonder how da to say such a thing . ' as if this poor little innocent in it be cradle have ever do any harm to you or anybody else , you jealous thing ! ' say she . ' you have much better go and marry , the carrier . why do not you ? ' 'I should make happy , if I be to , ' say . ' what a bad disposition you have , ! ' return my mother . ' you be as jealous of as it be possible for a ridiculous creature to be . you want to keep the key yourself , and give out all the thing , I suppose ? I should not be surprise if you do . when you know that she only do it out of kindness and the best intention ! you know she do , - you know it well . ' mutter something to the effect of ' bother the best intention ! ' and something else to the effect that there be a little too much of the best intention go on . 'I know what you mean , you cross thing , ' say my mother . 'I understand you , , perfectly . you know I do , and I wonder you do not colour up like fire . but one point at a time . be the point now , , and you sha ' not escape from it . have not you hear she say , over and over again , that she think I be too thoughtless and too - a - a - ' ' pretty , ' suggest . ' well , ' return my mother , half laugh , ' and if she be so silly as to say so , can I be blame for it ? ' ' no one say you can , ' say . ' no , I should hope not , indeed ! ' return my mother . ' have not you hear she say , over and over again , that on this account she wish to spare I a great deal of trouble , which she think I be not suit for , and which I really do not know myself that I be sui for ; and be not she up early and late , and go to and continually - and do not she do all sort of thing , and grope into all sort of place , coal - hole and pantry and I do not know where , that can not be very agreeable - and do you mean to insinuate that there be not a sort of devotion in that ? ' 'I do not insinuate at all , ' say . ' you do , , ' return my mother . ' you never do anything else , except you work . you be always insinuat . you revel in it . and when you talk of 's good intention -' 'I never talk of th'ey , ' say . 'no , , ' return my mother , ' but you insinuate . that be what I tell you just now . that be the worst of you . you will insinuate . I say , at the moment , that I understand you , and you see I do . when you talk of 's good intention , and pretend to slight they ( for I do not believe you really do , in you heart , ) , you must be as well convince as I be how good they be , and how they actuate he in everything . if he seem to have be at all stern with a certain person , - you understand , and so I be sure do , that I be not allud to anybody present - it be solely because he be satisfied that it be for a certain person 's benefit . he naturally love a certain person , on my account ; and act solely for a certain person 's good . he be better able to judge of it than
than I be ; for I very well know that I be a weak , light , girlish creature , and that he be a firm , grave , serious man . and he take , ' say my mother , with the tear which be engender in she affectionate nature , steal down she face , ' he take great pain with I ; and I ought to be very thankful to he , and very submissive to he even in my thought ; and when I be not , Peggotty , I worry and condemn myself , and feel doubtful of my own heart , and do not know what to do . ' sit with she ching on the foot of the stocking , look silently at the fire . ' there , , ' say my mother , change she tone , 'do not let we fall out with one another , for I could not bear it . you be my true friend , I know , if I have any in the world . when I call you a ridiculous creature , or a vexatious thing , or anything of that sort , Peggotty , I only mean that you be my true friend , and always have be , ever since the night when first bring I home here , and you come out to the gate to meet I . ' be not slow to respond , and ratify the treaty of friendship by give I one of she best hug . I think I have some glimpse of the real character of this conversation at the time ; but I be sure , now , that the good creature originate it , and take she part in it , merely that my mother might comfort herself with the little contradictory summary in which she have indulge . the design be efficacious ; for I remember that my mother see more at ease during the rest of the evening , and that observe she less . when we have have we tea , and the ash be thrown up , and the candle snuff , I read a chapter out of the , in remembrance of old time - she take it out of she pocket : I do not know whether she have keep it there ever since - and then we talk about , which bring I round again to , who be my great subject . we be very happy ; and that evening , as the last of its race , and destin evermore to close that volume of my life , will never pass out of my memory . it be almost ten o'clock before we hear the sound of wheel . we all get up then ; and my mother say hurriedly that , as it be so late , and and approve of early hour for young people , perhaps I have better go to bed . I kiss she , and go upstairs with my candle directly , before they come in . it appear to my childish fancy , as I ascend to the bedroom where I have be imprison , that they bring a cold blast of air into the house which blow away the old familiar feeling like a feather . I feel uncomfortable about go down to breakfast in the morning , as I have never set eye on since the day when I commit my memorable offence . however , as it must be do , I go down , after two or three false start half - way , and as many run back on tiptoe to my own room , and present myself in the parlour . he be stand before the fire with he back to it , while make the tea . he look at I steadily as I enter , but make no sign of recognition whatever . I go up to he , after a moment of confusion , and say : 'I beg you pardon , sir . I be very sorry for what I do , and I hope you will forgive I . ' 'I be glad to hear you be sorry , , ' he reply . the hand he give I be the hand I have bite . I could not restrain my eye from rest for a instant on a red spot upon it ; but it be not so red as I turn , when I meet that sinister expression in he face . ' how do you do , ma 'am ? ' I say to . 'Ah , dear I ! ' sigh , give I the tea - caddy scoop instead of she finger . ' how long be the holiday ? ' 'A month , ma'am . ' ' count from when ? ' ' from today , ma'am . ' 'Oh ! ' say . ' then here have one day off . ' she keep a calendar of the holiday in this way , and every morning check a day off in exactly the same manner . she do it gloomily until she come to ten , but when she get into two figure she become more hopeful , and , as the time advanced , even jocular . it be on this very first day that I have the misfortune to throw she , though she be not subject to such weakness in general , into a state of violent consternation . I come into the room where she and my mother be sit ; and the baby ( who be only a few week old ) be on my mother 's lap , I take it very carefully in my arm . suddenly give such a scream that I all but drop it . ' my dear ! ' cry my mother . ' good heaven , , do
do you see ? ' exclaim . ' see what , my dear ? ' say my mother ; ' where ? ' 'he be get it ! ' cry . ' the boy have get the baby ! ' she be limp with horror ; but stiffen herself to make a dart at I , and take it out of my arm . then , she turn faint ; and be so very ill that they be oblige to give she cherry brandy . I be solemnly interdict by she , on she recovery , from touch my brother any more on any pretence whatever ; and my poor mother , who , I could see , wish otherwise , meekly confirm the interdict , by say : ' no doubt you be right , my dear . ' on another occasion , when we three be together , this same dear baby - it be truly dear to I , for we mother 's sake - be the innocent occasion of have go into a passion . my mother , who have be look at its eye as it lay upon she lap , say : ' Davy ! come here ! ' and look at mine . I see lay she bead down . 'i declare , ' say my mother , gently , ' they be exactly alike . I suppose they be mine . I think they be the colour of mine . but they be wonderfully alike . ' ' what be you talk about , ? ' say . ' my dear , ' falter my mother , a little abash by the harsh tone of this inquiry , ' I find that the baby 's eye and Davy's be exactly alike . ' ' ! ' say , rise angrily , ' you be a positive fool sometimes . ' 'My dear , ' remonstrate my mother . 'a positive fool , ' say . ' who else could compare my brother 's baby with you boy ? they be not at all alike . they be exactly unlike . they be utterly dissimilar in all respects . I hope they will ever remain so . I will not sit here , and hear such comparison make . ' with that she stalk out , and make the door bing after she . in short , I be not a favourite with . in short , I be not a favourite there with anybody , not even with myself ; for those who do like I could not show it , and those who do not , show it so plainly that I have a sensitive consciousness of always appear constrain , boorish , and dull . I feel that I make they as uncomfortable as they make I . if I come into the room where they be , and they be talk together and my mother seem cheerful , a anxious cloud would steal over she face from the moment of my entrance . if be in he best humour , I check he . if be in she worst , I intensify it . I have perception enough to know that my mother be the victim always ; that she be afraid to speak to I or to be kind to I , lest she should give they some offence by she manner of do so , and receive a lecture afterwards ; that she be not only ceaselessly afraid of she own offending , but of my offending , and uneasily watch they look if I only move . therefore I resolve to keep myself as much out of they way as I could ; and many a wintry hour do I hear the church clock strike , when I be sit in my cheerless bedroom , wrap in my little great - coat , po over a book . in the evening , sometimes , I go and sit with in the kitchen . there I be comfortable , and not afraid of be myself . but neither of these resource be approve of in the parlour . the torment humour which be dominant there stop they both . I be still hold to be necessary to my poor mother 's training , and , as one of she trial , could not be suffer to absent myself . ' , ' say , one day after dinner when I be go to leave the room as usual ; 'I be sorry to observe that you be of a sullen disposition . ' 'as sulky as a bear ! ' say . I stand still , and hang my head . ' now , , ' say , 'a sull obdurate disposition be , of all temper , the worst . ' ' and the boy 's be , of all such disposition that ever I have see , ' remark he sister , ' the most confirm and stubborn . I think , my dear , even you must observe it ? ' 'I beg you pardon , my dear , ' say my mother , ' but be you quite sure - I be certain you will excuse I , my dear - that you understand ? ' 'I should be somewhat asham of myself , , ' return , ' if I could not understand the boy , or any boy . I do not profess to be profound ; but I do lay claim to common sense . ' ' no doubt , my dear , ' return my mother , ' you understanding be very vigorous -' ' oh dear , no ! pray do not say that , , ' interpose , angrily . ' but I be sure it be , ' resume my mother ; ' and everybody know it be . I profit so much by it myself ,
, in many way - at least I ink to - that no one can be more convinced of it than myself ; and therefore I speak with great diffidence , my dear , I assure you . ' ' we will say I do not understand the boy , , ' return , arrange the little fetter on she wrist . ' we will agree , if you please , that I do not understand he at all . he be much too deep for I . but perhaps my brother 's penetration may enable he to have some insight into he character . and I believe my brother be speak on the subject when we - not very decently - interrupt he . ' 'I think , , ' say , in a low grave voice , ' that there may be better and more dispassionate judge of such a question than you . ' ' , ' reply my mother , timidly , ' you be a far better judge of all question than I pretend to be . both you and be . I only say -' ' you only say something weak and inconsiderate , ' he reply . ' try not to do it again , my dear Clara , and keep a watch upon yourself . ' my mother 's lip move , as if she answer ' yes , my dear , ' but she say nothing aloud . 'I be sorry , , I remark , ' say , turn he head and he eye stifinitely towards I , 'too observe that you be of a sullen disposition . this be not a character that I can suffer to develop itself beneath my eye without a effort at improvement . you must endeaavor , sir , to change it . we must endeaavor to change it for you . ' 'I beg you pardon , sir ,' I falter . 'I have never mean to be sull since I come back . ' ' do not take refuge in a lie , sir ! ' he return so fiercely , that I see my mother involuntarily put out she trembling hand as if to interpose between we . ' you have withdraw yourself in you sullenness to you own room . you have keep you own room when you ought to have be here . you know now , once for all , that I require you to be here , and not there . further , that I require you to bring obedience here . you know I , . I will have it done . ' give a hoarse chuckle . 'I will have a respectful , prompt , and ready bear towards myself , ' he continue , ' and towards , and towards you mother . I will not have this room shunn as if it be infect , at the pleasure of a child . sit down . ' he order I like a dog , and I obey like a dog . ' one thing more , ' he say . 'I observe that you have a attachment to low and common company . you be not to associate with servants . the kitchen will not improve you , in the many respects in which you need improvement . of the woman who abet you , I say nothing - since you , , ' address my mother in a lower voice , ' from old associations and long - establish fancie , have a weakness respect she which be not yet overcome . ' 'a most unaccountable delusion it be ! ' cry . 'I only say ,' he resume , address I , ' that I disapprove of you preferring such company as , and that it be to be abandon . now , , you understand I , and you know what will be the consequence if you fail to obey I to the letter . ' I know well - better perhaps than he think , as far as my poor mother be concerned - and I obey he to the letter . I retreat to my own room no more ; I take refuge with no more ; but sit wearily in the parlour day after day , look forward to night , and bedtime . what irksome constraint I undergo , sit in the same attitude hour upon hour , afraid to move a arm or a leg lest should complain ( as she do on the least pretence ) of my restlessness , and afraid to move a eye lest she should light on some look of dislike or scrutiny that would find new cause for complaint in mine ! what intolerable dulness to sit listen to the ticking of the clock ; and watch 's little shiny steel bead as she string they ; and wonder whether she would ever be married , and if so , to what sort of unhappy man ; and count the division in the moulding of the chimney - piece ; and wander away , with my eye , to the ceiling , among the curl and corkscrew in the paper on the wall ! what walk I take alone , down muddy lane , in the bad winter weather , carry that parlour , and and in it , everywhere : a monstrous load that I be oblige to bear , a daymare that there be no possibility of break in , a weight that brood on my wit , and blunt they ! what meal I have in silence and embarrassment , always feel that there be a knife and fork too many , and that mine ; a appetite too many , and that mine ; a plate and chair too many , and those mine ; a somebody too many , and that I ! what evening ,
, when the candle come , and I be expect to employ myself , but , not da to read a entertaine book , po over some hard - head , harder - hear treatise on arithmetic ; when the table of weight and measure set themselves to tune , as ' ' , or ' away with ' ; when they would not stand still to be learn , but would go thread my grandmother 's needle through my unfortunate head , in at one ear and out at the other ! what yawn and doze I lapse into , in spite of all my care ; what start I come out of conceale sleep with ; what answer I never get , to little observation that I rarely make ; what a blank space I seem , which everybody overlook , and yet be in everybody 's way ; what a heavy relief it be to hear hail the first stroke of nine at night , and order I to bed ! thus the holiday lag away , until the morning come when say : ' here be the last day off ! ' and give I the closing cup of tea of the vacation . I be not sorry to go . I have lapse into a stupid state ; but I be recover a little and look forward to , albeit loom behind he . again appear at the gate , and again in she warning voice , say : ' ! ' when my mother bend over I , to bid I farewell . I kiss she , and my baby brother , and be very sorry then ; but not sorry to go away , for the gulf between we be there , and the parting be there , every day . and it be not so much the embrace she give I , that life in my mind , though it be as fervent as could be , as what follow the embrace . I be in the carrier 's cart when I hear she call to I . I look out , and she stand at the garden - gate alone , hold she baby up in she arm for I to see . it be cold still weather ; and not a hair of she head , nor a fold of she dress , be stir , as she look intently at I , hold up she child . so I lose she . so I see she afterwards , in my sleep at school - a silent presence near my bed - look at I with the same intent face - hold up she baby in she arm . chapter 9 I have a memorable birthday I pass over all that happen at school , until the anniversary of my birthday come round in . except that be more to be admired than ever , I remember nothing . he be go away at the end of the half - year , if not sooner , and be more spirited and independent than before in my eye , and therefore more engaging than before ; but beyond this I remember nothing . the great remembrance by which that time be mark in my mind , seem to have swallow up all lesser recollection , and to exist alone . it be even difficult for I to believe that there be a gap of full two month between my return to and the arrival of that birthday . I can only understand that the fact be so , because I know it must have be so ; otherwise I should feel convinced that there be no interval , and that the one occasion trod upon the other 's heel . how well I recollect the kind of day it be ! I smell the fog that hang about the place ; I see the hoar frost , ghostly , through it ; I feel my rimy hair fall clammy on my cheek ; I look along the dim perspective of the schoolroom , with a sputtering candle here and there to light up the foggy morning , and the breath of the boy wreathing and smoke in the raw cold as they blow upon they finger , and tap they foot upon the floor . it be after breakfast , and we have be summon in from the playground , when enter and say : ' be to go into the parlour . ' I expect a hamper from , and brighten at the order . some of the boy about I put in they claim not to be forget in the distribution of the good thing , as I get out of my seat with great alacrity . ' do not hurry , , ' say . ' there be time enough , my boy , do not hurry . ' I might have be surprise by the feeling tone in which he speak , if I have give it a thought ; but I give it none until afterwards . I hurry away to the parlour ; and there I find , sit at he breakfast with the cane and a newspaper before he , and . Creakle with a open letter in she hand . but no hamper . ' , ' say , lead I to a sofa , and sit down beside I . 'I want to speak to you very particularly . I have something to tell you , my child . ' , at whom of course I look , shook he head without look at I , and stop up a sigh with a very large piece of butter toast . ' you be too young to know how the world change every day , ' say . , ' and how the people in it pass away . but we all have to
to learn it , ; some of we when we be young , some of we when we be old , some of we at all time of we life . ' I look at she earnestly . ' when you come away from home at the end of the vacation , ' say , after a pause , ' be they all well ? ' after another pause , ' be you mama well ? ' I tremble without distinctly know why , and still look at she earnestly , make no attempt to answer . ' because , ' say she , 'I grieve to tell you that I hear this morning you mama be very ill . ' a mist rise between . and I , and she figure seem to move in it for a instant . then I feel the burn tear run down my face , and it be steady again . ' she be very dangerously ill , ' she add . I know all now . ' she be dead . ' there be no need to tell I so . I have already break out into a desolate cry , and feel a orphan in the wide world . she be very kind to I . she keep I there all day , and leave I alone sometimes ; and I cry , and wear myself to sleep , and awoke and cry again . when I could cry no more , I begin to think ; and then the oppression on my breast be heaviest , and my grief a dull pain that there be no ease for . and yet my thought be idle ; not intent on the calamity that weigh upon my heart , but idly loiter near it . I think of we house shut up and hush . I think of the little baby , who , . say , have be pin away for some time , and who , they believe , would die too . I think of my father 's grave in the churchyard , by we house , and of my mother lie there beneath the tree I know so well . I stand upon a chair when I be leave alone , and look into the glass to see how red my eye be , and how sorrowful my face . I consider , after some hour be gone , if my tear be really hard to flow now , as they seem to be , what , in connexion with my loss , it would affect I most to think of when I draw near home - for I be go home to the funeral . I be sensible of have feel that a dignity attach to I among the rest of the boy , and that I be important in my affliction . if ever child be stricken with sincere grief , I be . but I remember that this importance be a kind of satisfaction to I , when I walk in the playground that afternoon while the boy be in school . when I see they glance at I out of the window , as they go up to they class , I feel distinguished , and look more melancholy , and walk slower . when school be over , and they come out and speak to I , I feel it rather good in myself not to be proud to any of they , and to take exactly the same notice of they all , as before . I be to go home next night ; not by the mail , but by the heavy night - coach , which be call the , and be principally use by country - people travel short intermediate distance upon the road . we have no story - tell that evening , and Traddles insist on lend I he pillow . I do not know what good he think it would do I , for I have one of my own : but it be all he have to lend , poor fellow , except a sheet of letter - paper full of skeleton ; and that he give I at parting , as a soother of my sorrow and a contribution to my peace of mind . I leave upon the morrow afternoon . I little think then that I leave it , never to return . we travel very slowly all night , and do not get into before nine or ten o'clock in the morning . I look out for , but he be not there ; and instead of he a fat , short - winded , merry - look , little old man in black , with rusty little bunch of ribbon at the knee of he breech , black stocking , and a broad - brim hat , come puffe up to the coach window , and say : ' ? ' ' yes , sir . ' ' will you come with I , young sir , if you please ,' he say , open the door , ' and I shall have the pleasure of take you home . ' I put my hand in he , wonder who he be , and we walk away to a shop in a narrow street , on which be write Omer , , , , , &c . it be a close and stifle little shop ; full of all sort of clothing , make and unmade , include one window full of beaver - hat and bonnet . we go into a little back - parlour behind the shop , where we find three young woman at work on a quantity of black material , which be heape upon the table , and little bits and cutting of which be litter all over the floor . there be a good fire
fire in the room , and a breathless smell of warm black crape - I do not know what the smell be then , but I know now . the three young woman , who appear to be very industrious and comfortable , raise they head to look at I , and then go on with they work . Stitch , stitch , stitch . at the same time there come from a workshop across a little yard outside the window , a regular sound of hammering that keep a kind of tune : Rat - tat - tat , Rat - tat - tat , Rat - tat - tat , without any variation . ' well , ' say my conductor to one of the three young woman . ' how do you get on , ? ' ' we shall be ready by the try - on time , ' she reply gaily , without look up . ' do not you be afraid , father . ' take off he broad - brim hat , and sit down and pante . he be so fat that he be oblige to pant some time before he could say : ' that be right . ' ' ! ' say , playfully . ' what a porpoise you do grow ! ' ' well , I do not know how it be , my dear , ' he reply , consider about it . 'I be rather so . ' ' you be such a comfortable man , you see , ' say . ' you take thing so easy . ' ' no use take th'ey otherwise , my dear , ' say . 'no , indeed , ' return he daughter . ' we be all pretty gay here , thank ! be not we , father ? ' 'i hope so , my dear , ' say . 'as I have get my breath now , I think I will measure this young scholar . would you walk into the shop , master Copperfield ? ' I proceed , in compliance with he request ; and after show I a roll of cloth which he say be extra super , and too good mourning for anything short of parent , he take my various dimension , and put they down in a book . while he be record they he call my attention to he stock in trade , and to certain fashions which he say have ' just come up ' , and to certain other fashions which he say have ' just go out ' . ' and by that sort of thing we very often lose a little mint of money , ' say . ' but fashions be like human being . they come in , nobody know when , why , or how ; and they go out , nobody know when , why , or how . everything be like life , in my opinion , if you look at it in that point of view . ' I be too sorrowful to discuss the question , which would possibly have be beyond I under any circumstance ; and take I back into the parlour , breathing with some difficulty on the way . he then call down a little break - neck range of step behind a door : ' bring up that tea and bread - and - butter ! ' which , after some time , during which I sit look about I and think , and listen to the stitching in the room and the tune that be be hammere across the yard , appear on a tray , and turn out to be for I . 'I have be acquaint with you , ' say , after watch I for some minute , during which i have not make much impression on the breakfast , for the black thing destroy my appetite , 'I have be acquaint with you a long time , my young friend . ' ' have you , sir ? ' ' all you life , ' say . 'I may say before it . I know you father before you . he be five foot nine and a half , and he lay in five - and - twen - ty foot of ground . ' ' Rat - tat - tat , Rat - tat - tat , Rat - tat - tat , ' across the yard . ' he lay in five and twen - ty foot of ground , if he lay in a fraction , ' say , pleasantly . ' it be either he request or she direction , I forget which . ' ' do you know how my little brother be , sir ? ' I inquire . shook he head . ' Rat - tat - tat , Rat - tat - tat , Rat - tat - tat . ' ' he be in he mother 's arm , ' say he . 'Oh , poor little fellow ! be he dead ? ' ' do not mind it more than you can help , ' say . ' yes . the baby 's dead . ' my wound break out afresh at this intelligence . I leave the scarcely - taste breakfast , and go and rest my head on another table , in a corner of the little room , which hastily clear , lest I should spot the mourning that be lie there with my tear . she be a pretty , good - natured girl , and put my hair away from my eye with a soft , kind touch ; but she be very cheerful at have nearly finish she work and be in good time , and be so different from I ! presently the tune leave off , and a good - look
look young fellow come across the yard into the room . he have a hammer in he hand , and he mouth be full of little nails , which he be obliged to take out before he could speak . ' well , ! ' say . ' how do you get on ? ' ' all right , ' say . ' done , sir . ' colou a little , and the other two girl smile at one another . ' what ! you be at it by candle - light last night , when I be at the club , then ? be you ? ' say , shut up one eye . ' yes , ' say . 'as you say we could make a little trip of it , and go over together , if it be do , and I - and you . ' 'Oh ! I think you be go to leave I out altogether , ' say , laugh till he cough . ' - as you be so good as to say that , ' resume the young man , ' why I turn to with a will , you see . will you give I you opinion of it ? ' 'I will , ' say , rise . ' my dear ' ; and he stop and turn to I : ' would you like to see you - ' 'no , father , ' interpose . 'I think it might be agreeable , my dear , ' say . ' but perhaps you be right . ' I can not say how I know it be my dear , dear mother 's coffin that they go to look at . I have never hear one make ; I have never see one that I know of .- but it come into my mind what the noise be , while it be go on ; and when the young man enter , I be sure I know what he have be do . the work be now finish , the two girl , whose name I have not hear , brush the shred and thread from they dress , and go into the shop to put that to rights , and wait for customer . stay behind to fold up what they have make , and pack it in two basket . this she do upon she knee , hum a lively little tune the while . , who I have no doubt be she lover , come in and steal a kiss from she while she be busy ( he do not appear to mind I , at all ) , and say she father be go for the chaise , and he must make haste and get himself ready . then he go out again ; and then she put she thimble and scissors in she pocket , and stick a needle thread with black thread neatly in the bosom of she gown , and put on she outer clothing smartly , at a little glass behind the door , in which I see the reflection of she pleased face . all this I observ , sit at the table in the corner with my head lean on my hand , and my thought run on very different thing . the chaise soon come round to the front of the shop , and the basket be put in first , I be put in next , and those three follow . I remember it as a kind of half chaise - cart , half pianoforte - van , pain of a sombre colour , and draw by a black horse with a long tail . there be plenty of room for we all . I do not think I have ever experience so strange a feeling in my life ( I be wiser now , perhaps ) as that of be with they , remember how they have be employ , and see they enjoy the ride . I be not angry with they ; I be more afraid of they , as if I be cast away among creature with whom I have no community of nature . they be very cheerful . the old man sit in front to drive , and the two young people sit behind he , and whenever he speak to they lean forward , the one on one side of he chubby face and the other on the other , and make a great deal of he . they would have talk to I too , but I hold back , and mo in my corner ; scare by they love -making and hilarity , though it be far from boisterous , and almost wonder that no judgement come upon they for they hardness of heart . so , when they stop to bait the horse , and ate and drank and enjoy themselves , I could touch nothing that they touch , but keep my fast unbroken . so , when we reach home , I drop out of the chaise behind , as quickly as possible , that I might not be in they company before those solemn window , look blindly on I like close eye once bright . and oh , how little need I have have to think what would move I to tear when I come back - see the window of my mother 's room , and next it that which , in the better time , be mine ! I be in 's arm before I get to the door , and she take I into the house . she grief burst out when she first see I ; but she control it soon , and speak in whisper , and walk softly , as if the dead could be disturb . she have not be in bed , I find ,
, for a long time . she sit up at night still , and watch . as long as she poor dear pretty be above the ground , she say , she would never desert she . take no heed of I when I go into the parlour where he be , but sit by the fireside , weepe silently , and ponder in he elbow - chair . , who be busy at she writing - desk , which be cover with letter and papers , give I she cold finger - nail , and ask I , in a iron whisper , if I have be measure for my mourning . I say : ' yes . ' ' and you shirts , ' say ; ' have you bring th'ey home ? ' ' yes , ma 'am . I have bring home all my clothes . ' this be all the consolation that she firmness administer to I . I do not doubt that she have a choice pleasure in exhibiting what she call she self - command , and she firmness , and she strength of mind , and she common sense , and the whole diabolical catalogue of she unamiable quality , on such a occasion . she be particularly proud of she turn for business ; and she show it now in reduce everything to pen and ink , and be move by nothing . all the rest of that day , and from morning to night afterwards , she sit at that desk , scratch composedly with a hard pen , speak in the same imperturbable whisper to everybody ; never relax a muscle of she face , or soften a tone of she voice , or appear with a atom of she dress astray . she brother take a book sometimes , but never read it that I see . he would open it and look at it as if he be read , but would remain for a whole hour without turn the leaf , and then put it down and walk to and for in the room . I use to sit with fold hand watch he , and count he footstep , hour after hour . he very seldom speak to she , and never to I . he seem to be the only restless thing , except the clock , in the whole motionless house . in these day before the funeral , I see but little of , except that , in passing up or down stair , I always find she close to the room where my mother and she baby lay , and except that she come to I every night , and sit by my bed 's head while I go to sleep . a day or two before the burial - I think it be a day or two before , but I be conscious of confusion in my mind about that heavy time , with nothing to mark its progress - she take I into the room . I only recollect that underneath some white cover on the bed , with a beautiful cleanliness and freshness all around it , there seem to I to lie embody the solemn stillness that be in the house ; and that when she would have turn the cover gently back , I cry : ' oh no ! oh no ! ' and hold she hand . if the funeral have be yesterday , I could not recollect it better . the very air of the best parlour , when I go in at the door , the bright condition of the fire , the shining of the wine in the decanter , the pattern of the glass and plate , the faint sweet smell of cake , the odour of 's dress , and we black clothes . be in the room , and come to speak to I . ' and how be ? ' he say , kindly . I can not tell he very well . I give he my hand , which he hold in he . 'Dear I ! ' say , meekly smile , with something shining in he eye . ' we little friend grow up around we . they grow out of we knowledge , ma 'am ? ' this be to , who make no reply . ' there be a great improvement here , ma 'am ? ' say . merely answer with a frown and a formal bend : , discomfit , go into a corner , keep I with he , and open he mouth no more . I remark this , because I remark everything that happen , not because I care about myself , or have do since I come home . and now the bell begin to sound , and and another come to make we ready . as be will not to tell I , long ago , the follower of my father to the same grave be make ready in the same room . there be , we neighbour , , and I . when we go out to the door , the Bearer and they load be in the garden ; and they move before we down the path , and past the elm , and through the gate , and into the churchyard , where I have so often hear the bird se on a summer morning . we stand around the grave . the day seem different to I from every other day , and the light not of the same colour - of a sadder colour . now there be a solemn hush , which we have bring from home with what be rest in the mould ; and while we stand barehead , I hear the voice of the clergyman , sound remote in the open air , and yet distinct and
and plain , say : 'I be the Resurrection and the life , saith the ! ' then I hear sob ; and , stand apart among the looker - on , I see that good and faithful servant , whom of all the people upon earth I love the best , and unto whom my childish heart be certain that the will one day say : ' well do . ' there be many face that I know , among the little crowd ; face that I know in church , when mine be always wonder there ; face that first see my mother , when she come to the village in she youthful bloom . I do not mind they - I mind nothing but my grief - and yet I see and know they all ; and even in the background , far away , see look on , and she eye glance on she sweetheart , who be near I . it be over , and the earth be fill in , and we turn to come away . before we stand we house , so pretty and unchanged , so link in my mind with the young idea of what be gone , that all my sorrow have be nothing to the sorrow it call forth . but they take I on ; and talk to I ; and when we get home , put some water to my lip ; and when I ask he leave to go up to my room , dismiss I with the gentleness of a woman . all this , I say , be yesterday 's event . event of later date have float from I to the shore where all forgotten thing will reappear , but this stand like a high rock in the ocean . I know that would come to I in my room . the Sabbath stillness of the time ( the day be so like ! I have forget that ) be suit to we both . she sit down by my side upon my little bed ; and hold my hand , and sometimes put it to she lip , and sometimes smooth it with hers , as she might have comfort my little brother , tell I , in she way , all that she have to tell concern what have happen . ' she be never well , ' say , ' for a long time . she be uncertain in she mind , and not happy . when she baby be bear , I think at first she would get better , but she be more delicate , and sink a little every day . she use to like to sit alone before she baby come , and then she cry ; but afterwards she use to s to it - so soft , that I once think , when I hear she , it be like a voice up in the air , that be rise away . 'I think she get to be more timid , and more frightened - like , of late ; and that a hard word be like a blow to she . but she be always the same to I . she never change to she foolish , do not my sweet girl . ' here stop , and softly beat upon my hand a little while . ' the last time that I see she like she own old self , be the night when you come home , my dear . the day you go away , she say to I , " I never shall see my pretty darl again . something tell I so , that tell the truth , I know . " ' she try to hold up after that ; and many a time , when they tell she she be thoughtless and light - hear , make believe to be so ; but it be all a bygone then . she never tell she husband what she have tell I - she be afraid of say it to anybody else - till one night , a little more than a week before it happen , when she say to he : " my dear , I think I be die . " ' " it be off my mind now , , " she tell I , when I lay she in she bed that night . " he will believe it more and more , poor fellow , every day for a few day to come ; and then it will be past . I be very tired . if this be sleep , sit by I while I sleep : do not leave I . bless both my child ! protect and keep my fatherless boy ! " 'I never leave she afterwards , ' say . ' she often talk to they two downstairs - for she love they ; she could not bear not to love anyone who be about she - but when they go away from she bed - side , she always turn to I , as if there be rest where be , and never fall asleep in any other way . 'On the last night , in the evening , she kiss I , and say : " if my baby should die too , , please let they lay he in my arm , and bury we together . " ( it be done ; for the poor lamb live but a day beyond she . ) " let my dearest boy go with we to we resting - place , " she say , " and tell he that he mother , when she lay here , bless he not once , but a thousand time . " ' another silence follow this , and another gentle beat on my hand . ' it be
be pretty far in the night , ' say , ' when she ask I for some drink ; and when she have take it , give I such a patient smile , the dear ! - so beautiful ! ' have come , and the sun be rise , when she say to I , how kind and considerate have always been to she , and how he have borne with she , and tell she , when she doubt herself , that a loving heart be better and stronger than wisdom , and that he be a happy man in hers . " Peggotty , my dear , " she say then , " put I nearer to you , " for she be very weak . " Lay you good arm underneath my neck , " she say , " and turn I to you , for you face be go far off , and I want it to be near . " I put it as she ask ; and oh ! the time have come when my first part word to you be true - when she be glad to lay she poor head on she stupid cross old 's arm - and she die like a child that have go to sleep ! ' thus end 's narration . from the moment of my know of the death of my mother , the idea of she as she have be of late have vanish from I . I remembe she , from that instant , only as the young mother of my earliest impression , who have be use to wind she bright curl round and round she finger , and to dance with I at twilight in the parlour . what have tell I now , be so far from bring I back to the later period , that it root the earlier image in my mind . it may be curious , but it be true . in she death she win she way back to she calm untroubled youth , and cancel all the rest . the mother who lay in the grave , be the mother of my infancy ; the little creature in she arm , be myself , as I have once be , hush for ever on she bosom . chapter 10 I , and Am pROVIDEd for the first act of business perform when the day of the solemnity be over , and light be freely admit into the house , be to give a month 's warning . much as would have dislike such a service , I believe she would have retain it , for my sake , in preference to the best upon earth . she tell I we must part , and tell I why ; and we condol with one another , in all sincerity . as to I or my future , not a word be say , or a step take . happy they would have be , I dare say , if they could have dismiss I at a month 's warning too . I muster courage once , to ask when I be go back to school ; and she answer dryly , she believe I be not go back at all . I be tell nothing more . I be very anxious to know what be go to be do with I , and so be ; but neither she nor I could pick up any information on the subject . there be one change in my condition , which , while it relieve I of a great deal of present uneasiness , might have make I , if I have be capable of consider it closely , yet more uncomfortable about the future . it be this . the constraint that have be put upon I , be quite abandoned . I be so far from be require to keep my dull post in the parlour , that on several occasion , when I take my seat there , frown to I to go away . I be so far from be warn off from 's society , that , provide I be not in 's , I be never seek out or inquire for . at first I be in daily dread of he take my education in hand again , or of 's devote herself to it ; but I soon begin to think that such fear be groundless , and that all I have to anticipate be neglect . I do not conceive that this discovery give I much pain then . I be still giddy with the shock of my mother 's death , and in a kind of stun state as to all tributary thing . I can recollect , indeed , to have speculate , at odd time , on the possibility of my not be teach any more , or care for any more ; and grow up to be a shabby , moody man , lounge a idle life away , about the village ; as well as on the feasibility of my get rid of this picture by go away somewhere , like the hero in a story , to seek my fortune : but these be transient vision , daydream I sit look at sometimes , as if they be faintly paint or write on the wall of my room , and which , as they melt away , leave the wall blank again . ' ,' I say in a thoughtful whisper , one evening , when I be warm my hand at the kitchen fire , ' . Murdstone like I less than he use to . he never like I much , ; but he would rather not even see I now , if he can help it . ' ' perhaps it be he sorrow , ' say , strok my hair
hair . 'I be sure , , I be sorry too . if I believe it be he sorrow , I should not think of it at all . but it be not that ; oh , no , it be not that . ' ' how do you know it be not that ? ' say , after a silence . 'Oh , he sorrow be another and quite a different thing . he be sorry at this moment , sit by the fireside with ; but if I be to go in , , he would be something besides . ' ' what would he be ? ' say . ' ,' I answer , with a involuntary imitation of he dark frown . ' if he be only sorry , he would not look at I as he do . I be only sorry , and it make I feel kinder . ' say nothing for a little while ; and I warm my hand , as silent as she . ' , ' she say at length . ' yes , ? ' 'I have try , my dear , all way I could think of - all the way there be , and all the way there be not , in short - to get a suitable service here , in ; but there be no such a thing , my love . ' ' and what do you mean to do , , ' say I , wistfully . ' do you mean to go and seek you fortune ? ' 'I expect I shall be force to go to , ' reply , ' and live there . ' ' you might have go farther off ,' I say , brighten a little , ' and be as bad as lose . I shall see you sometimes , my dear old , there . you will not be quite at the other end of the world , will you ? ' ' contrary way , please ! ' cry , with great animation . ' as long as you be here , my pet , I shall come over every week of my life to see you . one day , every week of my life ! ' I feel a great weight take off my mind by this promise : but even this be not all , for go on to say : 'I be a - go , , you see , to my brother 's , first , for another fortnight 's visit - just till I have have time to look about I , and get to be something like myself again . now , I have be think that perhaps , as they do not want you here at present , you might be let to go along with I . ' if anything , short of be in a different relation to every one about I , Peggotty accept , could have give I a sense of pleasure at that time , it would have be this project of all other . the idea of be again surround by those honest face , shin welcome on I ; of renew the peacefulness of the sweet morning , when the bell be ring , the stone drop in the water , and the shadowy ship break through the mist ; of roam up and down with little Em'ly , tell she my trouble , and find charms against they in the shell and pebble on the beach ; make a calm in my heart . it be ruffle next moment , to be sure , by a doubt of 's give she consent ; but even that be set at rest soon , for she come out to take a evening grope in the store - closet while we be yet in conversation , and , with a boldness that amaze I , broach the topic on the spot . ' the boy will be idle there , ' say , look into a pickle - jar , ' and idleness be the root of all evil . but , to be sure , he would be idle here - or anywhere , in my opinion . ' have a angry answer ready , I could see ; but she swallow it for my sake , and remain silent . 'Humph ! ' say , still keep she eye on the pickle ; ' it be of more importance than anything else - it be of paramount importance - that my brother should not be disturb or make uncomfortable . I suppose I have better say yes . ' I thank she , without make any demonstration of joy , lest it should induce she to withdraw she assent . could I help think this a prudent course , since she look at I out of the pickle - jar , with as great a access of sourness as if she black eye have absorb its contents . however , the permission be give , and be never retract ; for when the month be out , and I be ready to depart . come into the house for 's box . I have never know he to pass the garden - gate before , but on this occasion he come into the house . and he give I a look as he shouldere the largest box and go out , which I think have meaning in it , if meaning could ever be say to find its way into 's visage . be naturally in low spirit at leave what have be she home so many year , and where the two strong attachment of she life - for my mother and myself - have be form . she have be walk in the churchyard , too , very early ; and she get into the cart ,
, and sit in it with she handkerchief at she eye . so long as she remain in this condition , give no sign of life whatever . he sit in he usual place and attitude like a great stuffed figure . but when she begin to look about she , and to speak to I , he nod he head and grin several time . I have not the least notion at whom , or what he mean by it . ' it be a beautiful day , ! ' I say , as a act of politeness . ' it be not bad , ' say , who generally qualifie he speech , and rarely commit himself . ' Peggotty be quite comfortable now , ,' I remark , for he satisfaction . ' be she , though ? ' say . after reflect about it , with a sagacious air , eye she , and say : ' be you pretty comfortable ? ' laugh , and answer in the affirmative . ' but really and truly , you know . be you ? ' grow , slide nearer to she on the seat , and nudg she with he elbow . ' be you ? really and truly pretty comfortable ? be you ? Eh ? ' at each of these inquiry shuffle nearer to she , and give she another nudge ; so that at last we be all crow together in the left - hand corner of the cart , and I be so squeeze that I could hardly bear it . call he attention to my suffering , give I a little more room at once , and get away by degree . but I could not help observe that he seem to think he have hit upon a wonderful expedient for express himself in a neat , agreeable , and point manner , without the inconvenience of inventing conversation . he manifestly chuckle over it for some time . by and by he turn to again , and repeat , ' be you pretty comfortable though ? ' bear down upon we as before , until the breath be nearly ed out of my body . by and by he make another descent upon we with the same inquiry , and the same result . at length , I get up whenever I see he come , and stand on the foot - board , pretend to look at the prospect ; after which I do very well . he be so polite as to stop at a public - house , expressly on we account , and entertain we with broiled mutton and beer . even when be in the act of drinking , he be seize with one of those approach , and almost chok she . but as we draw nearer to the end of we journey , he have more to do and less time for gallantry ; and when we get on pavement , we be all too much shaken and jolt , I apprehend , to have any leisure for anything else . and wait for we at the old place . they receive I and in a affectionate manner , and shake hand with , who , with he hat on the very back of he head , and a shame - face leer upon he countenance , and pervad he very legs , present but a vacant appearance , I think . they each take one of 's trunk , and we be go away , when solemnly make a sign to I with he forefinger to come under a archway . 'I say , ' grow , 'it be all right . ' I look up into he face , and answer , with a attempt to be very profound : ! ' ' it do not come to a end there , ' say , nodd confidentially . ' it be all right . ' again I answer , ! ' ' you know who be willin ' , ' say my friend . ' it be , and only . ' I nod assent . ' it be all right , ' say , shak hand ; 'I be a friend of you 'n . you make it all right , first . it be all right . ' in he attempt to be particularly lucid , be so extremely mysterious , that I might have stand look in he face for a hour , and most assuredly should have get as much information out of it as out of the face of a clock that have stop , but for 's call I away . as we be go along , she ask I what he have say ; and I tell she he have say it be all right . ' like he impudence , ' say , ' but I do not mind that ! Davy dear , what should you think if I be to think of be marry ? ' ' why - I suppose you would like I as much then , , as you do now ? ' I return , after a little consideration . greatly to the astonishment of the passenger in the street , as well as of she relation go on before , the good soul be oblige to stop and embrace I on the spot , with many protestation of she unalterable love . ' tell I what should you say , darl ? ' she ask again , when this be over , and we be walk on . ' if you be think of be marry - to , ? ' ' yes , ' say . 'I should think it would be a very good thing . for then you know , , you would always have the horse and cart to bring you over to see
see I , and could come for nothing , and be sure of come . ' ' the sense of the dear ! ' cry . ' what I have be think of , this month back ! yes , my precious ; and I think I should be more independent altogether , you see ; let alone my work with a better heart in my own house , than I could in anybody else 's now . I do not know what I might be fit for , now , as a servant to a stranger . and I shall be always near my pretty 's resting - place , ' say , musing , ' and be able to see it when I like ; and when I lie down to rest , I may be laid not far off from my darling girl ! ' we neither of we say anything for a little while . ' but I would not so much as give it another thought , ' say , cheerily ' if my be anyways against it - not if I have be ask in church thirty time three time over , and be wear out the ring in my pocket . ' ' look at I , ,' I reply ; ' and see if I be not really glad , and do not truly wish it ! ' as indeed I do , with all my heart . ' well , my life , ' say , give I a squeeze , 'I have think of it night and day , every way I can , and I hope the right way ; but I will think of it again , and speak to my brother about it , and in the meantime we will keep it to ourselves , Davy , you and I . Barkis be a good plain creature , ' say , ' and if I try to do my duty by he , I think it would be my fault if I be not - if I be not pretty comfortable , ' say , laugh heartily . this quotation from be so appropriate , and tick we both so much , that we laugh again and again , and be quite in a pleasant humour when we come within view of 's cottage . it look just the same , except that it may , perhaps , have shrink a little in my eye ; and be wait at the door as if she have stand there ever since . all withing be the same , down to the seaweed in the blue mug in my bedroom . I go into the out - house to look about I ; and the very same lobster , crab , and crawfish possess by the same desire to pinch the world in general , appear to be in the same state of conglomeration in the same old corner . but there be no little 'ly to be see , so I ask where she be . ' she be at school , sir , ' say , wip the heat consequent on the porterage of 's box from he forehead ; ' she will be home , ' look at the clock , 'in from twenty minute to half - a -hour 's time . we all on we feel the loss of she , bless ye ! ' moan . ' cheer up , ! ' cry . 'I feel it more than anybody else , ' say ; 'I be a lone lorn creetur ' , and she use to be a'most the only thing that do not go contrary with I . ' , whimper and shake she head , apply herself to blow the fire . , look round upon we while she be so engage , say in a low voice , which he shade with he hand : ' the old 'un ! ' from this I rightly conjecture that no improvement have take place since my last visit in the state of 's spirit . now , the whole place be , or it should have be , quite as delightful a place as ever ; and yet it do not impress I in the same way . I feel rather disappointed with it . perhaps it be because little 'ly be not at home . I know the way by which she would come , and presently find myself stroll along the path to meet she . a figure appear in the distance before long , and I soon know it to be , who be a little creature still in stature , though she be grow . but when she draw nearer , and I see she blue eye look bluer , and she dimple face look brighter , and she whole self prettier and gayer , a curiious feeling come over I that make I pretend not to know she , and pass by as if I be look at something a long way off . I have do such a thing since in later life , or I be mistaken . 'ly do not care a bit . she see I well enough ; but instead of turning round and call after I , run away laugh . this oblige I to run after she , and she run so fast that we be very near the cottage before I catch she . ' oh , it be you , be it ? ' say little Em'ly . ' why , you know who it be , 'ly , ' say I . ' and do not you know who it be ? ' say Em'ly . I be go to kiss she , but she cover she cherry lip with she hand , and say she be not a baby now , and run away , laugh
laugh more than ever , into the house . she seem to delight in tease I , which be a change in she I wonder at very much . the tea table be ready , and we little locker be put out in its old place , but instead of come to sit by I , she go and bestow she company upon that grumbl : and on 's inquiring why , rumple she hair all over she face to hide it , and could do nothing but laugh . 'a little puss , it be ! ' say , pat she with he great hand . ' so sh ' be ! so sh ' be ! ' cry . ' Mas 'r Davy bor ' , so sh ' be ! ' and he sit and chuckle at she for some time , in a state of mingled admiration and delight , that make he face a burn red . 'ly be spoilead by they all , in fact ; and by no one more than himself , whom she could have coax into anything , by only go and lay she cheek against he rough whisker . that be my opinion , at least , when I see she do it ; and I hold to be thoroughly in the right . but she be so affectionate and sweet - natured , and have such a pleasant manner of be both sly and shy at once , that she captivate I more than ever . she be tender - hear , too ; for when , as we sit round the fire after tea , a allusion be make by over he pipe to the loss I have sustain , the tear stand in she eye , and she look at I so kindly across the table , that I feel quite thankful to she . ' ah ! ' say , take up she curl , and run they over he hand like water , ' here be another orphan , you see , sir . and here , ' say , give a backhand knock in the chest , 'i another of th'ey , though he do not look much like it . ' ' if I have you for my guardian , , ' say I , shak my head , 'I do not think I should feel much like it . ' ' well say , Mas 'r Davy bor '! ' cry , in a ecstasy . ' hoorah ! well say ! more you would not ! ! ! ' - here he return 's back - hander , and little 'ly get up and kiss . ' and how be you friend , sir ? ' say to I . ' ? ' say I . ' that be the name ! ' cry , turn to . 'I know it be something in we way . ' ' you say it be , ' observe , laugh . ' well ! ' retort . ' and ye steer with a rudder , do not ye ? it be not fur off . how be he , sir ? ' ' he be very well indeed when I come away , . ' ' there be a friend ! ' say , stretch out he pipe . ' there be a friend , if you talk of friend ! why , love my heart alive , if it be not a treat to look at he ! ' ' he be very handsome , be he not ? ' say I , my heart warm with this praise . ' handsome ! ' cry . ' he stand up to you like - like a - why I do not know what he do not stand up to you like . he be so bold ! ' ' yes ! that be just he character , ' say I . 'he be as brave as a lion , and you can not think how frank he be , . ' ' and I do suppose , now , ' say , look at I through the smoke of he pipe , ' that in the way of book - larn he would take the wind out of a'most anything . ' ' yes , ' say I , delight ; ' he know everything . he be astonishingly clever . ' ' there be a friend ! ' murmure , with a grave toss of he head . ' nothing seem to cost he any trouble , ' say I . ' he know a task if he only look at it . he be the best cricketer you ever see . he will give you almost as many man as you like at draught , and beat you easily . ' give he head another toss , as much as to say : ' of course he will . ' ' he be such a speaker ,' I pursue , ' that he can win anybody over ; and I do not know what you would say if you be to hear he s , . ' give he head another toss , as much as to say : 'I have no doubt of it . ' ' then , he be such a generous , fine , noble fellow , ' say I , quite carry away by my favourite theme , ' that it be hardly possible to give he as much praise as he deserve . I be sure I can never feel thankful enough for the generosity with which he have protect I , so much younger and lower in the school than himself . ' I be run on , very fast indeed , when my eye rest on little 's face , which be bend forward over the table , listen with the deepest
deepest attention , she breath hold , she blue eye sparkling like jewel , and the colour mantl in she cheek . she look so extraordinarily earnest and pretty , that I stop in a sort of wonder ; and they all observe she at the same time , for as I stop , they laugh and look at she . ' be like I , ' say , 'and would like to see he . ' 'ly be confuse by we all observe she , and hang down she head , and she face be cover with blush . Glance up presently through she stray curl , and see that we be all look at she still ( I be sure I , for one , could have look at she for hour ) , she run away , and keep away till it be nearly bedtime . I lay down in the old little bed in the stern of the boat , and the wind come moan on across the flat as it have do before . but I could not help fancie , now , that it moan of those who be go ; and instead of think that the sea might rise in the night and float the boat away , I think of the sea that have risen , since I last hear those sound , and drown my happy home . I recollect , as the wind and water begin to sound fainter in my ear , put a short clause into my prayer , petition that I might grow up to marry little Em'ly , and so drop lovingly asleep . the day pass pretty much as they have pass before , except - it be a great exception - that little em 'ly and I seldom wander on the beach now . she have tasnks to learn , and needle - work to do ; and be absent during a great part of each day . but I feel that we should not have have those old wandering , even if it have be otherwise . wild and full of childish whim as 'ly be , she be more of a little woman than I have suppose . she seem to have get a great distance away from I , in little more than a year . she like I , but she laugh at I , and torment I ; and when I go to meet she , steal home another way , and be laugh at the door when I come back , disappointed . the best time be when she sit quietly at work in the doorway , and I sit on the wooden step at she foot , read to she . it seem to I , at this hour , that I have never see such sunlight as on those bright afternoon ; that I have never see such a sunny little figure as I use to see , sit in the doorway of the old boat ; that I have never beheld such sky , such water , such glorified ship sail away into golden air . on the very first evening after we arrival , appear in a exceedingly vacant and awkward condition , and with a bundle of orang tie up in a handkerchief . as he make no allusion of any kind to this property , he be suppose to have leave it behind he by accident when he go away ; until , run after he to restore it , come back with the information that it be intend for . after that occasion he appear every evening at exactly the same hour , and always with a little bundle , to which he never allude , and which he regularly put behind the door and leave there . these offering of affection be of a most various and eccentric description . among they I remember a double set of pig ' trotter , a huge pin-cushion , half a bushel or so of apple , a pair of jet earring , some spanish onion , a box of dominoe , a canary bird and cage , and a leg of pickle pork . 's wooing , as I remember it , be altogether of a peculiar kind . he very seldom say anything ; but would sit by the fire in much the same attitude as he sit in he cart , and stare heavily at , who be opposite . one night , be , as I suppose , inspire by love , he make a dart at the bit of wax - candle she keep for she thread , and put it in he waistcoat - pocket and carry it off . after that , he great delight be to produce it when it be want , stick to the lining of he pocket , in a partially melte state , and pocket it again when it be done with . he seem to enjoy himself very much , and not to feel at all call upon to talk . even when he take out for a walk on the flat , he have no uneasiness on that head , I believe ; contente himself with now and then ask she if she be pretty comfortable ; and I remember that sometimes , after he be gone , would throw she apron over she face , and laugh for half - a - hour . indeed , we be all more or less amused , except that miserable , whose courtship would appear to have be of a exactly parallel nature , she be so continually remind by these transaction of the old one . at length , when the term of my visit be nearly expire , it be give out that and be go to make a day 's holiday together , and that little 'ly and I
I be to accompany they . I have but a broken sleep the night before , in anticipation of the pleasure of a whole day with . we be all astir betime in the morning ; and while we be yet at breakfast , appear in the distance , drive a chaise - cart towards the object of he affections . be dress as usual , in she neat and quiet mourn ; but bloom in a new blue coat , of which the tailor have give he such good measure , that the cuff would have render glove unnecessary in the coldest weather , while the collar be so high that it push he hair up on end on the top of he head . he bright buttons , too , be of the largest size . render complete by drab pantaloon and a buff waistcoat , I think a phenomenon of respectability . when we be all in a bustle outside the door , I find that be prepare with a old shoe , which be to be throw after we for luck , and which he offer to . for that purpose . ' no . it have better be do by somebody else , , ' say . 'I be a lone lorn creetur ' myself , and everythink that remind I of creetur 's that be not lone and lorn , go contrary with I . ' ' come , old gal ! ' cry . ' take and heave it . ' 'no , , ' return , whimper and shake she head . ' if I feel less , I could do more . you do not feel like I , n'l ; think do not go contrary with you , nor you with they ; you have better do it yourself . ' but here , who have be go about from one to another in a hurried way , kiss everybody , call out from the cart , in which we all be by this time ( 'ly and I on two little chair , side by side ) , that must do it . so do it ; and , I be sorry to relate , cast a damp upon the festive character of we departure , by immediately burst into tear , and sink subdue into the arm of , with the declaration that she know she be a burden , and have better be carry to the house at once . which I really think be a sensible idea , that might have act on . away we go , however , on we holiday excursion ; and the first thing we do be to stop at a church , where tie the horse to some rail , and go in with , leave little 'ly and I alone in the chaise . I take that occasion to put my arm round 's waist , and propose that as I be go away so very soon now , we should determine to be very affectionate to one another , and very happy , all day . 'ly consent , and allow I to kiss she , I become desperate ; inform she , I recollect , that I never could love another , and that I be prepare to shed the blood of anybody who should aspire to she affections . how merry little 'ly make herself about it ! with what a demure assumption of be immensely older and wiser than I , the fairy little woman say I be 'a silly boy ' ; and then laugh so charmingly that I forget the pain of be call by that disparaging name , in the pleasure of look at she . and be a good while in the church , but come out at last , and then we drive away into the country . as we be go along , turn to I , and say , with a wink , - by the by , I should hardly have thought , before , that he could wink : ' what name be it as I write up in the cart ? ' ' ,' I answer . ' what name would it be as I should write up now , if there be a tilt here ? ' ' , again ? ' I suggest . ' ! ' he return , and burst into a roar of laughter that shook the chaise . in a word , they be marry , and have go into the church for no other purpose . be resolve that it should be quietly do ; and the clerk have give she away , and there have be no witness of the ceremony . she be a little confused when make this abrupt announcement of they union , and could not hug I enough in token of she unimpaired affection ; but she soon become herself again , and say she be very glad it be over . we drive to a little inn in a by - road , where we be expect , and where we have a very comfortable dinner , and pass the day with great satisfaction . if have be marry every day for the last ten year , she could hardly have be more at she ease about it ; it make no sort of difference in she : she be just the same as ever , and go out for a stroll with little 'ly and I before tea , while philosophically smoke he pipe , and enjoy himself , I suppose , with the contemplation of he happiness . if so , it sharpen he appetite ; for I distinctly call to mind that , although he have eat a good deal of pork and green at dinner , and have finish off with a fowl or two , he be oblige
oblige to have cold boiled bacon for tea , and dispose of a large quantity without any emotion . I have often think , since , what a odd , innocent , out - of - the - way kind of wedding it must have be ! we get into the chaise again soon after dark , and drive cosily back , look up at the star , and talk about they . I be they chief exponent , and open 's mind to a amazing extent . I tell he all I know , but he would have believe anything I might have take it into my head to impart to he ; for he have a profound veneration for my ability , and inform he wife in my hearing , on that very occasion , that I be 'a young ' - by which I think he mean prodigy . when we have exhaust the subject of the star , or rather when I have exhaust the mental faculty of , little 'ly and I make a cloak of a old wrapper , and sit under it for the rest of the journey . ah , how I love she ! what happiness ( I think ) if we be marry , and be go away anywhere to live among the tree and in the field , never grow older , never grow wiser , child ever , rambl hand in hand through sunshine and among flowery meadow , lay down we head on moss at night , in a sweet sleep of purity and peace , and bury by the bird when we be dead ! some such picture , with no real world in it , bright with the light of we innocence , and vague as the star afar off , be in my mind all the way . I be glad to think there be two such guileless heart at 's marriage as little 'ly 's and mine . I be glad to think the love and Graces take such airy form in it be homely procession . well , we come to the old boat again in good time at night ; and there and bay we good - bye , and drive away snugly to they own home . I feel then , for the first time , that I have lose . I should have go to be with a sore heart indeed under any other roof but that which shelter little 's head . and know what be in my thought as well as I do , and be ready with some supper and they hospitable face to drive it away . 'ly come and sit beside I on the locker for the only time in all that visit ; and it be altogether a wonderful close to a wonderful day . it be a night tide ; and soon after we go to bed , and go out to fish . I feel very brave at be leave alone in the solitary house , the protector of 'ly and , and only wish that a lion or a serpent , or any ill - dispose monster , would make a attack upon we , that I might destroy he , and cover myself with glory . but as nothing of the sort happen to be walk about on Yarmouth flat that night , I provide the best substitute I could by dreaming of dragons until morning . with morning come ; who call to I , as usual , under my window as if the carrier have be from first to last a dream too . after breakfast she take I to she own home , and a beautiful little home it be . of all the moveable in it , I must have be impress by a certain old bureau of some dark wood in the parlour ( the tile - floor kitchen be the general sitting - room ) , with a retreating top which open , let down , and become a desk , within which be a large quarto edition of 's of . this precious volume , of which I do not recollect one word , I immediately discover and immediately apply myself to ; and I never visit the house afterwards , but I knee on a chair , open the casket where this gem be enshrin , spread my arm over the desk , and fall to devour the book afresh . I be chiefly edified , I be afraid , by the picture , which be numerous , and represent all kind of dismal horror ; but the and 's house have be inseparable in my mind ever since , and be now . I take leave of , and , and , and little Em'ly , that day ; and pass the night at 's , in a little room in the roof ( with the on a shelf by the bed 's head ) which be to be always mine , say , and should always be keep for I in exactly the same state . 'Young or old , Davy dear , as long as I be alive and have this house over my head , ' say , ' you shall find it as if I expect you here directly minute . I shall keep it every day , as I use to keep you old little room , my darling ; and if you be to go to , you might think of it as be keep just the same , all the time you be away . ' I feel the truth and constancy of my dear old nurse , with all my heart , and thanke she as well as I could . that be not very well , for she speak to I thus , with she arm round my neck , in the
the morning , and I be go home in the morning , and I go home in the morning , with herself and in the cart . they leave I at the gate , not easily or lightly ; and it be a strange sight to I to see the cart go on , take away , and leave I under the old elm - tree look at the house , in which there be no face to look on mine with love or like any more . and now I fall into a state of neglect , which I can not look back upon without compassion . I fall at once into a solitary condition , - apart from all friendly notice , apart from the society of all other boy of my own age , apart from all companionship but my own spiritless thought , - which seem to cast its gloom upon this paper as I write . what would I have give , to have be send to the hardest school that ever be keep ! - to have be teach something , anyhow , anywhere ! no such hope dawn upon I . they dislike I ; and they sullenly , sternly , steadily , overlook I . I think 's means be straiten at about this time ; but it be little to the purpose . he could not bear I ; and in put I from he he try , as I believe , to put away the notion that I have any claim upon he - and succeed . I be not actively ill - use . I be not beaten , or starve ; but the wrong that be do to I have no interval of relenting , and be done in a systematic , passionless manner . day after day , week after week , month after month , I be coldly neglect . I wonder sometimes , when I think of it , what they would have do if I have be take with a illness ; whether I should have lain down in my lonely room , and languish through it in my usual solitary way , or whether anybody would have help I out . when and be at home , I take my meal with they ; in they absence , I eat and drank by myself . at all time I lounge about the house and neighbourhood quite disregard , except that they be jealous of my make any friend : think , perhaps , that if I do , I might complain to someone . for this reason , though often ask I to go and see he ( he be a widower , have , some year before that , lose a little small light - hair wife , whom I can just remember connecting in my own thought with a pale tortoise - shell cat ) , it be but seldom that I enjoy the happiness of pass a afternoon in he closet of a surgery ; read some book that be new to I , with the smell of the whole Pharmacopoeia come up my nose , or pound something in a mortar under he mild direction . for the same reason , add no doubt to the old dislike of she , I be seldom allow to visit . faithful to she promise , she either come to see I , or meet I somewhere near , once every week , and never empty - hand ; but many and bitter be the disappointment I have , in be refuse permission to pay a visit to she at she house . some few time , however , at long interval , I be allow to go there ; and then I find out that be something of a miser , or as dutifully express it , be 'a little near ' , and keep a heap of money in a box under he bed , which he pretend be only full of coat and trousers . in this coffer , he rich hide themselves with such a tenacious modesty , that the smallest instalment could only be temp out by artifice ; so that have to prepare a long and elaborate scheme , a very , for every 's expense . all this time I be so conscious of the waste of any promise I have give , and of my be utterly neglect , that I should have be perfectly miserable , I have no doubt , but for the old book . they be my only comfort ; and I be as true to they as they be to I , and read they over and over I do not know how many time more . I now approach a period of my life , which I can never lose the remembrance of , while I remember anything : and the recollection of which have often , without my invocation , come before I like a ghost , and haunt happier time . I have be out , one day , loiter somewhere , in the listless , meditative manner that my way of life engender , when , turn the corner of a lane near we house , I come upon walk with a gentleman . I be confused , and be go by they , when the gentleman cry : ' what ! Brooks ! ' 'no , sir , ,' I say . ' do not tell I . you be Brooks , ' say the gentleman . ' you be of . that be you name . ' at these word , I observ the gentleman more attentively . he laugh come to my remembrance too , I know he to be , whom I have go over to Lowestoft with to see , before - it be no matter - I need not recall
recall when . ' and how do you get on , and where be you be educated , ? ' say . he have put he hand upon my shoulder , and turn I about , to walk with they . I do not know what to reply , and glance dubiously at . ' he be at home at present , ' say the latter . ' he be not be educate anywhere . I do not know what to do with he . he be a difficult subject . ' that old , double look be on I for a moment ; and then he eye darken with a frown , as it turn , in its aversion , elsewhere . 'Humph ! ' say , look at we both , I think . ' Fine weather ! ' Silence ensue , and I be consider how I could best disengage my shoulder from he hand , and go away , when he say : 'I suppose you be a pretty sharp fellow still ? , ? ' ' aye ! he be sharp enough , ' say , impatiently . ' you have better let he go . he will not thank you for trouble he . ' on this hint , release I , and I make the best of my way home . look back as I turn into the front garden , I see lean against the wicket of the churchyard , and talk to he . they be both look after I , and I feel that they be speak of I . lay at we house that night . after breakfast , the next morning , I have put my chair away , and be go out of the room , when call I back . he then gravely repair to another table , where he sister sit herself at she desk . , with he hand in he pockets , stand look out of window ; and I stand look at they all . ' , ' say , 'to the young this be a world for action ; not for moping and dron in . ' - 'as you do , ' add he sister . ' , leave it to I , if you please . I say , , to the young this be a world for action , and not for moping and dron in . it be especially so for a young boy of you disposition , which require a great deal of correcting ; and to which no greater service can be do than to force it to conform to the way of the work world , and to bend it and break it . ' ' for stubbornness will not do here , ' say he sister ' what it want be , to be crush . and crush it must be . shall be , too ! ' he give she a look , half in remonstrance , half in approval , and go on : 'I suppose you know , , that I be not rich . at any rate , you know it now . you have receive some considerable education already . Education be costly ; and even if it be not , and I could afford it , I be of opinion that it would not be at all advantageous to you to be keep at school . what be before you , be a fight with the world ; and the sooner you begin it , the better . ' I think it occur to I that I have already begin it , in my poor way : but it occur to I now , whether or no . ' you have hear the " counting - house " mention sometimes , ' say . ' the counting - house , sir ? ' I repeat . ' of and , in the wine trade , ' he reply . I suppose I look uncertain , for he go on hastily : ' you have hear the " counting - house " mention , or the business , or the cellar , or the wharf , or something about it . ' 'I think I have hear the business mention , sir ,' I say , remembere what I vaguly know of he and he sister 's resource . ' but I do not know when . ' ' it do not matter when ,' he return . ' manage that business . ' I glance at the latter deferentially as he stand look out of window . ' suggest that it give employment to some other boy , and that he see no reason why it should not , on the same term , give employment to you . ' ' he have ,' observe in a low voice , and half turn round , 'no other prospect , . ' , with a impatient , even a angry gesture , resume , without notice what he have say : ' Those term be , that you will earn enough for yourself to provide for you eating and drinking , and pocket -money . you lodging ( which I have arrange for ) will be pay by I . so will you wash -' ' - which will be keep down to my estimate , ' say he sister . ' you clothes will be look after for you , too , ' say ; 'as you will not be able , yet awhile , to get they for yourself . so you be now go to , , with , to begin the world on you own account . ' ' in short , you be provide for , ' observe he sister ; ' and will please to do you duty . ' though I quite understand that the purpose of this announcement be to get
get rid of I , I have no distinct remembrance whether it please or frighten I . my impression be , that I be in a state of confusion about it , and , oscillat between the two point , touch neither . have I much time for the clearing of my thought , as be to go upon the morrow . behold I , on the morrow , in a much - wear little white hat , with a black crape round it for my mother , a black jacket , and a pair of hard , stiff corduroy trousers - which consider the best armour for the leg in that fight with the world which be now to come off . behold I so attire , and with my little worldly all before I in a small trunk , sit , a lone lorn child ( as might have say ) , in the post -chaise that be carry to the coach at ! see , how we house and church be lessen in the distance ; how the grave beneath the tree be blot out by intervene object ; how the spire point upward from my old playground no more , and the sky be empty ! chapter 11 I Life on my own account , and do not like it I know enough of the world now , to have almost lose the capacity of be much surprised by anything ; but it be matter of some surprise to I , even now , that I can have be so easily throw away at such a age . a child of excellent abilitie , and with strong power of observation , quick , eager , delicate , and soon hurt bodily or mentally , it seem wonderful to I that nobody should have make any sign in my behalf . but none be make ; and I become , at ten year old , a little labouring hind in the service of and . and 's warehouse be at the waterside . it be down in . modern improvements have alter the place ; but it be the last house at the bottom of a narrow street , curve down hill to the river , with some stair at the end , where people take . it be a crazy old house with a wharf of its own , abutt on the water when the tide be in , and on the mud when the tide be out , and literally overrun with rat . it be panel room , discoloure with the dirt and smoke of a hundred year , I dare say ; its decay floor and staircase ; the squeaking and scuffling of the old grey rat down in the cellar ; and the dirt and rottenness of the place ; be thing , not of many year ago , in my mind , but of the present instant . they be all before I , just as they be in the evil hour when I go among they for the first time , with my trembling hand in 's . and 's trade be among a good many kind of people , but a important branch of it be the supply of wine and spirit to certain packet ship . I forget now where they chiefly go , but I think there be some among they that make voyage both to the and . I know that a great many empty bottle be one of the consequence of this traffic , and that certain man and boy be employ to examine they against the light , and reject those that be flaw , and to rinse and wash they . when the empty bottle run short , there be label to be paste on full one , or cork to be fitte to they , or seal to be put upon the corks , or finish bottle to be pack in cask . all this work be my work , and of the boy employ upon it I be one . there be three or four of we , count I . my working place be establish in a corner of the warehouse , where could see I , when he choose to stand up on the bottom rail of he stool in the counting - house , and look at I through a window above the desk . Hither , on the first morning of my so auspiciously begin life on my own account , the oldest of the regular boy be summon to show I my business . he name be , and he wear a ragged apron and a paper cap . he inform I that he father be a bargeman , and walk , in a black velvet head - dress , in the 's show . he also inform I that we principal associate would be another boy whom he introduce by the - to I - extraordinary name of . I discover , however , that this youth have not be christen by that name , but that it have be bestow upon he in the warehouse , on account of he complexion , which be pale or meally . 's father be a waterman , who have the additional distinction of be a fireman , and be engage as such at one of the large theatre ; where some young relation of 's - I think he little sister - do in the Pantomime . no word can express the secret agony of my soul as I sink into this companionship ; compare these henceforth every day associate with those of my happier childhood - not to say with , , and the rest of those boy ; and feel my hope of grow up to be a learned and distinguished man , crush in my bosom . the deep remembrance of the sense I have
have , of be utterly without hope now ; of the shame I feel in my position ; of the misery it be to my young heart to believe that day by day what I have learn , and think , and delighte in , and raise my fancy and my emulation up by , would pass away from I , little by little , never to be bring back any more ; can not be write . as often as go away in the course of that forenoon , I mingl my tear with the water in which I be wash the bottle ; and sob as if there be a flaw in my own breast , and it be in danger of bursting . the counting - house clock be at half past twelve , and there be general preparation for go to dinner , when tap at the counting - house window , and beckon to I to go in . I go in , and find there a stoutish , middle - aged person , in a brown surtout and black tight and shoe , with no more hair upon he head ( which be a large one , and very shining ) than there be upon a egg , and with a very extensive face , which he turn full upon I . he clothes be shabby , but he have a imposing shirt - collar on . he carry a jaunty sort of a stick , with a large pair of rusty tassel to it ; and a quizzing - glass hung outside he coat , - for ornament , I afterwards find , as he very seldom look through it , and could not see anything when he do . ' this , ' say , in allusion to myself , 'i he . ' ' this , ' say the stranger , with a certain condescending roll in he voice , and a certain indescribable air of do something genteel , which impress I very much , t'is master . I hope I see you well , sir ? ' I say I be very well , and hope he be . I be sufficientely ill at ease , know ; but it be not in my nature to complain much at that time of my life , so I say I be very well , and hope he be . 'i am , ' say the stranger , ' thank , quite well . I have receive a letter from , in which he mention that he would desire I to receive into a apartment in the rear of my house , which be at present unoccupied - and be , in short , to be let as a - in short , ' say the stranger , with a smile and in a burst of confidence , 'as a bedroom - the young beginner whom I have now the pleasure to - ' and the stranger wav he hand , and settle he ching in he shirt - collar . ' this be , ' say to I . ' ! ' say the stranger , ' that be my name . ' ' , ' say , 'is know to . he take order for we on commission , when he can get any . he have be write to by , on the subject of you lodging , and he will receive you as a lodger . ' 'My address , ' say , 'is , . I - in short , ' say , with the same genteel air , and in another burst of confidence - 'I live there . ' I make he a bow . ' under the impression , ' say , ' that you peregrination in this metropolis have not as yet be extensive , and that you might have some difficulty in penetrat the arcana of the modern in the direction of the , - in short , ' say , in another burst of confidence , ' that you might lose yourself - I shall be happy to call this evening , and install you in the knowledge of the nearest way . ' I thank he with all my heart , for it be friendly in he to offer to take that trouble . ' at what hour , ' say , ' shall I -' ' at about eight , ' say . ' at about eight , ' say . 'I beg to wish you good day , . I will intrude no longer . ' so he put on he hat , and go out with he cane under he arm : very upright , and hum a tune when he be clear of the counting - house . then formally engage I to be as useful as I could in the warehouse of and , at a salary , I think , of six shilling a week . I be not clear whether it be six or seven . I be inclin to believe , from my uncertainty on this head , that it be six at first and seven afterwards . he pay I a week down ( from he own pocket , I believe ) , and I give Meally sixpence out of it to get my trunk carry to Terrace that night : it be too heavy for my strength , small as it be . I pay sixpence more for my dinner , which be a meat pie and a turn at a neighbour pump ; and pass the hour which be allow for that meal , in walk about the street . at the appointed time in the evening , reappear . I washed my hand and face , to do the greater honour to he gentility , and we walk to we house , as I suppose I must now
now call it , together ; impress the name of street , and the shape of corner house upon I , as we go along , that I might find my way back , easily , in the morning . arrive at this house in ( which I notice be shabby like himself , but also , like himself , make all the show it could ) , he present I to , a thing and fade lady , not at all young , who be sit in the parlour ( the first floor be altogether unfurnished , and the blind be keep down to delude the neighbour ) , with a baby at she breast . this baby be one of twin ; and I may remark here that I hardly ever , in all my experience of the family , see both the twin detach from at the same time . one of they be always take refreshment . there be two other child ; master , a about four , and , a about three . these , and a dark - complexioned young woman , with a habit of snorting , who be servant to the family , and inform I , before half a hour have expire , that she be ' , and come from 's workhouse , in the neighbourhood , complete the establishment . my room be at the top of the house , at the back : a close chamber ; stencill all over with a ornament which my young imagination represent as a blue muffin ; and very scantily furnish . 'I never think , ' say , when she come up , twin and all , to show I the apartment , and sit down to take breath , ' before I be marry , when I live with papa and mama , that I should ever find it necessary to take a lodger . but be in difficulty , all consideration of private feeling must give way . ' I say : ' yes , ma'am . ' ' 's difficulty be almost overwhelm just at present , ' say ; 'and whether it be possible to bring he through they , I do not know . when I live at home with papa and mama , I really should have hardly understood what the word mean , in the sense in which I now employ it , but experientia do it , - as papa use to say . ' I can not satisfy myself whether she tell I that have be a officer in the , or whether I have imagine it . I only know that I believe to this hour that he be in the once upon a time , without know why . he be a sort of town traveller for a number of miscellaneous house , now ; but make little or nothing of it , I be afraid . ' if 's creditor will not give he time , ' say . , ' they must take the consequence ; and the sooner they bring it to a issue the better . Blood can not be obtain from a stone , neither can anything on account be obtain at present ( not to mention law expense ) from . ' I never can quite understand whether my precocious self - dependence confuse in reference to my age , or whether she be so full of the subject that she would have talk about it to the very twin if there have be nobody else to communicate with , but this be the strain in which she begin , and she go on accordingly all the time I know she . poor ! she say she have try to exert herself , and so , I have no doubt , she have . the centre of the street door be perfectly cover with a great brass - plate , on which be engrave ' . 's for young Lady ' : but I never find that any young lady have ever be to school there ; or that any young lady ever come , or propose to come ; or that the least preparation be ever make to receive any young lady . the only visitor I ever see , or heard of , be creditor . they use to come at all hour , and some of they be quite ferocious . one dirty - face man , I think he be a boot - maker , use to edge himself into the passage as early as seven o'clock in the morning , and call up the stair to - ' come ! you be not out yet , you know . pay we , will you ? do not hide , you know ; that be mean . I would not be mean if I be you . pay we , will you ? you just pay we , would 'ye hear ? come ! ' receive no answer to these taunt , he would mount in he wrath to the word ' swindler ' and ' robber ' ; and these be ineffectual too , would sometimes go to the extremity of cross the street , and roar up at the window of the second floor , where he know be . at these time , would be transport with grief and mortification , even to the length ( as I be once make aware by a scream from he wife ) of make motion at himself with a razor ; but within half - a - hour afterwards , he would polish up he shoe with extraordinary pain , and go out , hum a tune with a greater air of gentility than ever . be quite as elastic . I have know she to be throw into fainting fit by the king 's tax at three o'clock ,
, and to eat lamb chop , bread , and drink warm ale ( pay for with two tea - spoon that have go to the pawnbroker 's ) at four . on one occasion , when a execution have just be put in , come home through some chance as early as six o'clock , I see she lying ( of course with a twin ) under the grate in a swoon , with she hair all tear about she face ; but I never know she more cheerful than she be , that very same night , over a veal cutlet before the kitchen fire , tell I story about she papa and mama , and the company they use to keep . in this house , and with this family , I pass my leisure time . my own exclusive breakfast of a penny loaf and a pennyworth of milk , I provide myself . I keep another small loaf , and a modicum of cheese , on a particular shelf of a particular cupboard , to make my supper on when I come back at night . this make a hole in the six or seven shilling , I know well ; and I be out at the warehouse all day , and have to support myself on that money all the week . from morning until night , I have no advice , no counsel , no encouragement , no consolation , no assistance , no support , of any kind , from anyone , that I can call to mind , as I hope to go to heaven ! I be so young and childish , and so little qualified - how could I be otherwise ? - to undertake the whole charge of my own existence , that often , in go to and 's , of a morning , I could not resist the stale pastry put out for sale at half - price at the pastrycook ' door , and spend in that the money I should have keep for my dinner . then , I go without my dinner , or buy a roll or a slice of pudding . I remember two pudding shop , between which I be divide , accord to my finances . one be in a court close to 's - at the back of the church , - which be now remove altogether . the pudding at that shop be make of currant , and be rather a special pudding , but be dear , twopennyworth not be larger than a pennyworth of more ordinary pudding . a good shop for the latter be in the - somewhere in that part which have be rebuild since . it be a stout pale pudding , heavy and flabby , and with great flat raisin in it , stuck in whole at wide distance apart . it come up hot at about my time every day , and many a day do I dine off it . when I dine regularly and handsomely , I have a saveloy and a penny loaf , or a fourpenny plate of red beef from a cook 's shop ; or a plate of bread and cheese and a glass of beer , from a miserable old public - house opposite we place of business , call the lion , or the and something else that I have forgote . once , I remember carry my own bread ( which I have bring from home in the morning ) under my arm , wrap in a piece of paper , like a book , and go to a famious alamode beef - house near , and order a ' small plate ' of that delicacy to eat with it . what the waiter thought of such a strange little apparition come in all alone , I do not know ; but I can see he now , star at I as I eat my dinner , and bring up the other waiter to look . I give he a halfpenny for himself , and I wish he have not take it . we have half - a - hour , I think , for tea . when I have money enough , I use to get half - a - pint of ready - make coffee and a slice of bread and butter . when I have none , I use to look at a venison shop in ; or I have stroll , at such a time , as far as , and star at the pineapple . I be fond of wandere about the , because it be a mysterious place , with those dark arch . I see myself emerge one evening from some of these arch , on a little public - house close to the river , with a open space before it , where some coal - heaver be dance ; to look at whom I sit down upon a bench . I wonder what they think of I ! I be such a child , and so little , that frequently when I go into the bar of a strange public - house for a glass of ale or porter , to moisten what I have have for dinner , they be afraid to give it I . I remember one hot evening I go into the bar of a public - house , and say to the landlord : ' what be you best - you very best - ale a glass ? ' for it be a special occasion . I do not know what . it may have be my birthday . ' Twopence - halfpenny , ' say the landlord , 'i the price of the ale . ' ' then , ' say I , produce the money , 'just draw I a glass of the , if you
you please , with a good head to it . ' the landlord look at I in return over the bar , from head to foot , with a strange smile on he face ; and instead of draw the beer , look round the screen and say something to he wife . she come out from behind it , with she work in she hand , and join he in survey I . here we stand , all three , before I now . the landlord in he shirt -sleeve , lean against the bar window - frame ; he wife look over the little half - door ; and I , in some confusion , look up at they from outside the partition . they ask I a good many question ; as , what my name be , how old I be , where I liv , how I be employ , and how I come there . to all of which , that I might commit nobody , I invent , I be afraid , appropriate answer . they serve I with the ale , though I suspect it be not the ; and the landlord 's wife , open the little half - door of the bar , and bend down , give I my money back , and give I a kiss that be half admiring and half compassionate , but all womanly and good , I be sure . I know I do not exaggerate , unconsciously and unintentionally , the scantiness of my resource or the difficulty of my life . I know that if a shilling be give I by at any time , I spend it in a dinner or a tea . I know that I work , from morning until night , with common man and boy , a shabby child . I know that I lounge about the street , insufficiently and unsatisfactorily feed . I know that , but for the mercy of , I might easily have be , for any care that be take of I , a little robber or a little vagabond . yet I hold some station at and 's too . besides that do what a careless man so occupied , and deal with a thing so anomalous , could , to treat I as one upon a different footing from the rest , I never say , to man or boy , how it be that I come to be there , or give the least indication of be sorry that I be there . that I suffer in secret , and that I suffer exquisitely , no one ever know but I . how much I suffer , it be , as I have say already , utterly beyond my power to tell . but I keep my own counsel , and I do my work . I know from the first , that , if I could not do my work as well as any of the rest , I could not hold myself above slight and contempt . I soon become at least as expeditious and as skilful as either of the other boy . though perfectly familiar with they , my conduct and manner be different enough from theirs to place a space between we . they and the man generally speak of I as ' the little gent ' , or ' the young . ' a certain man name , who be foreman of the packer , and another name Tipp , who be the carman , and wear a red jacket , use to address I sometimes as ' ' : but I think it be mostly when we be very confidential , and when I have make some effort to entertain they , over we work , with some result of the old reading ; which be fast perish out of my remembrance . Meally Potato uprise once , and rebel against my be so distinguished ; but settle he in no time . my rescue from this kind of existence I consider quite hopeless , and abandon , as such , altogether . I be solemnly convince that I never for one hour be reconcile to it , or be otherwise than miserably unhappy ; but I bear it ; and even to , partly for the love of she and partly for shame , never in any letter ( though many pass between we ) reveal the truth . 's difficulty be a addition to the distressed state of my mind . in my forlorn state I become quite attach to the family , and use to walk about , busy with 's calculation of way and mean , and heavy with the weight of 's debt . on a night , which be my grand treat , - partly because it be a great thing to walk home with six or seven shilling in my pocket , look into the shop and think what such a sum would buy , and partly because I go home early , - would make the most heart - rende confidence to I ; also on a morning , when I mix the portion of tea or coffee I have buy over -night , in a little shaving - pot , and sit late at my breakfast . it be nothing at all unusual for to sob violently at the beginning of one of these night conversation , and s about 's delight be he lovely , towards the end of it . I have know he come home to supper with a flood of tear , and a declaration that nothing be now leave but a jail ; and go to bed make a calculation of the expense of put bow- window to the house , 'in case anything turn up ' , which be he favourite expression . and be just
just the same . a curious equality of friendship , originating , I suppose , in we respective circumstance , spring up between I and these people , notwithstand the ludicrous disparity in we year . but I never allow myself to be prevail upon to accept any invitation to eat and drink with they out of they stock ( know that they get on badly with the butcher and baker , and have often not too much for themselves ) , until take I into she entire confidence . this she do one eve as follow : ' master , ' say , ' I make no stranger of you , and therefore do not hesitate to say that 's difficulty be come to a crisis . ' it make I very miserable to hear it , and I look at 's red eye with the utmost sympathy . ' with the exception of the heel of a cheese - which be not adapt to the wants of a young family ' - say , ' there be really not a scrap of anything in the larder . I be accustom to speak of the larder when I live with papa and mama , and I use the word almost unconsciously . what I mean to express be , that there be nothing to eat in the house . ' ' dear I ! ' I say , in great concern . I have two or three shilling of my week 's money in my pocket - from which I presume that it must have be on a night when we hold this conversation - and I hastily produce they , and with heartfelt emotion beg to accept of they as a loan . but that lady , kiss I , and make I put they back in my pocket , reply that she could not think of it . ' no , my dear master , ' say she , ' far be it from my thought ! but you have a discretion beyond you year , and can render I another kind of service , if you will ; and a service I will thankfully accept of . ' I beg to name it . 'I have part with the plate myself , ' say . ' six tea , two salt , and a pair of sugar , I have at different time borrow money on , in secret , with my own hand . but the twin be a great tie ; and to I , with my recollection , of papa and mama , these transaction be very painful . there be still a few trifle that we could part with . 's feeling would never allow he to dispose of they ; and ' - this be the girl from the workhouse - ' be of a vulgar mind , would take painful liberty if so much confidence be repose in she . master , if I might ask you -' I understand now , and beg she to make use of I to any extent . I begin to dispose of the more portable article of property that very evening ; and go out on a similar expedition almost every morning , before I go to and 's . have a few book on a little chiffonier , which he call the library ; and those go first . I carry they , one after another , to a bookstall in the - one part of which , near we house , be almost all bookstall and bird shop then - and sell they for whatever they would bring . the keeper of this bookstall , who live in a little house behind it , use to get tipsy every night , and to be violently scold by he wife every morning . more than once , when I go there early , I have audience of he in a turn - up bedstead , with a cut in he forehead or a black eye , bear witness to he excess over-night ( I be afraid he be quarrelsome in he drink ) , and he , with a shaking hand , endeavour to find the needful shilling in one or other of the pocket of he clothes , which lay upon the floor , while he wife , with a baby in she arm and she sho down at heel , never leave off rate he . sometimes he have lose he money , and then he would ask I to call again ; but he wife have always get some - have take he , I dare say , while he be drink - and secretly complete the bargain on the stair , as we go down together . at the pawnbroker 's shop , too , I begin to be very well know . the principal gentleman who officiat behind the counter , take a good deal of notice of I ; and often get I , I recollect , to decline a Latin noun or adjective , or to conjugate a Latin verb , in he ear , while he transact my business . after all these occasion Mr . make a little treat , which be generally a supper ; and there be a peculiar relish in these meal which I well remember . at last 's difficulty come to a crisis , and he be arrest early one morning , and carry over to the 's in the Borough . he tell I , as he go out of the house , that the of day have now go down upon he - and I really think he heart be broken and mine too . but I hear , afterwards , that he be see to play a lively game at skittle , before noon . on the first after he be take there , I be
be to go and see he , and have dinner with he . I be to ask my way to such a place , and just short of that place I should see such another place , and just short of that I should see a yard , which I be to cross , and keep straight on until i see a turnkey . all this I do ; and when at last I do see a turnkey ( poor little fellow that I be ! ) , and think how , when be in a debtor ' prison , there be a man there with nothing on he but a old rug , the turnkey swam before my dim eye and my beat heart . be wait for I within the gate , and we go up to he room ( top story but one ) , and cry very much . he solemnly conjure I , I remember , to take warning by he fate ; and to observe that if a man have twenty pound a - year for he income , and spend nineteen pound nineteen shilling and sixpence , he would be happy , but that if he spend twenty pound one he would be miserable . after which he borrow a shilling of I for porter , give I a write order on for the amount , and put away he pocket - handkerchief , and cheer up . we sit before a little fire , with two brick put within the rust grate , one on each side , to prevent its burn too many coal ; until another debtor , who share the room with , come in from the bakehouse with the loin of mutton which be we joint - stock repast . then I be send up to ' ' in the room overhead , with 's compliment , and I be he young friend , and would captain lend I a knife and fork . lent I the knife and fork , with he compliment to . there be a very dirty lady in he little room , and two wan girl , he daughter , with shock head of hair . I think it be better to borrow 's knife and fork , than 's comb . the himself be in the last extremity of shabbiness , with large whisker , and a old , old brown great - coat with no other coat below it . I see he bed roll up in a corner ; and what plate and dish and pots he have , on a shelf ; and I divine ( know how ) that though the two girl with the shock head of hair be 's child , the dirty lady be not marry to . my timid station on he threshold be not occupy more than a couple of minute at most ; but I come down again with all this in my knowledge , as surely as the knife and fork be in my hand . there be something gipsy - like and agreeable in the dinner , after all . I take back 's knife and fork early in the afternoon , and go home to comfort Micawber with a account of my visit . she faint when she see I return , and make a little jug of egg - hot afterwards to conseal we while we talk it over . I do not know how the household furniture come to be sell for the family benefit , or who sell it , except that I do not . sell it be , however , and carry away in a van ; except the bed , a few chair , and the kitchen table . with these possession we encamp , as it be , in the two parlour of the empty house in ; , the child , the Orfling , and myself ; and live in those room night and day . I have no idea for how long , though it seem to I for a long time . at last Mrs . resolve to move into the prison , where have now secure a room to himself . so I take the key of the house to the landlord , who be very glad to get it ; and the bed be send over to the 's , except mine , for which a little room be hire outside the wall in the neighbourhood of that Institution , very much to my satisfaction , since the and I have become too used to one another , in we trouble , to part . the Orfling be likewise accommodate with a inexpensive lodging in the same neighbourhood . mine be a quiet back - garret with a sloping roof , command a pleasant prospect of a timberyard ; and when I take possession of it , with the reflection that 's trouble have come to a crisis at last , I think it quite a paradise . all this time I be work at and be in the same common way , and with the same common companion , and with the same sense of unmerited degradation as at first . but I never , happily for I no doubt , make a single acquaintance , or speak to any of the many boy whom I see daily in go to the warehouse , in come from it , and in prowl about the street at meal - time . I lead the same secretly unhappy life ; but I lead it in the same lonely , self - reliant manner . the only change I be conscious of be , firstly , that I have grow more shabby , and secondly , that I be now relieve of much of the weight of and 's car ; for some relative or friend have engage to help
help they at they present pass , and they liv more comfortably in the prison than they have liv for a long while out of it . I use to breakfast with they now , in virtue of some arrangement , of which I have forget the detail . I forget , too , at what hour the gate be open in the morning , admit of my go in ; but I know that I be often up at six o'clock , and that my favourite lounge - place in the interval be old , where I be will not to sit in one of the stone recess , watch the people go by , or to look over the balustrade at the sun shining in the water , and light up the golden flame on the top of the Monument . the Orfling meet I here sometimes , to be tell some astonishing fiction respect the wharve and the ; of which I can say no more than that I hope I believe they myself . in the evening I use to go back to the prison , and walk up and down the parade with ; or play casino with , and hear reminiscence of she papa and mama . whether know where I be , I be unable to say . I never tell they at and 's . 's affair , although past they crisis , be very much involved by reason of a certain ' deed ' , of which I use to hear a great deal , and which I suppose , now , to have be some former composition with he creditor , though I be so far from be clear about it then , that I be conscious of have confound it with those demoniacal parchment which be hold to have , once upon a time , obtain to a great extent in . at last this document appear to be get out of the way , somehow ; at all event it cease to be the rock - ahead it have be ; and inform I that ' she family ' have decide that should apply for he release under the , which would set he free , she expect , in about six week . ' and then , ' say , who be present , 'I have no doubt I shall , please , begin to be beforehand with the world , and to live in a perfectly new manner , if - in short , if anything turn up . ' by way of go in for anything that might be on the card , I call to mind that , about this time , compose a petition to the of , pray for a alteration in the law of imprisonment for debt . I set down this remembrance here , because it be a instance to myself of the manner in which I fit my old book to my altered life , and make story for myself , out of the street , and out of man and woman ; and how some main point in the character I shall unconsciously develop , I suppose , in write my life , be gradually form all this while . there be a club in the prison , in which , as a gentleman , be a great authority . have state he idea of this petition to the club , and the club have strongly approve of the same . Wherefore ( who be a thoroughly good - natured man , and as active a creature about everything but he own affair as ever exist , and never so happy as when he be busy about something that could never be of any profit to he ) set to work at the petition , invent it , engross it on a immense sheet of paper , spread it out on a table , and appoint a time for all the club , and all within the wall if they choose , to come up to he room and sign it . when I hear of this approaching ceremony , I be so anxious to see they all come in , one after another , though I know the greater part of they already , and they I , that I get a hour 's leave of absence from and 's , and establish myself in a corner for that purpose . as many of the principal member of the club as could be get into the small room without fill it , support in front of the petition , while my old friend ( who have wash himself , to do honou to so solemn a occasion ) statione himself close to it , to read it to all who be unacquainted with its contents . the door be then throw open , and the general population begin to come in , in a long file : several wait outside , while one enter , affix he signature , and go out . to everybody in succession , say : 'have you read it ? ' - ' no . ' - ' would you like to hear it read ? ' if he weakly show the least disposition to hear it , , in a loud sonorous voice , give he every word of it . the would have read it twenty thousand time , if twenty thousand people would have hear he , one by one . I remember a certain luscious roll he give to such phrasis as ' the people 's representative in parliament assemble ,' ' you petitioner therefore humbly approach you honourable house ,' ' he gracious Majesty 's unfortunate subject , ' as if the word be something real in he mouth , and delicious to taste ; , meanwhile , listen with a little of a author 's vanity ,
, and contemplate ( not severely ) the spike on the opposite wall . as I walk to and for daily between and , and lounge about at meal - time in obscure street , the stone of which may , for anything I know , be wear at this moment by my childish foot , I wonder how many of these people be want in the crowd that use to come filing before I in review again , to the echo of 's voice ! when my thought go back , now , to that slow agony of my youth , I wonder how much of the histories I invent for such people hang like a mist of fancy over well - remember fact ! when I tread the old ground , I do not wonder that I seem to see and pity , go on before I , a innocent romantic boy , make he imaginative world out of such strange experience and sordid thing ! chapter 12 Liking Life on my own account no , I form a great Resolution in due time , 's petition be ripe for hearing ; and that gentleman be order to be dischar under the Act , to my great joy . he creditor be not implacable ; and . inform I that even the revengeful boot - maker have declare in open court that he bear he no malice , but that when money be owe to he he like to be pay . he say he think it be human nature . m be return to the 's when he case be over , as some fee be to be settle , and some formality observe , before he could be actually release . the club receive he with transport , and hold a harmonic meeting that evening in he honour ; while and I have a lamb 's fry in private , surround by the sleeping family . 'On such a occasion I will give you , master , ' say , 'in a little more flip , ' for we have be have some already , ' the memory of my papa and mama. ' ' be they dead , ma'am ? ' I inquire , after drink the toast in a wine - glass . 'my mama depart this life , ' say , ' before 's difficulty commence , or at least before they become pressing . my papa live to bail several time , and then expire , regret by a numerous circle . ' shook she head , and drop a pious tear upon the twin who happen to be in hand . as I could hardly hope for a more favourable opportunity of put a question in which I have a near interest , I say to : ' may I ask , ma 'am , what you and intend to do , now that be out of he difficulty , and at liberty ? have you settle yet ? ' ' my family , ' say , who always say those two word with a air , though I never could discover who come under the denomination , 'my family be of opinion that should quit , and exert he talents in the country . be a man of great talent , . ' I say I be sure of that . ' of great talent , ' repeat . ' my family be of opinion , that , with a little interest , something might be do for a man of he ability in the . the influence of my family be local , it be they wish that should go down to . they think it indispensable that he should be upon the spot . ' ' that he may be ready ? ' I suggest . ' exactly , ' return . ' that he may be ready - in case of anything turn up . ' ' and do you go too , ma 'am ? ' the event of the day , in combination with the twin , if not with the flip , have make hysterical , and she she tear as she reply : 'i never will desert . may have conceal he difficulty from I in the first instance , but he sanguine temper may have lead he to expect that he would overcome they . the pearl necklace and bracelet which I inherit from , have be dispose of for less than half they value ; and the set of coral , which be the wedding gift of my papa , have be actually throw away for nothing . but I never will desert . no ! ' cry , more affected than before , 'I never will do it ! it be of no use ask I ! ' I feel quite uncomfortable - as if suppose I have ask she to do anything of the sort ! - and sit look at she in alarm . ' have he fault . I do not deny that he be improvident . I do not deny that he have keep I in the dark as to he resource and he liability both , ' she go on , look at the wall ; ' but I never will desert ! ' have now raise she voice into a perfect scream , I be so frightened that I run off to the club - room , and disturb in the act of presiding at a long table , and lead the chorus of up , , , , up , , up , and gee ho - of - o ! with the tiding that . be in a alarming state , upon which he immediately burst into tear , and come away with I with he waistcoat full of the head and tail of shrimp , of which he have be partak .
. ' , my angel ! ' cry , run into the room ; ' what be the matter ? ' 'I never will desert you , ! ' she exclaim . 'My life ! ' say , take she in he arm . 'I be perfectly aware of it . ' ' he be the parent of my child ! he be the father of my twin ! he be the husband of my affection , ' cry , struggle ; ' and I ne - ver - will - desert ! ' be so deeply affect by this proof of she devotion ( as to I , I be dissolve in tear ) , that he hang over she in a passionate manner , implor she to look up , and to be calm . but the more he ask . to look up , the more she fix she eye on nothing ; and the more he ask she to compose herself , the more she would not . consequently be soon so overcome , that he mingle he tear with hers and mine ; until he beg I to do he the favour of take a chair on the staircase , while he get she into bed . I would have take my leave for the night , but he would not hear of my do that until the strangers 's bell should ring . so I sit at the staircase window , until he come out with another chair and join I . ' how be now , sir ? ' I say . ' very low , ' say , shak he head ; ' reaction . ah , this have be a dreadful day ! we stand alone now - everything be go from we ! ' press my hand , and groan , and afterwards she tear . I be greatly touche , and disappoint too , for I have expect that we should be quite gay on this happy and long - look - for occasion . but and . be so use to they old difficulty , I think , that they feel quite shipwreck when they come to consider that they be release from they . all they elasticity be depart , and I never see they half so wretch as on this night ; insomuch that when the bell rang , and walk with I to the lodge , and part from I there with a blessing , I feel quite afraid to leave he by himself , he be so profoundly miserable . but through all the confusion and lowness of spirit in which we have be , so unexpectedly to I , involve , I plainly discern that and and they family be go away from , and that a parting between we be near at hand . it be in my walk home that night , and in the sleepless hour which follow when I lay in bed , that the thought first occur to I - though I do not know how it come into my head - which afterwards shape itself into a settled resolution . I have grow to be so accustom to the , and have be so intimate with they in they distress , and be so utterly friendless without they , that the prospect of be throw upon some new shift for a lodging , and go once more among unknown people , be like be that moment turn adrift into my present life , with such a knowledge of it ready make as experience have give I . all the sensitive feeling it wound so cruelly , all the shame and misery it keep alive within my breast , become more poignant as I think of this ; and I determine that the life be unendurable . that there be no hope of escape from it , unless the escape be my own act , I know quite well . I rarely hear from , and never from : but two or three parcel of make or mende clothes have come up for I , consign to , and in each there be a scrap of paper to the effect that trust be apply himself to business , and devote himself wholly to he duty - not the least hint of my ever be anything else than the common drudge into which I be fast settle down . the very next day show I , while my mind be in the first agitation of what it have conceive , that . have not speak of they go away without warrant . they take a lodging in the house where I liv , for a week ; at the expiration of which time they be to start for . himself come down to the counting - house , in the afternoon , to tell Quinion that he must relinquish I on the day of he departure , and to give I a high character , which I be sure I deserv . and , call in the carman , who be a married man , and have a room to let , quarter I prospectively on he - by we mutual consent , as he have every reason to think ; for I say nothing , though my resolution be now take . I pass my evening with and , during the remaining term of we residence under the same roof ; and I think we become fonder of one another as the time go on . on the last , they invite I to dinner ; and we have a loin of pork and apple sauce , and a pudding . I have buy a spot wooden horse over -night as a part gift to little - that be the boy - and a doll for little . I have also bestow a shilling on the Orfling , who
who be about to be disband . we have a very pleasant day , though we be all in a tender state about we approaching separation . 'I shall never , , ' say , ' revert to the period when be in difficulty , without think of you . you conduct have always be of the most delicate and oblige description . you have never be a lodger . you have be a friend . ' 'My dear , ' say ; ' , ' for so he have be accustom to call I , of late , ' have a heart to feel for the distress of he fellow - creature when they be behind a cloud , and a head to plan , and a hand to - in short , a general ability to dispose of such available property as could be make away with . ' I express my sense of this commendation , and say I be very sorry we be go to lose one another . ' my dear young friend , ' say , 'I be older than you ; a man of some experience in life , and - and of some experience , in short , in difficulty , generally speak . at present , and until something turn up ( which I be , I may say , hourly expect ) , I have nothing to bestow but advice . still my advice be so far worth take , that - in short , that I have never take it myself , and be the ' - here , who have be beam and smile , all over he head and face , up to the present moment , check himself and frown - ' the miserable wretch you behold . ' 'my dear ! ' urge he wife . 'I say , ' return , quite forget himself , and smile again , ' the miserable wretch you behold . my advice be , never do tomorrow what you can do today . Procrastination be the thief of time . collar he ! ' ' my poor papa 's maxim ,' observ . ' my dear , ' say , ' you papa be very well in he way , and forbid that I should disparage he . take he for all in all , we ne 'er shall - in short , make the acquaintance , probably , of anybody else possessing , at he time of life , the same leg for gaiter , and able to read the same description of print , without spectacle . but he apply that maxe to we marriage , my dear ; and that be so far prematurely enter into , in consequence , that I never recover the expense . ' look aside at , and add : ' not that I be sorry for it . quite the contrary , my love . ' after which , he be grave for a minute or so . ' my other piece of advice , , ' say , ' you know . annual income twenty pound , annual expenditure nineteen nineteen and six , result happiness . annual income twenty pound , annual expenditure twenty pound ought and six , result misery . the blossom be blight , the leaf be wither , the god of day go down upon the dreary scene , and - and in short you be for ever floor . as I be ! ' to make he example the more impressive , drank a glass of punch with a air of great enjoyment and satisfaction , and whistle the . I do not fail to assure he that I would store these precept in my mind , though indeed I have no need to do so , for , at the time , they affect I visibly . next morning I meet the whole family at the coach office , and see they , with a desolate heart , take they place outside , at the back . ' master , ' say , ' bless you ! I never can forget all that , you know , and I never would if I could . ' ' , ' say , ' farewell ! every happiness and prosperity ! if , in the progress of revolve year , I could persuade myself that my blighted destiny have be a warning to you , I should feel that I have not occupy another man 's place in existence altogether in vain . in case of anything turn up ( of which I be rather confident ) , I shall be extremely happy if it should be in my power to improve you prospect . ' I think , as Mrs . sit at the back of the coach , with the child , and I stand in the road look wistfully at they , a mist clear from she eye , and she see what a little creature I really be . I think so , because she beckon to I to climb up , with quite a new and motherly expression in she face , and put she arm round my neck , and give I just such a kiss as she might have give to she own boy . I have barely time to get down again before the coach start , and I could hardly see the family for the handkerchief they wave . it be go in a minute . the Orfling and I stand look vacantly at each other in the middle of the road , and then shook hand and say good - bye ; she go back , I suppose , to 's workhouse , as I go to begin my weary day at and 's . but with no intention of passing many more weary day there . no . I have resolve to run
run away . - to go , by some means or other , down into the country , to the only relation I have in the world , and tell my story to my aunt , . I have already observ that I do not know how this desperate idea come into my brain . but , once there , it remain there ; and harden into a purpose than which I have never entertaine a more determined purpose in my life . I be far from sure that I believe there be anything hopeful in it , but my mind be thoroughly make up that it must be carry into execution . again , and again , and a hundred time again , since the night when the thought have first occur to I and banish sleep , I have go over that old story of my poor mother 's about my birth , which it have be one of my great delight in the old time to hear she tell , and which I know by heart . my aunt walk into that story , and walk out of it , a dread and awful personage ; but there be one little trait in she behaviour which I like to dwell on , and which give I some faint shadow of encouragement . I could not forget how my mother have think that she feel she touch she pretty hair with no ungentle hand ; and though it might have be altogether my mother 's fancy , and might have have no foundation whatever in fact , I make a little picture , out of it , of my terrible aunt relent towards the girlish beauty that I recollect so well and love so much , which soften the whole narrative . it be very possible that it have be in my mind a long time , and have gradually engender my determination . as I do not even know where liv , I write a long letter to , and ask she , incidentally , if she remember ; pretend that I have hear of such a lady live at a certain place I name at random , and have a curiosity to know if it be the same . in the course of that letter , I tell that I have a particular occasion for half a guinea ; and that if she could lend I that sum until I could repay it , I should be very much oblige to she , and would tell she afterwards what I have want it for . 's answer soon arrive , and be , as usual , full of affectionate devotion . she enclose the half guinea ( I be afraid she must have have a world of trouble to get it out of 's box ) , and tell I that live near , but whether at itself , at , , or , she could not say . one of we man , however , inform I on my ask he about these place , that they be all close together , I deem this enough for my object , and resolve to set out at the end of that week . be a very honest little creature , and unwill to disgrase the memory I be go to leave behind I at and 's , I consider myself bound to remain until night ; and , as I have be pay a week 's wage in advance when I first come there , not to present myself in the counting - house at the usual hour , to receive my stipend . for this express reason , I have borrow the half - guinea , that I might not be without a fund for my travelling - expense . accordingly , when the night come , and we be all wait in the warehouse to be pay , and Tipp the carman , who always take precedence , go in first to draw he money , I shook by the hand ; ask he , when it come to he turn to be pay , to say to that I have go to move my box to Tipp's ; and , bid a last good night to , run away . my box be at my old lodging , over the water , and I have write a direction for it on the back of one of we address card that we nail on the cask : ' , to be leave till call for , at the , . ' this I have in my pocket ready to put on the box , after I should have get it out of the house ; and as I go towards my lodging , I look about I for someone who would help I to carry it to the booking - office . there be a long - leg young man with a very little empty donkey - cart , stand near the , in the , whose eye I catch as I be go by , and who , address I as ' of bad hag pence , ' hope 'I should know he agin to swear to ' - in allusion , I have no doubt , to my staring at he . I stop to assure he that I have not do so in bad manners , but uncertain whether he might or might not like a job . ' Wot job ? ' say the long - leg young man . 'To move a box ,' I answer . ' Wot box ? ' say the long - leg young man . I tell he mine , which be down that street there , and which I want he to take to the Dover coach office for sixpence . ' do with you for a tanner ! ' say the long -
- leg young man , and directly get upon he cart , which be nothing but a large wooden tray on wheel , and rattle away at such a rate , that it be as much as I could do to keep pace with the donkey . there be a defiant manner about this young man , and particularly about the way in which he chew straw as he speak to I , that I do not much like ; as the bargain be make , however , I take he upstairs to the room I be leave , and we bring the box down , and put it on he cart . now , I be unwilling to put the direction - card on there , lest any of my landlord 's family should fathom what I be do , and detain I ; so I say to the young man that I would be glad if he would stop for a minute , when he come to the dead - wall of the 's prison . the word be no sooner out of my mouth , than he rattle away as if he , my box , the cart , and the donkey , be all equally mad ; and I be quite out of breath with running and call after he , when I catch he at the place appoint . be much flush and excit , I tumble my half - guinea out of my pocket in pull the card out . I put it in my mouth for safety , and though my hand tremble a good deal , have just tie the card on very much to my satisfaction , when I feel myself violently chuck under the ching by the long - leg young man , and see my half - guinea fly out of my mouth into he hand . ' ! ' say the young man , seize I by my jacket collar , with a frightful grin . ' this be a pollis case , be it ? you be a - go to bolt , be you ? come to the pollis , you young warmin , come to the pollis ! ' ' you give I my money back , if you please , ' say I , very much frightened ; 'and leave I alone . ' ' come to the pollis ! ' say the young man . ' you shall prove it yourn to the pollis . ' ' give I my box and money , will you ,' I cry , burst into tear . the young man still reply : ' come to the pollis ! ' and be drag I against the donkey in a violent manner , as if there be any affinity between that animal and a magistrate , when he change he mind , jump into the cart , sit upon my box , and , exclaim that he would drive to the pollis straight , rattle away harder than ever . I run after he as fast as I could , but I have no breath to call out with , and should not have da to call out , now , if I have . I narrowly escape be run over , twenty time at least , in half a mile . now I lose he , now I see he , now I lose he , now I be cut at with a whip , now shoute at , now down in the mud , now up again , now run into somebody 's arm , now run headlong at a post . at length , confuse by fright and heat , and doubt whether half might not by this time be turn out for my apprehension , I leave the young man to go where he would with my box and money ; and , pante and cry , but never stop , face about for , which I have be on the : take very little more out of the world , towards the retreat of my aunt , , than I have bring into it , on the night when my arrival give she so much umbrage . chapter 13 the Sequel of my resolution for anything I know , I may have have some wild idea of run all the way to , when I give up the pursuit of the young man with the donkey - cart , and start for . my scattered sense be soon collect as to that point , if I have ; for I come to a stop in the , at a terrace with a piece of water before it , and a great foolish image in the middle , blow a dry shell . here I sit down on a doorstep , quite spend and exhaust with the effort I have already make , and with hardly breath enough to cry for the loss of my box and half - guinea . it be by this time dark ; I hear the clock strike ten , as I sit resting . but it be a summer night , fortunately , and fine weather . when I have recover my breath , and have get rid of a stifling sensation in my throat , I rise up and go on . in the midst of my distress , I have no notion of go back . I doubt if I should have have any , though there have be a swiss snow - drift in the . but my stand possessed of only three - halfpence in the world ( and I be sure I wonder how they come to be leave in my pocket on a night ! ) trouble I no the less because I go on . I begin to picture to myself , as a scrap of newspaper intelligence , my be
be find dead in a day or two , under some hedge ; and I trudge on miserably , though as fast as I could , until I happen to pass a little shop , where it be write up that ladie ' and gentleman 's wardrobe be buy , and that the best price be give for rag , bone , and kitchen - stuff . the master of this shop be sit at the door in he shirt -sleeve , smoke ; and as there be a great many coat and pair of trousers dangl from the low ceiling , and only two feeble candle burn inside to show what they be , I fancie that he look like a man of a revengeful disposition , who have hang all he enemy , and be enjoy himself . my late experience with and . suggest to I that here might be a means of keep off the wolf for a little while . I go up the next by - street , take off my waistcoat , roll it neatly under my arm , and come back to the shop door . ' if you please , sir ,' I say , 'I be to sell this for a fair price . ' - be the name over the shop door , at least - take the waistcoat , stand he pipe on its head , against the door - post , go into the shop , follow by I , snuff the two candle with he finger , spread the waistcoat on the counter , and look at it there , hold it up against the light , and look at it there , and ultimately say : ' what do you call a price , now , for this here little weskit ? ' 'Oh ! you know best , sir ,' I return modestly . 'I can not be buyer and seller too , ' say . ' put a price on this here little weskit . ' ' would eighteenpence be ? '- I hint , after some hesitation . roll it up again , and give it I back . 'I should rob my family , ' he say , ' if I be to offer ninepence for it . ' this be a disagreeable way of put the business ; because it impos upon I , a perfect stranger , the unpleasantness of ask to rob he family on my account . my circumstance be so very pressing , however , I say I would take ninepence for it , if he please . , not without some grumbling , give ninepence . I wish he good night , and walk out of the shop the richer by that sum , and the poorer by a waistcoat . but when I button my jacket , that be not much . indeed , I foresee pretty clearly that my jacket would go next , and that I should have to make the best of my way to Dover in a shirt and a pair of trousers , and might deem myself lucky if I get there even in that trim . but my mind do not run so much on this as might be suppose . beyond a general impression of the distance before I , and of the young man with the donkey - cart have use I cruelly , I think I have no very urgent sense of my difficulty when I once again set off with my ninepence in my pocket . a plan have occur to I for pass the night , which I be go to carry into execution . this be , to lie behind the wall at the back of my old school , in a corner where there use to be a haystack . I imagine it would be a kind of company to have the boy , and the bedroom where I use to tell the story , so near I : although the boy would know nothing of my be there , and the bedroom would yield I no shelter . I have have a hard day 's work , and be pretty well jad when I come climbe out , at last , upon the level of . it cost I some trouble to find out ; but I find it , and I find a haystack in the corner , and I lay down by it ; have first walk round the wall , and look up at the window , and see that all be dark and silent withing . never shall I forget the lonely sensation of first lie down , without a roof above my head ! sleep come upon I as it come on many other outcast , against whom house - door be locked , and house - dog barked , that night - and I dream of lie on my old school - bed , talk to the boy in my room ; and find myself sit upright , with 's name upon my lip , look wildly at the star that be glisten and glimmer above I . when I remembe where I be at that untimely hour , a feeling stole upon I that make I get up , afraid of I do not know what , and walk about . but the fainter glimmering of the star , and the pale light in the sky where the day be come , reassure I : and my eye be very heavy , I lay down again and sleep - though with a knowledge in my sleep that it be cold - until the warm beam of the sun , and the ringing of the get - up bell at , awoke I . if I could have hope that be there , I would have lurk about until he come out alone ; but
but I know he must have leave long since . Traddle still remain , perhaps , but it be very doubtful ; and I have not sufficient confidence in he discretion or good luck , however strong my reliance be on he good nature , to wish to trust he with my situation . so I creep away from the wall as 's boy be get up , and strike into the long dusty track which I have first know to be the when I be one of they , and when I little expect that any eye would ever see I the wayfarer I be now , upon it . what a different morning from the old morning at ! in due time I hear the church - bell ringing , as I plod on ; and I meet people who be go to church ; and I pass a church or two where the congregation be inside , and the sound of singing come out into the sunshine , while the beadle sat and cool himself in the shade of the porch , or stand beneath the yew - tree , with he hand to he forehead , glower at I go by . but the peace and rest of the old morning be on everything , except I . that be the difference . I feel quite wicked in my dirt and dust , with my tangled hair . but for the quiet picture I have conjure up , of my mother in she youth and beauty , weep by the fire , and my aunt relent to she , I hardly think I should have have the courage to go on until next day . but it always go before I , and I follow . I get , that , through three - and - twenty mile on the straight road , though not very easily , for I be new to that kind of toil . I see myself , as evening close in , come over the bridge at , footsore and tired , and eat bread that I have buy for supper . one or two little house , with the notice , ' Lodgings for travellers 's , hang out , have temp I ; but I be afraid of spend the few pence I have , and be even more afraid of the vicious look of the tramper I have meet or overtaken . I seek no shelter , therefore , but the sky ; and toil into , - which , in that night 's aspect , be a mere dream of chalk , and drawbridge , and mastless ship in a muddy river , roof like 's ark , - crept , at last , upon a sort of grass - grow battery overhange a lane , where a sentry be walk to and fro . here I lay down , near a cannon ; and , happy in the society of the sentry 's footstep , though he know no more of my be above he than the boy at have know of my lie by the wall , sleep soundly until morning . very stiff and sore of foot I be in the morning , and quite daze by the beating of drum and marching of troops , which seem to hem I in on every side when I go down towards the long narrow street . feel that I could go but a very little way that day , if I be to reserve any strength for get to my journey 's end , I resolve to make the sale of my jacket its principal business . accordingly , I take the jacket off , that I might learn to do without it ; and carry it under my arm , begin a tour of inspection of the various slop - shops . it be a likely place to sell a jacket in ; for the dealer in second - hand clothes be numerous , and be , generally speak , on the look - out for customer at they shop door . but as most of they have , hang up among they stock , a officer 's coat or two , epaulette and all , I be render timid by the costly nature of they dealings , and walk about for a long time without offer my merchandise to anyone . this modesty of mine direct my attention to the marine - store shop , and such shop as 's , in preference to the regular dealer . at last I find one that I think look promising , at the corner of a dirty lane , end in a enclosure full of stinging - nettle , against the paling of which some second - hand sailor ' clothes , that seem to have overflow the shop , be flutter among some cot , and rusty gun , and oilskin hat , and certain tray full of so many old rusty key of so many size that they seem various enough to open all the door in the world . into this shop , which be low and small , and which be darken rather than light by a little window , overhng with clothes , and be descende into by some step , I go with a palpitat heart ; which be not relieve when a ugly old man , with the lower part of he face all cover with a stubbly grey beard , rush out of a dirty den behind it , and seize I by the hair of my head . he be a dreadful old man to look at , in a filthy flannel waistcoat , and smell terribly of rum . he bedstead , cover with a tumble and rag piece of patchwork , be in the den he have come from , where another little window show
show a prospect of more stinging - nettle , and a lame donkey . ' oh , what do you want ? ' grin this old man , in a fierce , monotonous whine . ' oh , my eye and limb , what do you want ? oh , my lung and liver , what do you want ? oh , goroo , goroo ! ' I be so much dismay by these word , and particularly by the repetition of the last unknown one , which be a kind of rattle in he throat , that I could make no answer ; hereupon the old man , still hold I by the hair , repeat : ' oh , what do you want ? oh , my eye and limb , what do you want ? oh , my lung and liver , what do you want ? oh , goroo ! ' - which he screw out of himself , with a energy that make he eye start in he head . 'I want to know ,' I say , trembl , ' if you would buy a jacket . ' 'Oh , let 's see the jacket ! ' cry the old man . ' oh , my heart on fire , show the jacket to we ! oh , my eye and limb , bring the jacket out ! ' with that he take he trembling hand , which be like the claw of a great bird , out of my hair ; and put on a pair of spectacle , not at all ornamental to he inflam eye . 'Oh , how much for the jacket ? ' cry the old man , after examine it . 'Oh - goroo ! - how much for the jacket ? ' - a - crown ,' I answer , recover myself . ' oh , my lung and liver , ' cry the old man , 'no ! oh , my eye , no ! oh , my limb , no ! Eighteenpence . ! ' every time he uttere this ejaculation , he eye seem to be in danger of start out ; and every sentence he speak , he deliver in a sort of tune , always exactly the same , and more like a gust of wind , which begin low , mount up high , and fall again , than any other comparison I can find for it . ' well , ' say I , glad to have close the bargain , ' I will take eighteenpence . ' 'Oh , my liver ! ' cry the old man , throw the jacket on a shelf . ' get out of the shop ! oh , my lung , get out of the shop ! oh , my eye and limb - goroo ! - do not ask for money ; make it a exchange . ' I never be so frightened in my life , before or since ; but I tell he humbly that I want money , and that nothing else be of any use to I , but that I would wait for it , as he desire , outside , and have no wish to hurry he . so I go outside , and sit down in the shade in a corner . and I sit there so many hour , that the shade become sunlight , and the sunlight become shade again , and still I sit there wait for the money . there never be such another drunken madman in that line of business , I hope . that he be well know in the neighbourhood , and enjoy the reputation of have sell himself to the devil , I soon understand from the visit he receive from the boy , who continually come skirmish about the shop , shout that legend , and call to he to bring out he gold . ' you be not poor , you know , , as you pretend . bring out you gold . bring out some of the gold you sell yourself to the devil for . come ! it be in the lining of the mattress , . rip it open and let 's have some ! ' this , and many offer to lend he a knife for the purpose , exasperate he to such a degree , that the whole day be a succession of rush on he part , and flight on the part of the boy . sometimes in he rage he would take I for one of they , and come at I , mouthe as if he be go to tear I in piece ; then , remembere I , just in time , would dive into the shop , and lie upon he bed , as I think from the sound of he voice , yell in a frantic way , to he own windy tune , the ' death of ' ; with a oh ! before every line , and innumerable Goroos intersperse . as if this be not bad enough for I , the boy , connect I with the establishment , on account of the patience and perseverance with which I sit outside , half - dress , pelt I , and use I very ill all day . he make many attempt to induce I to consent to a exchange ; at one time come out with a fishing - rod , at another with a fiddle , at another with a cocked hat , at another with a flute . but I resist all these overture , and sit there in desperation ; each time ask he , with tear in my eye , for my money or my jacket . at last he begin to pay I in halfpence at a time ; and be full two hour get by easy
easy stage to a shilling . ' oh , my eye and limb ! ' he then cry , pee hideously out of the shop , after a long pause , ' will you go for twopence more ? ' 'I can not ,' I say ; 'I shall be starve . ' 'Oh , my lung and liver , will you go for threepence ? ' 'I would go for nothing , if I could ,' I say , ' but I want the money badly . ' 'Oh , go - roo ! ' ( it be really impossible to express how he twist this ejaculation out of himself , as he pee round the door - post at I , show nothing but he crafty old head ) ; ' will you go for fourpence ? ' I be so faint and weary that I close with this offer ; and take the money out of he claw , not without trembling , go away more hungry and thirsty than I have ever be , a little before sunset . but at a expense of threepence I soon refresh myself completely ; and , be in better spirits then , lim seven mile upon my road . my be at night be under another haystack , where I rest comfortably , after have wash my blistered foot in a stream , and dress they as well as I be able , with some cool leave . when I take the road again next morning , I find that it lay through a succession of hop - grounds and orchard . it be sufficientely late in the year for the orchard to be ruddy with ripe apple ; and in a few place the hop - picker be already at work . I think it all extremely beautiful , and make up my mind to sleep among the hops that night : imagine some cheerful companionship in the long perspectife of pole , with the graceful leave twine round they . the tramper be worse than ever that day , and inspire I with a dread that be yet quite fresh in my mind . some of they be most ferocious - look ruffian , who star at I as I go by ; and stop , perhaps , and call after I to come back and speak to they , and when I take to my heel , ston I . I recollect one young fellow - a tinker , I suppose , from he wallet and brazier - who have a woman with he , and who face about and star at I thus ; and then roar to I in such a tremendous voice to come back , that I halt and look round . ' come here , when you be call , ' say the tinker , 'or I will rip you young body open . ' I think it best to go back . as I draw nearer to they , try to propitiate the tinker by my look , I observe that the woman have a black eye . ' where be you go ? ' say the tinker , grip the bosom of my shirt with he blacken hand . 'I be go to Dover ,' I say . ' where do you come from ? ' ask the tinker , give he hand another turn in my shirt , to hold I more securely . 'I come from ,' I say . ' what lay be you upon ? ' ask the tinker . ' be you a prig ? ' - no ,' I say . ' be not you , by g -- ? if you make a brag of you honesty to I , ' say the tinker , 'I will knock you brain out . ' with he disengage hand he make a menace of strike I , and then look at I from head to foot . ' have you get the price of a pint of beer about you ? ' say the tinker . ' if you have , out with it , afore I take it away ! ' I should certainly have produce it , but that I meet the woman 's look , and see she very slightly shake she head , and form ' no ! ' with she lip . 'I be very poor ,' I say , attempt to smile , ' and have get no money . ' ' why , what do you mean ? ' say the tinker , look so sternly at I , that I almost fear he see the money in my pocket . ' ! ' I stammer . ' what do you mean , ' say the tinker , ' by wear my brother 's silk handkerchief ! give it over here ! ' and he have mine off my neck in a moment , and toss it to the woman . the woman burst into a fit of laughter , as if she think this a joke , and toss it back to I , nod once , as slightly as before , and make the word ' ! ' with she lip . before I could obey , however , the tinker seize the handkerchief out of my hand with a roughness that throw I away like a feather , and put it loosely round he own neck , turn upon the woman with a oath , and knock she down . I never shall forget see she fall backward on the hard road , and lie there with she bonnet tumble off , and she hair all whiten in the dust ; nor , when I look back from a distance , see she sit on the pathway , which be a bank by the roadside , wip the blood from she face with a corner
corner of she shawl , while he go on ahead . this adventure frightene I so , that , afterwards , when I see any of these people come , I turn back until I could find a hiding - place , where I remain until they have go out of sight ; which happen so often , that I be very seriously delay . but under this difficulty , as under all the other difficulty of my journey , I seem to be sustain and lead on by my fanciful picture of my mother in she youth , before I come into the world . it always keep I company . it be there , among the hops , when I lay down to sleep ; it be with I on my wake in the morning ; it go before I all day . I have associate it , ever since , with the sunny street of , do as it be in the hot light ; and with the sight of it be old house and gateway , and the stately , , with the rook sail round the towers . when I come , at last , upon the bare , wide down near , it relieve the solitary aspect of the scene with hope ; and not until I reach that first great aim of my journey , and actually set foot in the town itself , on the sixth day of my flight , do it desert I . but then , strange to say , when I stand with my ragged shoe , and my dusty , sunburnt , half - clothed figure , in the place so long desire , it seem to vanish like a dream , and to leave I helpless and dispirit . I inquire about my aunt among the boatman first , and receive various answer . one say she live in the , and have singe she whisker by do so ; another , that she be make fast to the great buoy outside the harbour , and could only be visit at half - tide ; a third , that she be lock up in Maidstone jail for child - stealing ; a fourth , that she be see to mount a broom in the last high wind , and make direct for Calais . the fly-driver , among whom I inquire next , be equally jocose and equally disrespectful ; and the shopkeeper , not like my appearance , generally reply , without hear what I have to say , that they have get nothing for I . I feel more miserable and destitute than I have do at any period of my running away . my money be all gone , I have nothing leave to dispose of ; I be hungry , thirsty , and wear out ; and see as distant from my end as if I have remain in . the morning have wear away in these inquiry , and I be sit on the step of a empty shop at a street corner , near the market - place , deliberat upon wander towards those other place which have be mention , when a fly - driver , come by with he carriage , drop a horsecloth . something good - natured in the man 's face , as I hand it up , encourage I to ask he if he could tell I where liv ; though I have ask the question so often , that it almost die upon my lip . ' Trotwood , ' say he . ' let I see . I know the name , too . old lady ? ' ' yes ,' I say , ' rather . ' ' pretty stiff in the back ? ' say he , make himself upright . ' yes ,' I say . 'I should think it very likely . ' ' carry a bag ? ' say he - ' bag with a good deal of room in it - be gruffish , and come down upon you , sharp ? ' my heart sank within I as I acknowledge the undoubted accuracy of this description . ' why then , I tell you what , ' say he . ' if you go up there , ' point with he whip towards the height , ' and keep right on till you come to some house face the sea , I think you will hear of she . my opinion be she will not stand anything , so here be a penny for you . ' I accept the gift thankfully , and buy a loaf with it . Dispatche this refreshment by the way , I go in the direction my friend have indicate , and walk on a good distance without come to the house he have mention . at length I see some before I ; and approach they , go into a little shop ( it be what we use to call a general shop , at home ) , and inquire if they could have the goodness to tell I where liv . I address myself to a man behind the counter , who be weigh some rice for a young woman ; but the latter , take the inquiry to herself , turn round quickly . ' my mistress ? ' she say . ' what do you want with she , boy ? ' 'I want ,' I reply , 'to speak to she , if you please . ' 'to beg of she , you mean , ' retort the damsel . ' no ,' I say , ' indeed . ' but suddenly remembere that in truth I come for no other purpose , I hold my peace in confusion , and feel my face burn . my aunt 's handmaid , as I suppose she
she be from what she have say , put she rice in a little basket and walk out of the shop ; tell I that I could follow she , if I want to know where liv . I need no second permission ; though I be by this time in such a state of consternation and agitation , that my leg shook under I . I follow the young woman , and we soon come to a very neat little cottage with cheerful bow-window : in front of it , a small square gravell court or garden full of flower , carefully ten , and smell deliciously . ' this be 's , ' say the young woman . ' now you know ; and that be all I have get to say . ' with which word she hurry into the house , as if to shake off the responsibility of my appearance ; and leave I stand at the garden - gate , look disconsolately over the top of it towards the parlour window , where a muslin curtain partly undrawn in the middle , a large round green screen or fan fasten on to the windowsill , a small table , and a great chair , suggest to I that my aunt might be at that moment seat in awful state . my shoe be by this time in a woeful condition . the sole have she themselves bit by bit , and the upper leather have break and burst until the very shape and form of shoe have depart from they . my hat ( which have serve I for a night - cap , too ) be so crushed and bent , that no old batter handleless saucepan on a dunghill need have be asham to vie with it . my shirt and trousers , stain with heat , dew , grass , and the Kentish soil on which I have sleep - and tear besides - might have frighten the bird from my aunt 's garden , as I stand at the gate . my hair have know no comb or brush since I leave . my face , neck , and hand , from unaccustomed exposure to the air and sun , be burnt to a berry - brown . from head to foot I be powder almost as white with chalk and dust , as if I have come out of a lime - kiln . in this plight , and with a strong consciousness of it , I wait to introduce myself to , and make my first impression on , my formidable aunt . the unbroken stillness of the parlour window lead I to infer , after a while , that she be not there , I lift up my eye to the window above it , where I see a florid , pleasant - look gentleman , with a grey head , who shut up one eye in a grotesque manner , nod he head at I several time , shook it at I as often , laugh , and go away . I have be discompose enough before ; but I be so much the more discompose by this unexpected behaviour , that I be on the point of slink off , to think how I have best proceed , when there come out of the house a lady with she handkerchief tie over she cap , and a pair of gardening glove on she hand , wear a gardening pocket like a toll - man 's apron , and carry a great knife . I know she immediately to be , for she come stalk out of the house exactly as my poor mother have so often describe she stalk up we garden at . 'Go away ! ' say , shak she head , and make a distant chop in the air with she knife . ' go along ! no boy here ! ' I watch she , with my heart at my lip , as she march to a corner of she garden , and stoop to dig up some little root there . then , without a scrap of courage , but with a great deal of desperation , I go softly in and stand beside she , touch she with my finger . ' if you please , ma 'am ,' I begin . she start and look up . ' if you please , aunt . ' 'eh ? ' exclaim , in a tone of amazement I have never hear approach . ' if you please , aunt , I be you nephew . ' 'Oh , ! ' say my aunt . and sit flat down in the garden - path . 'I be , of , in - where you come , on the night when I be bear , and see my dear mama . I have be very unhappy since she die . I have be slighte , and teach nothing , and throw upon myself , and put to work not fit for I . it make I run away to you . I be rob at first set out , and have walk all the way , and have never sleep in a bed since I begin the journey . ' here my self - support give way all at once ; and with a movement of my hand , intend to show she my rag state , and call it to witness that I have suffer something , I break into a passion of crying , which I suppose have be pend up within I all the week . my aunt , with every sort of expression but wonder dischar from she countenance , sit on the gravel , stare at I , until I begin to cry ; when she get up in a great hurry , collar I , and take
take I into the parlour . she first proceed there be to unlock a tall press , bring out several bottle , and pour some of the contents of each into my mouth . I think they must have be take out at random , for I be sure I taste aniseed water , anchovy sauce , and salad dressing . when she have administer these restorative , as I be still quite hysterical , and unable to control my sob , she put I on the sofa , with a shawl under my head , and the handkerchief from she own head under my foot , lest I should sully the cover ; and then , sit herself down behind the green fan or screen I have already mention , so that I could not see she face , ejaculate at interval , ' on we ! ' let those exclamation off like minute gun . after a time she ring the bell . ' , ' say my aunt , when she servant come in . 'Go upstairs , give my compliment to , and say I wish to speak to he . ' look a little surprised to see I lie stifinitely on the sofa ( I be afraid to move lest it should be displease to my aunt ) , but go on she errand . my aunt , with she hand behind she , walk up and down the room , until the gentleman who have squint at I from the upper window come in laughing . ' , ' say my aunt , 'do not be a fool , because nobody can be more discreet than you can , when you choose . we all know that . so do not be a fool , whatever you be . ' the gentleman be serious immediately , and look at I , I think , as if he would entreat I to say nothing about the window . ' , ' say my aunt , ' you have hear I mention ? now do not pretend not to have a memory , because you and I know better . ' ' ? ' say , who do not appear to I to remember much about it . ' ? oh yes , to be sure . , certainly . ' ' well , ' say my aunt , ' this be he boy - he son . he would be as like he father as it be possible to be , if he be not so like he mother , too . ' ' he son ? ' say . ' 's son ? indeed ! ' ' yes , ' pursue my aunt , ' and he have do a pretty piece of business . he have run away . ah ! he sister , , never would have run away . ' my aunt shook she head firmly , confident in the character and behaviour of the girl who never be bear . 'Oh ! you think she would not have run away ? ' say . ' and save the man , ' exclaim my aunt , sharply , ' how he talk ! do not I know she would not ? she would have live with she god - mother , and we should have be devote to one another . where , in the name of , should he sister , , have run from , or to ? ' ' nowhere , ' say . ' well then , ' return my aunt , soften by the reply , ' how can you pretend to be wool - gathering , , when you be as sharp as a surgeon 's lancet ? now , here you see young , and the question I put to you be , what shall I do with he ? ' ' what shall you do with he ? ' say , feebly , scratch he head . 'Oh ! do with he ? ' ' yes , ' say my aunt , with a grave look , and she forefinger hold up . ' come ! I want some very sound advice . ' ' why , if I be you , ' say , consider , and look vacantly at I , 'I should -' the contemplation of I seem to inspire he with a sudden idea , and he add , briskly , 'I should wash he ! ' ' , ' say my aunt , turn round with a quiet triumph , which I do not then understand , ' . set we all right . heat the bath ! ' although I be deeply interested in this dialogue , I could not help observe my aunt , , and , while it be in progress , and complete a survey I have already be engage in making of the room . my aunt be a tall , hard - feature lady , but by no means ill - look . there be a inflexibility in she face , in she voice , in she gait and carriage , amply sufficient to account for the effect she have make upon a gentle creature like my mother ; but she feature be rather handsome than otherwise , though unbending and austere . I particularly notice that she have a very quick , bright eye . she hair , which be grey , be arrange in two plain division , under what I believe would be call a mob-cap ; I mean a cap , much more common then than now , with side - piece fasten under the ching . she dress be of a lavender colour , and perfectly neat ; but scantily make , as if she desire to be as little encumber as possible . I remember that I think it , in form , more like a riding
riding - habit with the superfluous skirt cut off , than anything else . she wear at she side a gentleman 's gold watch , if I might judge from its size and make , with a appropriate chain and seal ; she have some linen at she throat not unlike a shirt - collar , and thing at she wrist like little shirt-wristband . , as I have already say , be grey - head , and florid : I should have say all about he , in say so , have not he head be curiously bow - not by age ; it remind I of one of 's boy ' head after a beating - and he grey eye prominent and large , with a strange kind of watery brightness in they that make I , in combination with he vacant manner , he submission to my aunt , and he childish delight when she praise he , suspect he of be a little mad ; though , if he be mad , how he come to be there puzzl I extremely . he be dress like any other ordinary gentleman , in a loose grey morning coat and waistcoat , and white trousers ; and have he watch in he fob , and he money in he pocket : which he rattle as if he be very proud of it . be a pretty blooming girl , of about nineteen or twenty , and a perfect picture of neatness . though I make no further observation of she at the moment , I may mention here what I do not discover until afterwards , namely , that she be one of a series of protegee whom my aunt have take into she service expressly to educate in a renouncement of mankind , and who have generally complete they abjuration by marry the baker . the room be as neat as or my aunt . as I lay down my pen , a moment since , to think of it , the air from the sea come blow in again , mix with the perfume of the flower ; and I see the old - fashioned furniture brightly rub and polish , my aunt 's inviolable chair and table by the round green fan in the bow - window , the drugget - cover carpet , the cat , the kettle - holder , the two canary , the old china , the punchbowl full of dry rose - leave , the tall press guard all sort of bottle and pots , and , wonderfully out of keep with the rest , my dusty self upon the sofa , take note of everything . have go away to get the bath ready , when my aunt , to my great alarm , become in one moment rigid with indignation , and have hardly voice to cry out , ' ! Donkey ! ' upon which , come run up the stair as if the house be in flame , dart out on a little piece of green in front , and warn off two saddle - donkey , lady - ridden , that have presume to set hoof upon it ; while my aunt , rush out of the house , seize the bridle of a third animal laden with a bestriding child , turn he , lead he forth from those sacred precinct , and box the ear of the unlucky urching in attendance who have da to profane that hallow ground . to this hour I do not know whether my aunt have any lawful right of way over that patch of green ; but she have settle it in she own mind that she have , and it be all the same to she . the one great outrage of she life , demand to be constantly avenge , be the passage of a donkey over that immaculate spot . in whatever occupation she be engage , however interesting to she the conversation in which she be take part , a donkey turn the current of she idea in a moment , and she be upon he straight . Jug of water , and wate - pots , be keep in secret place ready to be dischar on the offending boy ; stick be laid in ambush behind the door ; sally be make at all hour ; and incessant war prevail . perhaps this be a agreeable excitement to the donkey - boy ; or perhaps the more sagacious of the donkey , understand how the case stood , delighte with constitutional obstinacy in come that way . I only know that there be three alarms before the bath be ready ; and that on the occasion of the last and most desperate of all , I see my aunt engage , single - hand , with a sandy - head lad of fifteen , and bump he sandy head against she own gate , before he seem to comprehend what be the matter . these interruption be of the more ridiculous to I , because she be give I broth out of a table - spoon at the time ( have firmly persuade herself that I be actually starve , and must receive nourishment at first in very small quantity ) , and , while my mouth be yet open to receive the spoon , she would put it back into the basin , cry ' ! Donkeys ! ' and go out to the assault . the bath be a great comfort . for I begin to be sensible of acute pain in my limb from lie out in the field , and be now so tired and low that I could hardly keep myself awake for five minute together . when I have bath , they ( I mean my aunt and ) enro I in a shirt and a pair
pair of trousers belong to , and tie I up in two or three great shawl . what sort of bundle I look like , I do not know , but I feel a very hot one . feel also very faint and drowsy , I soon lay down on the sofa again and fall asleep . it might have be a dream , originate in the fancy which have occupy my mind so long , but I awoke with the impression that my aunt have come and bend over I , and have put my hair away from my face , and lay my head more comfortably , and have then stand look at I . the word , ' pretty fellow , ' or ' poor fellow , ' seem to be in my ear , too ; but certainly there be nothing else , when I awoke , to lead I to believe that they have be utter by my aunt , who sit in the bow - window gazing at the sea from behind the green fan , which be mount on a kind of swivel , and turn any way . we dine soon after I awoke , off a roast fowl and a pudding ; I sit at table , not unlike a trussed bird myself , and move my arm with considerable difficulty . but as my aunt have swath I up , I make no complaint of be inconvenience . all this time I be deeply anxious to know what she be go to do with I ; but she take she dinner in profound silence , except when she occasionally fix she eye on I sit opposite , and say , ' mercy upon we ! ' which do not by any means relieve my anxiety . the cloth be draw , and some sherry put upon the table ( of which I have a glass ) , my aunt send up for again , who join we , and look as wise as he could when she request he to attend to my story , which she elicit from I , gradually , by a course of question . during my recital , she keep she eye on , who I think would have go to sleep but for that , and who , whensoever he lapse into a smile , be check by a frown from my aunt . ' whatever possess that poor unfortunate , that she must go and be marry again , ' say my aunt , when I have finish , 'I can not conceive . ' ' perhaps she fall in love with she second husband , ' suggest . ' fall in love ! ' repeat my aunt . ' what do you mean ? what business have she to do it ? ' ' perhaps ,' simper , after think a little , ' she do it for pleasure . ' ' pleasure , indeed ! ' reply my aunt . 'a mighty pleasure for the poor baby to fix she simple faith upon any dog of a fellow , certain to ill - use she in some way or other . what do she propose to herself , I should like to know ! she have have one husband . she have see out of the world , who be always run after wax doll from he cradle . she have get a baby - oh , there be a pair of baby when she give birth to this child sit here , that night ! - and what more do she want ? ' secretly shook he head at I , as if he think there be no getting over this . ' she could not even have a baby like anybody else , ' say my aunt . ' where be this child 's sister , ? not forthcome . do not tell I ! ' seem quite frightened . ' that little man of a doctor , with he head on one side , ' say my aunt , ' , or whatever he name be , what be he about ? all he could do , be to say to I , like a robin redbreast - as he be - " it be a boy . " a boy ! Yah , the imbecility of the whole set of th'ey ! ' the heartiness of the ejaculation start exceedingly ; and I , too , if I be to tell the truth . ' and then , as if this be not enough , and she have not stand sufficiently in the light of this child 's sister , , ' say my aunt , ' she marry a second time - go and marry a murderer - or a man with a name like it - and stand in this child 's light ! and the natural consequence be , as anybody but a baby might have foreseen , that he prowl and wander . he be as like before he be grow up , as he can be . ' look hard at I , as if to identify I in this character . ' and then there be that woman with the Pagan name , ' say my aunt , ' that , she go and get married next . because she have not see enough of the evil attend such thing , she go and get married next , as the child relate . I only hope , ' say my aunt , shak she head , ' that she husband be one of those poker husband who abound in the newspaper , and will beat she well with one . ' I could not bear to hear my old nurse so decried , and make the subject of such a wish . I tell my aunt that indeed she be mistaken .
. that Peggotty be the best , the truest , the most faithful , most devote , and most self - denying friend and servant in the world ; who have ever love I dearly , who have ever love my mother dearly ; who have hold my mother 's die head upon she arm , on whose face my mother have imprint she last grateful kiss . and my remembrance of they both , chok I , I break down as I be try to say that she home be my home , and that all she have be mine , and that I would have go to she for shelter , but for she humble station , which make I fear that I might bring some trouble on she - I break down , I say , as I be try to say so , and lay my face in my hand upon the table . ' well , well ! ' say my aunt , ' the child be right to stand by those who have stand by he - ! Donkey ! ' I thoroughly believe that but for those unfortunate donkey , we should have come to a good understanding ; for my aunt have lay she hand on my shoulder , and the impulse be upon I , thus embolden , to embrace she and beseech she protection . but the interruption , and the disorder she be throw into by the struggle outside , put a end to all softer idea for the present , and keep my aunt indignantly declaim to about she determination to appeal for redress to the law of she country , and to bring action for trespass against the whole donkey proprietorship of , until tea - time . after tea , we sit at the window - on the look - out , as I imagine , from my aunt 's sharp expression of face , for more invader - until dusk , when set candle , and a backgammon - board , on the table , and pull down the blind . ' now , , ' say my aunt , with she grave look , and she forefinger up as before , 'I be go to ask you another question . look at this child . ' ' 's son ? ' say , with a attentive , puzzl face . ' exactly so , ' return my aunt . ' what would you do with he , now ? ' ' do with 's son ? ' say . ' ay , ' reply my aunt , ' with 's son . ' 'Oh ! ' say . ' yes . do with - I should put he to bed . ' ' ! ' cry my aunt , with the same complacent triumph that I have remark before . ' set we all right . if the bed be ready , we will take he up to it . ' report it to be quite ready , I be take up to it ; kindly , but in some sort like a prisoner ; my aunt go in front and bring up the rear . the only circumstance which give I any new hope , be my aunt 's stopping on the stair to inquire about a smell of fire that be prevalent there ; and janet 's reply that she have be make tinder down in the kitchen , of my old shirt . but there be no other clothes in my room than the odd heap of thing I wear ; and when I be leave there , with a little taper which my aunt forewarn I would burn exactly five minute , I hear they lock my door on the outside . turn these thing over in my mind I deeme it possible that my aunt , who could know nothing of I , might suspect I have a habit of running away , and take precaution , on that account , to have I in safe keeping . the room be a pleasant one , at the top of the house , overlook the sea , on which the moon be shin brilliantly . after I have say my prayer , and the candle have burnt out , I remember how I still sit look at the moonlight on the water , as if I could hope to read my fortune in it , as in a bright book ; or to see my mother with she child , come from , along that shining path , to look upon I as she have look when I last see she sweet face . I remember how the solemn feeling with which at length I turn my eye away , yield to the sensation of gratitude and rest which the sight of the white - curtain bed - and how much more the lie softly down upon it , nestle in the snow - white sheet ! - inspire . I remember how I think of all the solitary place under the night sky where I have sleep , and how I pray that I never might be houseless any more , and never might forget the houseless . I remember how I seem to float , then , down the melancholy glory of that track upon the sea , away into the world of dream . chapter 14 my MIND about ME on go down in the morning , I find my aunt muse so profoundly over the breakfast table , with she elbow on the tray , that the contents of the urn have overflow the teapot and be lay the whole table - cloth under water , when my entrance put she meditations to flight . I feel sure that I have be the subject of she reflection , and be more than ever anxious to know she
she intentions towards I . yet I da not express my anxiety , lest it should give she offence . my eye , however , not be so much under control as my tongue , be attract towards my aunt very often during breakfast . I never could look at she for a few moment together but I find she look at I - in a odd thoughtful manner , as if I be a immense way off , instead of be on the other side of the small round table . when she have finish she breakfast , my aunt very deliberately lean back in she chair , knit she brows , fold she arm , and contemplate I at she leisure , with such a fixedness of attention that I be quite overpower by embarrassment . not have as yet finish my own breakfast , I attempt to hide my confusion by proceeding with it ; but my knife tumble over my fork , my fork trip up my knife , I chipp bit of bacon a surprising height into the air instead of cut they for my own eating , and chok myself with my tea , which persist in go the wrong way instead of the right one , until I give in altogether , and sit blushing under my aunt 's close scrutiny . ' Hallo ! ' say my aunt , after a long time . I look up , and meet she sharp bright glance respectfully . 'I have write to he , ' say my aunt . ' to -? ' 'to you father - in - law , ' say my aunt . 'I have send he a letter that I will trouble he to attend to , or he and I will fall out , I can tell he ! ' ' do he know where I be , aunt ? ' I inquire , alarm . 'I have tell he , ' say my aunt , with a nod . ' shall I - be - give up to he ? ' I falter . 'I do not know , ' say my aunt . ' we shall see . ' 'Oh ! I can not think what I shall do ,' I exclaim , ' if I have to go back to ! ' 'I do not know anything about it , ' say my aunt , shak she head . 'I can not say , I be sure . we shall see . ' my spirit sank under these word , and I become very downcast and heavy of heart . my aunt , without appear to take much heed of I , put on a coarse apron with a bib , which she take out of the press ; wash up the teacup with she own hand ; and , when everything be wash and set in the tray again , and the cloth fold and put on the top of the whole , rang for to remove it . she next sweep up the crumb with a little broom ( put on a pair of glove first ) , until there do not appear to be one microscopic speck leave on the carpet ; next dust and arrange the room , which be dust and arrange to a hair 's breadth already . when all these task be perform to she satisfaction , she take off the glove and apron , fold they up , put they in the particular corner of the press from which they have be take , bring out she work - box to she own table in the open window , and sit down , with the green fan between she and the light , to work . 'I wish you would go upstairs , ' say my aunt , as she threade she needle , ' and give my compliment to , and I will be glad to know how he get on with he memorial . ' I rise with all alacrity , to acquit myself of this commission . 'I suppose , ' say my aunt , eye I as narrowly as she have eye the needle in thread it , ' you think a short name , eh ? ' 'I think it be rather a short name , yesterday ,' I confess . ' you be not to suppose that he have not get a longer name , if he choose to use it , ' say my aunt , with a loftier air . ' - - that be the gentleman 's true name . ' I be go to suggest , with a modest sense of my youth and the familiarity I have be already guilty of , that I have better give he the full benefit of that name , when my aunt go on to say : ' but do not you call he by it , whatever you do . he can not bear he name . that be a peculiarity of he . though I do not know that it be much of a peculiarity , either ; for he have be ill - use enough , by some that bear it , to have a mortal antipathy for it , knows . be he name here , and everywhere else , now - if he ever go anywhere else , which he do not . so take care , child , you do not call he anything but . ' I promise to obey , and go upstairs with my message ; think , as I go , that if have be work at he memorial long , at the same rate as I have see he work at it , through the open door , when I come down , he be probably get on very well indeed . I find he still drive at it with a
a long pen , and he head almost laid upon the paper . he be so intent upon it , that I have ample leisure to observe the large paper kite in a corner , the confusion of bundle of manuscript , the number of pens , and , above all , the quantity of ink ( which he seem to have in , in half - gallon jar by the dozen ) , before he observe my be present . ! ! ' say , lay down he pen . ' how do the world go ? I will tell you what ,' he add , in a lower tone , 'I should not wish it to be mention , but it be a -' here he beckon to I , and put he lip close to my ear - ' it be a mad world . as , boy ! ' say , take snuff from a round box on the table , and laugh heartily . without presum to give my opinion on this question , I deliver my message . ' well , ' say , in answer , 'my compliment to she , and I - I believe I have make a start . I think I have make a start , ' say , pass he hand among he grey hair , and cast anything but a confident look at he manuscript . ' you have be to school ? ' ' yes , sir ,' I answer ; ' for a short time . ' ' do you recollect the date , ' say , look earnestly at I , and take up he pen to note it down , ' when the have he head cut off ? ' I say I believe it happen in the year sixteen hundred and forty - nine . ' well , ' return , scratch he ear with he pen , and look dubiously at I . ' so the boonks say ; but I do not see how that can be . because , if it be so long ago , how could the people about he have make that mistake of put some of the trouble out of he head , after it be take off , into mine ? ' I be very much surprised by the inquiry ; but could give no information on this point . ' it be very strange , ' say , with a despondent look upon he papers , and with he hand among he hair again , ' that I never can get that quite right . I never can make that perfectly clear . but no matter , no matter ! ' he say cheerfully , and rouse himself , ' there be time enough ! my compliment to , I be get on very well indeed . ' I be go away , when he direct my attention to the kite . ' what do you think of that for a kite ? ' he say . I answer that it be a beautiful one . I should think it must have be as much as seven foot high . 'I make it . we will go and fly it , you and I , ' say . ' do you see this ? ' he show I that it be cover with manuscript , very closely and laboriously write ; but so plainly , that as I look along the line , I think I see some allusion to the 's head again , in one or two place . ' there be plenty of string , ' say , ' and when it fly high , it take the fact 's a long way . that be my manner of diffusing 'em . I do not know where they may come down . it be accord to circumstance , and the wind , and so forth ; but I take my chance of that . ' he face be so very mild and pleasant , and have something so reverend in it , though it be hale and hearty , that I be not sure but that he be have a good - humoure jest with I . so I laugh , and he laugh , and we part the best friend possible . ' well , child , ' say my aunt , when I go downstairs . ' and what of , this morning ? ' I inform she that he send he compliment , and be get on very well indeed . ' what do you think of he ? ' say my aunt . I have some shadowy idea of endeavouring to evade the question , by reply that I think he a very nice gentleman ; but my aunt be not to be so put off , for she laid she work down in she lap , and say , fold she hand upon it : ' come ! you sister would have tell I what she think of anyone , directly . be as like you sister as you can , and speak out ! ' ' be he - be - I ask because I do not know , aunt - be he at all out of he mind , then ? ' I stammer ; for I feel I be on dangerous ground . ' not a morsel , ' say my aunt . 'Oh , indeed ! ' I observ faintly . ' if there be anything in the world , ' say my aunt , with great decision and force of manner , ' that be not , it be that . ' I have nothing better to offer , than another timid , 'Oh , indeed ! ' ' he have be call mad , ' say my aunt . 'I have a selfish pleasure in say he have be call
call mad , or I should not have have the benefit of he society and advice for these last ten year and upward - in fact , ever since you sister , , disappoint I . ' ' so long as that ? ' I say . ' and nice people they be , who have the audacity to call he mad , ' pursue my aunt . ' be a sort of distant connexion of mine - it do not matter how ; I need not enter into that . if it have not be for I , he own brother would have shut he up for life . that be all . ' I be afraid it be hypocritical in I , but see that my aunt feel strongly on the subject , I try to look as if I feel strongly too . 'a proud fool ! ' say my aunt . ' because he brother be a little eccentric - though he be not half so eccentric as a good many people - he do not like to have he visible about he house , and send he away to some private asylum - place : though he have be leave to he particular care by they deceased father , who think he almost a natural . and a wise man he must have be to think so ! mad himself , no doubt . ' again , as my aunt look quite convinced , I endeavoure to look quite convinced also . ' so I step in , ' say my aunt , ' and make he a offer . I say , " you brother 's sane - a great deal more sane than you be , or ever will be , it be to be hope . let he have he little income , and come and live with I . I be not afraid of he , I be not proud , I be ready to take care of he , and shall not ill - treat he as some people ( besides the asylum - folk ) have do . " after a good deal of squabbling , ' say my aunt , 'I get he ; and he have be here ever since . he be the most friendly and amenable creature in existence ; and as for advice ! - but nobody know what that man 's mind be , except myself . ' my aunt smoothe she dress and shake she head , as if she smoothe defiance of the whole world out of the one , and shake it out of the other . ' he have a favourite sister , ' say my aunt , 'a good creature , and very kind to he . but she do what they all do - take a husband . and he do what they all do - make she wretch . it have such a effect upon the mind of ( that be not madness , I hope ! ) that , combine with he fear of he brother , and he sense of he unkindness , it throw he into a fever . that be before he come to I , but the recollection of it be oppressive to he even now . do he say anything to you about the , child ? ' ' yes , aunt . ' 'Ah ! ' say my aunt , rub she nose as if she be a little vexed . ' that be he allegorical way of express it . he connect he illness with great disturbance and agitation , naturally , and that be the figure , or the simile , or whatever it be call , which he choose to use . and why should not he , if he think proper ! ' I say : ' certainly , aunt . ' ' it be not a business - like way of speak , ' say my aunt , ' nor a worldly way . I be aware of that ; and that be the reason why I insist upon it , that there sha not be a word about it in he memorial . ' ' be it a about he own history that he be write , aunt ? ' ' yes , child , ' say my aunt , rub she nose again . ' he be memorialize the , or the or other - one of those people , at all event , who be pay to be memorialize - about he affair . I suppose it will go in , one of these day . he have not be able to draw it up yet , without introduce that mode of express himself ; but it do not signify ; it keep he employ . ' in fact , I find out afterwards that have be for upward of ten year endeavour to keep the first out of the memorial ; but he have be constantly get into it , and be there now . 'I say again , ' say my aunt , ' nobody know what that man 's mind be except myself ; and he be the most amenable and friendly creature in existence . if he like to fly a kite sometimes , what of that ! use to fly a kite . he be a Quaker , or something of that sort , if I be not mistaken . and a Quaker fly a kite be a much more ridiculous object than anybody else . ' if I could have suppose that my aunt have recount these particular for my especial behoof , and as a piece of confidence in I , I should have feel very much distinguished , and should have augure favourably from such a mark of she good opinion . but I could hardly help observe that she have launch into they
they , chiefly because the question be raise in she own mind , and with very little reference to I , though she have address herself to I in the absence of anybody else . at the same time , I must say that the generosity of she championship of poor harmless , not only inspire my young breast with some selfish hope for myself , but warm it unselfishly towards she . I believe that I begin to know that there be something about my aunt , notwithstand she many eccentricity and odd humours , to be honoure and trust in . though she be just as sharp that day as on the day before , and be in and out about the donkey just as often , and be throw into a tremendous state of indignation , when a young man , go by , ogle at a window ( which be one of the gravest misdemeanour that could be commit against my aunt 's dignity ) , she seem to I to command more of my respect , if not less of my fear . the anxiety I undergo , in the interval which necessarily elapse before a reply could be receive to she letter to , be extreme ; but I make a endeavour to suppress it , and to be as agreeable as I could in a quiet way , both to my aunt and . the latter and I would have go out to fly the great kite ; but that I have still no other clothes than the anything but ornamental garment with which i have be decorate on the first day , and which confin I to the house , except for a hour after dark , when my aunt , for my health 's sake , parade I up and down on the cliff outside , before go to bed . at length the reply from come , and my aunt inform I , to my infinite terror , that he be come to speak to she herself on the next day . on the next day , still bundle up in my curiious habiliment , I sit count the time , flush and heat by the conflict of sinking hope and rise fear within I ; and wait to be start by the sight of the gloomy face , whose non-arrival start I every minute . my aunt be a little more imperious and stern than usual , but I observ no other token of she prepare herself to receive the visitor so much dread by I . she sit at work in the window , and I sit by , with my thought run astray on all possible and impossible result of 's visit , until pretty late in the afternoon . we dinner have be indefinitely postpone ; but it be grow so late , that my aunt have order it to be get ready , when she give a sudden alarm of donkey , and to my consternation and amazement , I beheld , on a side - saddle , ride deliberately over the sacred piece of green , and stop in front of the house , look about she . ' go along with you ! ' cry my aunt , shak she head and she fist at the window . ' you have no business there . how dare you trespass ? go along ! oh ! you bold - face thing ! ' my aunt be so exasperate by the coolness with which look about she , that I really believe she be motionless , and unable for the moment to dart out accord to custom . I seize the opportunity to inform she who it be ; and that the gentleman now come near the offender ( for the way up be very steep , and he have drop behind ) , be himself . 'I do not care who it be ! ' cry my aunt , still shak she head and gesticulat anything but welcome from the bow- window . 'I will not be trespass upon . I will not allow it . go away ! , turn he round . lead he off ! ' and I see , from behind my aunt , a sort of hurried battle - piece , in which the donkey stood resist everybody , with all he four leg plan different way , while try to pull he round by the bridle , try to lead he on , struck at with a parasol , and several boy , who have come to see the engagement , shoute vigorously . but my aunt , suddenly descry among they the young malefactor who be the donkey 's guardian , and who be one of the most inveterate offender against she , though hardly in he teens , rush out to the scene of action , pounce upon he , capture he , drag he , with he jacket over he head , and he heel grind the ground , into the garden , and , call upon to fetch the constable and justice , that he might be take , try , and execute on the spot , hold he at there . this part of the business , however , do not last long ; for the young rascal , be expert at a variety of feint and dodge , of which my aunt have no conception , soon go whoope away , leave some deep impressions of he nailed boot in the flower - bed , and take he donkey in triumph with he . , during the latter portion of the contest , have dismount , and be now wait with she brother at the bottom of the step , until my aunt should be at leisure to receive they . my aunt , a little ruffle by the combat , march past
past they into the house , with great dignity , and take no notice of they presence , until they be announce by . ' shall I go away , aunt ? ' I ask , trembl . ' no , sir , ' say my aunt . ' certainly not ! ' with which she push I into a corner near she , and fence I in with a chair , as if it be a prison or a bar of justice . this position I continue to occupy during the whole interview , and from it I now see and enter the room . 'Oh ! ' say my aunt , be not aware at first to whom I have the pleasure of objecting . but I do not allow anybody to ride over that turf . I make no exceptions . I do not allow anybody to do it . ' ' you regulation be rather awkward to stranger , ' say . ' be it ! ' say my aunt . seem afraid of a renewal of hostility , and interposing begin : ' ! ' 'I beg you pardon , ' observe my aunt with a keen look . ' you be the who marry the widow of my late nephew , , of ! - though why , I do not know ! ' 'i am , ' say . ' you will excuse my say , sir , ' return my aunt , ' that I think it would have be a much better and happier thing if you have leave that poor child alone . ' 'I so far agree with what have remark , ' observe , bridl , ' that I consider we lament to have be , in all essential respects , a mere child . ' ' it be a comfort to you and I , ma 'am , ' say my aunt , ' who be get on in life , and be not likely to be make unhappy by we personal attraction , that nobody can say the same of we . ' 'No doubt ! ' return , though , I think , not with a very ready or gracious assent . ' and it certainly might have be , as you say , a better and happier thing for my brother if he have never enter into such a marriage . I have always be of that opinion . ' 'I have no doubt you have , ' say my aunt . ' , ' ring the bell , 'my compliment to , and beg he to come down . ' until he come , my aunt sit perfectly upright and stiff , frown at the wall . when he come , my aunt perform the ceremony of introduction . ' . a old and intimate friend . on whose judgement , ' say my aunt , with emphasis , as a admonition to , who be bite he forefinger and look rather foolish , rely . ' take he finger out of he mouth , on this hint , and stand among the group , with a grave and attentive expression of face . my aunt inclin she head to , who go on : ' : on the receipt of you letter , I consider it a act of greater justice to myself , and perhaps of more respect to you -' ' thank you , ' say my aunt , still eye he keenly . ' you need not mind I . ' 'To answer it in person , however inconvenient the journey , ' pursue , ' rather than by letter . this unhappy boy who have run away from he friend and he occupation -' ' and whose appearance , ' interpose he sister , direct general attention to I in my indefinable costume , 'is perfectly scandalous and disgraceful . ' ' , ' say she brother , ' have the goodness not to interrupt I . this unhappy boy , , have be the occasion of much domestic trouble and uneasiness ; both during the lifetime of my late dear wife , and since . he have a sullen , rebellious spirit ; a violent temper ; and a untoward , intractable disposition . both my sister and myself have endeavoure to correct he vex , but ineffectually . and I have feel - we both have felt , I may say ; my sister be fully in my confidence - that it be right you should receive this grave and dispassionate assurance from we lip . ' ' it can hardly be necessary for I to confirm anything state by my brother , ' say ; ' but I beg to observe , that , of all the boy in the world , I believe this be the worst boy . ' ' strong ! ' say my aunt , shortly . ' but not at all too strong for the fact , ' return . ! ' say my aunt . ' well , sir ? ' 'I have my own opinion , ' resume , whose face darken more and more , the more he and my aunt observe each other , which they do very narrowly , 'as to the best mode of bring he up ; they be founde , in part , on my knowledge of he , and in part on my knowledge of my own means and resource . I be responsible for they to myself , I act upon they , and I say no more about they . it be enough that I place this boy under the eye of a friend of my own , in a respectable business ; that it do not please he ; that he run away from it ; make himself a common vagabond about the country ; and come here ,
, in rag , to appeal to you , . I wish to set before you , honourably , the exact consequence - so far as they be within my knowledge - of you abett he in this appeal . ' ' but about the respectable business first , ' say my aunt . ' if he have be you own boy , you would have put he to it , just the same , I suppose ? ' ' if he have be my brother 's own boy , ' return , strike in , ' he character , I trust , would have be altogether different . ' ' or if the poor child , he mother , have be alive , he would still have go into the respectable business , would he ? ' say my aunt . 'I believe , ' say , with a inclination of he head , ' that would have dispute nothing which myself and my sister be agree be for the best . ' confirm this with a audible murmur . 'Humph ! ' say my aunt . ' unfortunate baby ! ' , who have be ratt he money all this time , be ratt it so loudly now , that my aunt feel it necessary to check he with a look , before say : ' the poor child 's annuity di with she ? ' ' die with she , ' reply . ' and there be no settlement of the little property - the house and gare - the what 's - its - name Rookery without any rook in it - upon she boy ? ' ' it have be leave to she , unconditionally , by she first husband , ' begin , when my aunt catch he up with the greatest irascibility and impatience . ' , man , there be no occasion to say that . leave to she unconditionally ! I think I see look forward to any condition of any sort or kind , though it stare he point - blank in the face ! of course it be leave to she unconditionally . but when she marry again - when she take that most disastrous step of marry you , in short , ' say my aunt , 'to be plain - do no one put in a word for the boy at that time ? ' ' my late wife love she second husband , ma 'am , ' say , ' and trust implicitly in he . ' ' you late wife , sir , be a most unworldly , most unhappy , most unfortunate baby , ' return my aunt , shak she head at he . ' that be what she be . and now , what have you get to say next ? ' ' merely this , ,' he return . 'I be here to take back - to take he back unconditionally , to dispose of he as I think proper , and to deal with he as I think right . I be not here to make any promise , or give any pledge to anybody . you may possibly have some idea , , of abett he in he running away , and in he complaint to you . you manner , which I must say do not seem intend to propitiate , induce I to think it possible . now I must caution you that if you abet he once , you abet he for good and all ; if you step in between he and I , now , you must step in , , for ever . I can not trifle , or be trifle with . I be here , for the first and last time , to take he away . be he ready to go ? if he be not - and you tell I he be not ; on any pretence ; it be indifferent to I what - my door be shut against he henceforth , and yours , I take it for grant , be open to he . ' to this address , my aunt have listen with the closest attention , sit perfectly upright , with she hand fold on one knee , and look grimly on the speaker . when he have finish , she turn she eye so as to command , without otherwise disturb she attitude , and say : ' well , ma 'am , have you get anything to remark ? ' ' indeed , , ' say , ' all that I could say have be so well say by my brother , and all that I know to be the fact have be so plainly state by he , that I have nothing to add except my thanks for you politeness . for you very great politeness , I be sure , ' say ; with a irony which no more affect my aunt , than it discompose the cannon I have sleep by at . ' and what do the boy say ? ' say my aunt . ' be you ready to go , ? ' I answer no , and entreate she not to let I go . I say that neither nor have ever like I , or have ever be kind to I . that they have make my mama , who always love I dearly , unhappy about I , and that I know it well , and that know it . I say that I have be more miserable than I think anybody could believe , who only know how young I be . and I beg and praye my aunt - I forget in what term now , but I remember that they affect I very much then - to befriend and protect I , for my father 's sake . ' , ' say
say my aunt , ' what shall I do with this child ? ' consider , hesitat , brighten , and rejoin , ' have he measure for a suit of clothes directly . ' ' , ' say my aunt triumphantly , ' give I you hand , for you common sense be invaluable . ' have shake it with great cordiality , she pull I towards she and say to : ' you can go when you like ; I will take my chance with the boy . if he be all you say he be , at least I can do as much for he then , as you have do . but I do not believe a word of it . ' ' , ' rejoin , shrugge he shoulders , as he rise , ' if you be a gentleman - ' ' ! stuff and nonsense ! ' say my aunt . ' do not talk to I ! ' ' how exquisitely polite ! ' exclaim , rise . ' Overpowering , really ! ' ' do you think I do not know , ' say my aunt , turn a deaf ear to the sister , and continue to address the brother , and to shake she head at he with infinite expression , ' what kind of life you must have lead that poor , unhappy , misdirected baby ? do you think I do not know what a woeful day it be for the soft little creature when you first come in she way - smirk and make great eye at she , I will be bound , as if you could not say boh ! to a goose ! ' 'I never hear anything so elegant ! ' say . ' do you think I can not understand you as well as if I have see you , ' pursue my aunt , ' now that I do see and hear you - which , I tell you candidly , be anything but a pleasure to I ? oh yes , bless we ! who so smooth and silky as at first ! the poor , benighted innocent have never see such a man . he be make of sweetness . he worship she . he do on she boy - tenderly do on he ! he be to be another father to he , and they be all to live together in a garden of rose , be not they ? ugh ! get along with you , do ! ' say my aunt . 'I never hear anything like this person in my life ! ' exclaim . ' and when you have make sure of the poor little fool , ' say my aunt - ' forgive I that I should call she so , and she go where you will not go in a hurry - because you have not do wrong enough to she and hers , you must begin to train she , must you ? begin to break she , like a poor cage bird , and wear she delude life away , in teach she to s you note ? ' ' this be either insanity or intoxication , ' say , in a perfect agony at not be able to turn the current of my aunt 's address towards herself ; ' and my suspicion be that it be intoxication . ' Betsey , without take the least notice of the interruption , continue to address herself to as if there have be no such thing . ' , ' she say , shak she finger at he , ' you be a tyrant to the simple baby , and you break she heart . she be a loving baby - I know that ; I know it , year before you ever see she - and through the best part of she weakness you give she the wound she die of . there be the truth for you comfort , however you like it . and you and you instrument may make the most of it . ' ' allow I to inquire , , ' interpose , ' whom you be pleased to call , in a choice of word in which I be not experience , my brother 's instrument ? ' ' it be clear enough , as I have tell you , year before you ever see she - and why , in the mysterious dispensation of Providence , you ever do see she , be more than humanity can comprehend - it be clear enough that the poor soft little thing would marry somebody , at some time or other ; but I do hope it would not have be as bad as it have turn out . that be the time , , when she give birth to she boy here , ' say my aunt ; 'too the poor child you sometimes torment she through afterwards , which be a disagreeable remembrance and make the sight of he odious now . aye , aye ! you need not wince ! ' say my aunt . 'I know it be true without that . ' he have stand by the door , all this while , observant of she with a smile upon he face , though he black eyebrow be heavily contrac . I remarke now , that , though the smile be on he face still , he colour have go in a moment , and he seem to breathe as if he have be run . ' good day , sir , ' say my aunt , ' and good - bye ! good day to you , too , , ' say my aunt , turn suddenly upon he sister . ' let I see you ride a donkey over my green again , and as sure as you have
have a head upon you shoulders , I will knock you bonnet off , and tread upon it ! ' it would require a painter , and no common painter too , to depict my aunt 's face as she deliver herself of this very unexpected sentiment , and 's face as she hear it . but the manner of the speech , no less than the matter , be so fiery , that , without a word in answer , discreetly put she arm through she brother 's , and walk haughtily out of the cottage ; my aunt remain in the window look after they ; prepare , I have no doubt , in case of the donkey 's reappearance , to carry she threat into instant execution . no attempt at defiance be make , however , she face gradually relaxed , and become so pleasant , that I be embolden to kiss and thank she ; which I do with great heartiness , and with both my arm clasp round she neck . I then shook hand with , who shook hand with I a great many time , and haile this happy close of the proceeding with repeat burst of laughter . ' you will consider yourself guardian , jointly with I , of this child , , ' say my aunt . 'I shall be delighted , ' say , 'to be the guardian of 's son . ' ' very good , ' return my aunt , ' that be settled . I have be think , do you know , , that I might call he ? ' ' certainly , certainly . call he Trotwood , certainly , ' say . ' 's son 's Trotwood . ' ' , you mean , ' return my aunt . ' yes , to be sure . yes . , ' say , a little abashed . my aunt take so kindly to the notion , that some ready - make clothes , which be purchase for I that afternoon , be mark ' ' , in she own handwriting , and in indelible marking - ink , before I put they on ; and it be settle that all the other clothes which be order to be make for I ( a complete outfit be bespeak that afternoon ) should be mark in the same way . thus I begin my new life , in a new name , and with everything new about I . now that the state of doubt be over , I feel , for many day , like one in a dream . I never think that I have a curiious couple of guardian , in my aunt and . I never think of anything about myself , distinctly . the two thing clearest in my mind be , that a remoteness have come upon the old life - which seem to lie in the haze of a immeasurable distance ; and that a curtain have for ever fallen on my life at and 's . no one have ever raise that curtain since . I have lift it for a moment , even in this narrative , with a reluctant hand , and drop it gladly . the remembrance of that life be fraught with so much pain to I , with so much mental suffer and want of hope , that I have never have the courage even to examine how long I be doom to lead it . whether it last for a year , or more , or less , I do not know . I only know that it be , and cease to be ; and that I have write , and there I leave it . chapter 15 i make another beginning and I soon become the best of friend , and very often , when he day 's work be do , go out together to fly the great kite . every day of he life he have a long sitting at the , which never make the least progress , however hard he laboure , for the always stray into it , sooner or later , and then it be throw aside , and another one begin . the patience and hope with which he bear these perpetual disappointment , the mild perception he have that there be something wrong about King the , the feeble effort he make to keep he out , and the certainty with which he come in , and tumble the memorial out of all shape , make a deep impression on I . what suppose would come of the memorial , if it be complete ; where he think it be to go , or what he think it be to do ; he know no more than anybody else , I believe . be it at all necessary that he should trouble himself with such question , for if anything be certain under the sun , it be certain that the memorial never would be finish . it be quite a affect sight , I use to think , to see he with the kite when it be up a great height in the air . what he have tell I , in he room , about he belief in its disseminate the statement paste on it , which be nothing but old leave of abortive Memorial , might have be a fancy with he sometimes ; but not when he be out , look up at the kite in the sky , and feel it pull and tug at he hand . he never look so serene as he do then . I use to fancy , as I sit by he of a evening , on a green slope , and see he watch the kite high in the quiet air , that it lift he mind out of its
its confusion , and bear it ( such be my boyish think ) into the sky . as he wound the string in and it come lower and lower down out of the beautiful light , until it flutter to the ground , and lay there like a dead thing , he seem to wake gradually out of a dream ; and I remember to have see he take it up , and look about he in a lost way , as if they have both come down together , so that I pitie he with all my heart . while I advance in friendship and intimacy with , I do not go backward in the favour of he staunch friend , my aunt . she take so kindly to I , that , in the course of a few week , she shorten my adopt name of into ; and even encourage I to hope , that if I go on as I have begin , I might take equal rank in she affections with my sister . ' trot , ' say my aunt one evening , when the backgammon - board be place as usual for herself and , 'we must not forget you education . ' this be my only subject of anxiety , and I feel quite delighted by she refer to it . ' should you like to go to school at ? ' say my aunt . I reply that I should like it very much , as it be so near she . ' good , ' say my aunt . ' should you like to go tomorrow ? ' be already no stranger to the general rapidity of my aunt 's evolution , I be not surprise by the suddenness of the proposal , and say : ' yes . ' ' good , ' say my aunt again . ' Janet , hire the grey pony and chaise tomorrow morning at ten o'clock , and pack up master Trotwood 's clothes tonight . ' I be greatly elate by these order ; but my heart smote I for my selfishness , when I witness they effect on , who be so low - spirit at the prospect of we separation , and play so ill in consequence , that my aunt , after give he several admonitory rap on the knuckle with she dice - box , shut up the board , and decline to play with he any more . but , on hearing from my aunt that I should sometimes come over on a , and that he could sometimes come and see I on a , he revive ; and vow to make another kite for those occasion , of proportion greatly surpass the present one . in the morning he be downheart again , and would have sustain himself by give I all the money he have in he possession , gold and silver too , if my aunt have not interpose , and limit the gift to five shilling , which , at he earnest petition , be afterwards increase to ten . we part at the garden - gate in a most affectionate manner , and do not go into the house until my aunt have drive I out of sight of it . my aunt , who be perfectly indifferent to public opinion , drive the grey pony through in a masterly manner ; sit high and stiff like a state coachman , keep a steady eye upon he wherever he go , and make a point of not let he have he own way in any respect . when we come into the country road , she permit he to relax a little , however ; and look at I down in a valley of cushion by she side , ask I whether I be happy ? ' very happy indeed , thank you , aunt ,' I say . she be much gratify ; and both she hand be occupi , pat I on the head with she whip . ' be it a large school , aunt ? ' I ask . ' why , I do not know , ' say my aunt . ' we be go to 's first . ' ' do he keep a school ? ' I ask . ' no , , ' say my aunt . ' he keep a office . ' I ask for no more information about , as she offer none , and we converse on other subject until we come to , where , as it be market - day , my aunt have a great opportunity of insinuat the grey pony among cart , basket , vegetable , and huckster 's goods . the hair - breadth turn and twists we make , draw down upon we a variety of speech from the people stand about , which be not always complimentary ; but my aunt drive on with perfect indifference , and I dare say would have take she own way with as much coolness through a enemy 's country . at length we stop before a very old house bulge out over the road ; a house with long low lattice - window bulge out still farther , and beam with carve head on the end bulge out too , so that I fancie the whole house be lean forward , try to see who be pass on the narrow pavement below . it be quite spotless in its cleanliness . the old - fashioned brass knocker on the low arch door , ornament with carve garland of fruit and flower , twinkle like a star ; the two stone step descende to the door be as white as if they have be cover with fair linen ; and all the angles and corner , and carving and moulding , and quaint little pane of
of glass , and quainter little window , though as old as the hill , be as pure as any snow that ever fell upon the hill . when the pony - chaise stop at the door , and my eye be intent upon the house , I see a cadaverous face appear at a small window on the ground floor ( in a little round tower that form one side of the house ) , and quickly disappear . the low arch door then open , and the face come out . it be quite as cadaverous as it have look in the window , though in the grain of it there be that tinge of red which be sometimes to be observe in the skin of red - haired people . it belong to a red - hair person - a youth of fifteen , as I take it now , but look much older - whose hair be crop as close as the closest stubble ; who have hardly any eyebrow , and no eyelash , and eye of a red - brown , so unsheltered and unshaded , that I remember wonder how he go to sleep . he be high - shouldered and bony ; dress in decent black , with a white wisp of a neckcloth ; buttone up to the throat ; and have a long , lank , skeleton hand , which particularly attract my attention , as he stand at the pony 's head , rub he ching with it , and look up at we in the chaise . 'Is at home , ? ' say my aunt . ' 's at home , ma 'am , ' say , ' if you will please to walk in there ' - point with he long hand to the room he mean . we get out ; and leave he to hold the pony , go into a long low parlour look towards the street , from the window of which I catch a glimpse , as I go in , of breath into the pony 's nostril , and immediately cover they with he hand , as if he be put some spell upon he . opposite to the tall old chimney - piece be two portrait : one of a gentleman with grey hair ( though not by any mean a old man ) and black eyebrow , who be look over some papers tie together with red tape ; the other , of a lady , with a very placid and sweet expression of face , who be look at I . I believe I be turn about in search of 's picture , when , a door at the farther end of the room open , a gentleman enter , at sight of whom I turn to the first - mention portrait again , to make quite sure that it have not come out of its frame . but it be stationary ; and as the gentleman advanc into the light , I see that he be some year older than when he have have he picture pain . ' , ' say the gentleman , ' pray walk in . I be engage for a moment , but you will excuse my be busy . you know my motive . I have but one in life . ' thank he , and we go into he room , which be furnish as a office , with book , papers , tin box , and so forth . it look into a garden , and have a iron safe let into the wall ; so immediately over the mantelshelf , that I wonder , as I sit down , how the sweep get round it when they sweep the chimney . ' well , , ' say ; for I soon find that it be he , and that he be a lawyer , and steward of the estate of a rich gentleman of the county ; ' what wind blow you here ? not a ill wind , I hope ? ' ' no , ' reply my aunt . 'I have not come for any law . ' ' that be right , ma 'am , ' say . ' you have better come for anything else . ' he hair be quite white now , though he eyebrow be still black . he have a very agreeable face , and , I think , be handsome . there be a certain richness in he complexion , which I have be long accustom , under 's tuition , to connect with port wine ; and I fancie it be in he voice too , and refer he grow corpulency to the same cause . he be very cleanly dress , in a blue coat , stripe waistcoat , and nankeen trousers ; and he fine frilled shirt and cambric neckcloth look unusually soft and white , remind my strolling fancy ( I call to mind ) of the plumage on the breast of a swan . ' this be my nephew , ' say my aunt . 'be not aware you have one , , ' say . 'My grand - nephew , that be to say , ' observe my aunt . ' be not aware you have a grand - nephew , I give you my word , ' say . 'I have adopt he , ' say my aunt , with a wave of she hand , import that he knowledge and he ignorance be all one to she , ' and I have bring he here , to put to a school where he may be thoroughly well teach , and well treat . now tell I where that school be , and what it be , and all about it . ' ' before I can advise you properly , '
' say - ' the old question , you know . what be you motive in this ? ' ' take the man ! ' exclaim my aunt . ' fish for motive , when they be on the surface ! why , to make the child happy and useful . ' ' it must be a mixed motive , I think , ' say , shak he head and smile incredulously . 'A mix fiddlestick , ' return my aunt . ' you claim to have one plain motive in all you do yourself . you do not suppose , I hope , that you be the only plain dealer in the world ? ' 'Ay , but I have only one motive in life , , ' he rejoin , smile . ' other people have dozen , score , hundred . I have only one . there be the difference . however , that be beside the question . the best school ? whatever the motive , you want the best ? ' my aunt nod assent . ' at the best we have , ' say , consider , ' you nephew could not board just now . ' ' but he could board somewhere else , I suppose ? ' suggest my aunt . think I could . after a little discussion , he propose to take my aunt to the school , that she might see it and judge for herself ; also , to take she , with the same object , to two or three house where he think I could be boarde . my aunt embrace the proposal , we be all three go out together , when he stop and say : ' we little friend here might have some motive , perhaps , for objecting to the arrangement . I think we have better leave he behind ? ' my aunt seem dispose to contest the point ; but to facilitate matter I say I would gladly remain behind , if they please ; and return into 's office , where I sit down again , in the chair I have first occupied , to await they return . it so happen that this chair be opposite a narrow passage , which end in the little circular room where I have see 's pale face look out of the window . Uriah , have take the pony to a neighbour stable , be at work at a desk in this room , which have a brass frame on the top to hang paper upon , and on which the writing he be make a copy of be then hang . though he face be towards I , I think , for some time , the writing be between we , that he could not see I ; but look that way more attentively , it make I uncomfortable to observe that , every now and then , he sleepless eye would come below the writing , like two red suns , and stealthily stare at I for I dare say a whole minute at a time , during which he pen go , or pretend to go , as cleverly as ever . I make several attempt to get out of they way - such as stand on a chair to look at a map on the other side of the room , and po over the column of a newspaper - but they always attract I back again ; and whenever I look towards those two red suns , I be sure to find they , either just rise or just set . at length , much to my relief , my aunt and come back , after a pretty long absence . they be not so successful as I could have wish ; for though the advantages of the school be undeniable , my aunt have not approve of any of the boarding - house propose for I . ' it be very unfortunate , ' say my aunt . 'I do not know what to do , . ' ' it do happen unfortunately , ' say . ' but I will tell you what you can do , . ' ' what be that ? ' inquire my aunt . ' leave you nephew here , for the present . he be a quiet fellow . he will not disturb I at all . it be a capital house for study . as quiet as a monastery , and almost as roomy . leave he here . ' my aunt evidently like the offer , though she be delicate of accept it . so do I . ' come , , ' say . ' this be the way out of the difficulty . it be only a temporary arrangement , you know . if it do not act well , or do not quite accord with we mutual convenience , he can easily go to the right - about . there will be time to find some better place for he in the meanwhile . you have better determine to leave he here for the present ! ' 'I be very much oblige to you , ' say my aunt ; ' and so be he , I see ; but -' ' come ! I know what you mean , ' cry . ' you shall not be oppress by the receipt of favour , . you may pay for he , if you like . we will not be hard about term , but you shall pay if you will . ' 'On that understanding , ' say my aunt , ' though it do not lessen the real obligation , I shall be very glad to leave he . ' ' then come and see my little housekeeper , ' say . we accordingly go up a wonderful old staircase ; with
with a balustrade so broad that we might have go up that , almost as easily ; and into a shady old drawing - room , light by some three or four of the quaint window I have look up at from the street : which have old oak seat in they , that seem to have come of the same tree as the shining oak floor , and the great beam in the ceiling . it be a prettily furnished room , with a piano and some lively furniture in red and green , and some flower . it seem to be all old nook and corner ; and in every nook and corner there be some queer little table , or cupboard , or bookcase , or seat , or something or other , that make I think there be not such another good corner in the room ; until I look at the next one , and find it equal to it , if not better . on everything there be the same air of retirement and cleanliness that mark the house outside . tap at a door in a corner of the panel wall , and a girl of about my own age come quickly out and kiss he . on she face , I see immediately the placid and sweet expression of the lady whose picture have look at I downstairs . it seem to my imagination as if the portrait have grow womanly , and the original remain a child . although she face be quite bright and happy , there be a tranquillity about it , and about she - a quiet , good , calm spirit - that I never have forgotten ; that I shall never forget . this be he little housekeeper , he daughter , say . when I hear how he say it , and see how he hold she hand , I guess what the one motive of he life be . she have a little basket - trifle hang at she side , with key in it ; and she look as staid and as discreet a housekeeper as the old house could have . she listen to she father as he tell she about I , with a pleasant face ; and when he have conclude , propose to my aunt that we should go upstairs and see my room . we all go together , she before we : and a glorious old room it be , with more oak beam , and diamond pane ; and the broad balustray go all the way up to it . I can not call to mind where or when , in my childhood , I have see a stain glass window in a church . nor do I recollect its subject . but I know that when I see she turn round , in the grave light of the old staircase , and wait for we , above , I think of that window ; and I associate something of its tranquil brightness with ever afterwards . my aunt be as happy as I be , in the arrangement make for I ; and we go down to the drawing - room again , well please and gratify . as she would not hear of stay to dinner , lest she should by any chance fail to arrive at home with the grey pony before dark ; and as I apprehend kknow she too well to argue any point with she ; some lunch be provide for she there , and go back to she governess , and to he office . so we be leave to take leave of one another without any restraint . she tell I that everything would be arrange for I by , and that I should want for nothing , and give I the kindest word and the best advice . ' trot , ' say my aunt in conclusion , ' be a credit to yourself , to I , and , and be with you ! ' I be greatly overcome , and could only thank she , again and again , and send my love to . ' never , ' say my aunt , ' be mean in anything ; never be false ; never be cruel . avoid those three vex , trot , and I can always be hopeful of you . ' I promise , as well as I could , that I would not abuse she kindness or forget she admonition . ' the pony' at the door , ' say my aunt , ' and I be off ! stay here . ' with these word she embrace I hastily , and go out of the room , shutt the door after she . at first I be start by so abrupt a departure , and almost fear I have displease she ; but when I look into the street , and see how dejectedly she get into the chaise , and drive away without look up , I understand she better and do not do she that injustice . by five o'clock , which be 's dinner - hour , I have muster up my spirits again , and be ready for my knife and fork . the cloth be only laid for we two ; but be wait in the drawing - room before dinner , go down with she father , and sit opposite to he at table . I doubt whether he could have dine without she . we do not stay there , after dinner , but come upstairs into the drawing - room again : in one snug corner of which , Agnes set glassis for she father , and a decanter of port wine . I think he would have miss its usual flavour , if it have be put there for he by any
any other hand . there he sit , take he wine , and take a good deal of it , for two hour ; while play on the piano , work , and talk to he and I . he be , for the most part , gay and cheerful with we ; but sometimes he eye rest on she , and he fall into a brooding state , and be silent . she always observ this quickly , I think , and always rouse he with a question or caress . then he come out of he meditation , and drank more wine . Agnes make the tea , and preside over it ; and the time pass away after it , as after dinner , until she go to be ; when she father take she in he arm and kiss she , and , she be go , order candle in he office . then I go to be too . but in the course of the evening I have ramble down to the door , and a little way along the street , that I might have another peep at the old house , and the grey Cathedral ; and might think of my come through that old city on my journey , and of my pass the very house I live in , without know it . as I come back , I see shut up the office ; and feel friendly towards everybody , go in and speak to he , and at parting , give he my hand . but oh , what a clammy hand he be ! as ghostly to the touch as to the sight ! I rub mine afterwards , to warm it , and to rub . it be such a uncomfortable hand , that , when I go to my room , it be still cold and wet upon my memory . lean out of the window , and see one of the face on the beam - end look at I sideway , I fancie it be get up there somehow , and shut he out in a hurry . chapter 16 I be a New Boy in more than one next morning , after breakfast , I enter on school life again . I go , accompany by , to the scene of my future study - a grave building in a courtyard , with a learn air about it that see very well sui to the stray rook and jackdaw who come down from the Cathedral towers to walk with a clerkly bear on the grass - plot - and be introduce to my new master , . look almost as rusty , to my thinking , as the tall iron rails and gate outside the house ; and almost as stiff and heavy as the great stone urn that flank they , and be set up , on the top of the red -brick wall , at regular distance all round the court , like sublimate skittle , for to play at . he be in he library ( I mean be ) , with he clothes not particularly well brush , and he hair not particularly well comb ; he knee - smalls unbraced ; he long black gaiter unbutton ; and he sho yawn like two cavern on the hearth - rug . turn upon I a lustreless eye , that remind I of a long - forget blind old horse who once use to crop the grass , and tumble over the grave , in churchyard , he say he be glad to see I : and then he give I he hand ; which I do not know what to do with , as it do nothing for itself . but , sit at work , not far from , be a very pretty young lady - whom he call , and who be he daughter , I suppose - who get I out of my difficulty by knee down to put 's shoe on , and button he gaiter , which she do with great cheerfulness and quickness . when she have finish , and we be go out to the schoolroom , I be much surprised to hear , in bidding she good morning , address she as ' . strong ' ; and I be wonder could she be 's son 's wife , or could she be , when Strong himself unconsciously enlighten I . ' by the by , , ' he say , stop in a passage with he hand on my shoulder ; ' you have not find any suitable provision for my wife 's cousin yet ? ' ' no , ' say . ' no . not yet . ' 'I could wish it do as soon as it can be do , , ' say , ' for be needy , and idle ; and of those two bad thing , worse thing sometimes come . what do say ,' he add , look at I , and move he head to the time of he quotation , ' " find some mischief still , for idle hand to do . "' ' , , ' return , 'if knew mankind , he might have write , with as much truth , " find some mischief still , for busy hand to do . " the busy people achieve they full share of mischief in the world , you may rely upon it . what have the people be about , who have be the busiest in get money , and in get power , this century or two ? no mischief ? ' ' will never be very busy in get either , I expect , ' say , rub he ching thoughtfully . ' perhaps not , ' say ; ' and you bring I back to the
the question , with a apology for digressing . no , I have not be able to dispose of yet . I believe ,' he say this with some hesitation , 'I penetrate you motive , and it make the thing more difficult . ' 'My motive , ' return , ' be to make some suitable provision for a cousin , and a old playfellow , of 's . ' ' yes , I know , ' say ; 'at home or abroad . ' ' aye ! ' reply the Doctor , apparently wonder why he emphasize those word so much . ' at home or abroad . ' ' you own expression , you know , ' say . 'or abroad . ' ' surely , ' the answer . ' surely . one or other . ' ' one or other ? have you no choice ? ' ask . ' no , ' return the Doctor . ' no ? ' with astonishment . ' not the least . ' ' no motive , ' say , ' for mean abroad , and not at home ? ' ' no , ' return the Doctor . 'I be bound to believe you , and of course I do believe you , ' say . ' it might have simplify my office very much , if I have know it before . but I confess I entertaine another impression . ' regard he with a puzzl and doubt look , which almost immediately subsid into a smile that give I great encouragement ; for it be full of amiability and sweetness , and there be a simplicity in it , and indeed in he whole manner , when the studious , ponder frost upon it be get through , very attractive and hopeful to a young scholar like I . repeat ' no ' , and ' not the least ' , and other short assurance to the same purport , jog on before we , at a queer , uneven pace ; and we follow : , look grave , I observe , and shake he head to himself , without know that I see he . the schoolroom be a pretty large hall , on the quietest side of the house , confront by the stately stare of some half - dozen of the great urn , and command a peep of a old secluded garden belong to the Doctor , where the peach be ripen on the sunny south wall . there be two great aloe , in tubs , on the turf outside the window ; the broad hard leave of which plant ( look as if they be make of painted tin ) have ever since , by association , be symbolical to I of silence and retirement . about five - and - twenty boy be studiously engage at they book when we go in , but they rise to give the good morning , and remain stand when they see and I . 'a new boy , young gentleman , ' say the Doctor ; ' . ' one Adam , who be the head - boy , then step out of he place and welcome I . he look like a young clergyman , in he white cravat , but he be very affable and good - humoured ; and he show I my place , and present I to the master , in a gentlemanly way that would have put I at my ease , if anything could . it seem to I so long , however , since I have be among such boy , or among any companion of my own age , except and , that I feel as strange as ever I have do in my life . I be so conscious of have pass through scene of which they could have no knowledge , and of have acquire experience foreign to my age , appearance , and condition as one of they , that I half believe it be a imposture to come there as a ordinary little schoolboy . I have become , in the and time , however short or long it may have be , so unused to the sport and game of boy , that I know I be awkward and inexperienc in the commonest thing belong to they . whatever I have learn , have so slipp away from I in the sordid care of my life from day to night , that now , when I be examine about what I know , I know nothing , and be put into the lowest form of the school . but , troublead as I be , by my want of boyish skill , and of book - learn too , I be make infinitely more uncomfortable by the consideration , that , in what I do know , I be much farther remove from my companion than in what I do not . my mind run upon what they would think , if they know of my familiar acquaintance with the 's ? be there anything about I which would reveal my proceedings in connexion with the family - all those pawning , and sellings , and supper - in spite of myself ? suppose some of the boy have see I come through , wayworn and rag , and should find I out ? what would they say , who make so light of money , if they could know how I have scrape my halfpence together , for the purchase of my daily saveloy and beer , or my slice of pudding ? how would it affect they , who be so innocent of life , and street , to discover how know I be ( and be asham to be ) in some of the meanest phase of both ? all this run in my
my head so much , on that first day at 's , that I feel distrustful of my slightest look and gesture ; shrunk within myself whensoever I be approach by one of my new schoolfellow ; and hurrie off the minute school be over , afraid of commit myself in my response to any friendly notice or advance . but there be such a influence in 's old house , that when I knock at it , with my new school - book under my arm , I begin to feel my uneasiness soften away . as I go up to my airy old room , the grave shadow of the staircase seem to fall upon my doubt and fear , and to make the past more indistinct . I sit there , sturdily con my book , until dinner - time ( we be out of school for good at three ) ; and go down , hopeful of become a passable sort of boy yet . Agnes be in the drawing - room , wait for she father , who be detain by someone in he office . she meet I with she pleasant smile , and ask I how I like the school . I tell she I should like it very much , I hope ; but I be a little strange to it at first . ' you have never be to school ,' I say , ' have you ? ' ' oh yes ! every day . ' 'Ah , but you mean here , at you own home ? ' ' could not spare I to go anywhere else , ' she answer , smile and shake she head . ' he housekeeper must be in he house , you know . ' ' he be very fond of you , I be sure ,' I say . she nod ' yes , ' and go to the door to listen for he come up , that she might meet he on the stair . but , as he be not there , she come back again . ' mama have be dead ever since I be bear , ' she say , in she quiet way . 'I only know she picture , downstairs . I see you look at it yesterday . do you think whose it be ? ' I tell she yes , because it be so like herself . ' say so , too , ' say , pleased . ! that be papa now ! ' she bright calm face lighte up with pleasure as she go to meet he , and as they come in , hand in hand . he greet I cordially ; and tell I I should certainly be happy under , who be one of the gentlest of man . ' there may be some , perhaps - I do not know that there be - who abuse he kindness , ' say . ' never be one of those , , in anything . he be the least suspicious of mankind ; and whether that be a merit , or whether it be a blemish , it deserve consideration in all dealings with the Doctor , great or small . ' he speak , I think , as if he be weary , or dissatisfie with something ; but I do not pursue the question in my mind , for dinner be just then announce , and we go down and take the same seat as before . we have scarcely do so , when put in he red head and he lank hand at the door , and say : ' be beg the favour of a word , sir . ' 'I be but this moment quit of , ' say he master . ' yes , sir , ' return ; ' but have come back , and he beg the favour of a word . ' as he hold the door open with he hand , look at I , and look at , and look at the dish , and look at the plate , and look at every object in the room , I think , - yet seem to look at nothing ; he make such a appearance all the while of keep he red eye dutifully on he master . 'I beg you pardon . it be only to say , on reflection , ' observe a voice behind , as 's head be push away , and the speaker 's substitute - ' pray excuse I for this intrusion - that as it seem I have no choice in the matter , the sooner I go abroad the better . my cousin do say , when we talk of it , that she like to have she friend within reach rather than to have they banish , and the old doctor -' ' , be that ? ' interpose , gravely . ' Doctor strong , of course , ' return the other ; call he the old doctor ; it be all the same , you know . ' 'I do not know , ' return . ' well , , ' say the other - ' be of the same mind , I believe . but as it appear from the course you take with I he have change he mind , why there be no more to be say , except that the sooner I be off , the better . therefore , I think I would come back and say , that the sooner I be off the better . when a plunge be to be make into the water , it be of no use linger on the bank . ' ' there shall be as little linger as possible , in you case , , you may depend upon it , ' say . '
' thank 'ee , ' say the other . ' Much oblige . I do not want to look a gift - horse in the mouth , which be not a gracious thing to do ; otherwise , I dare say , my cousin could easily arrange it in she own way . I suppose would only have to say to the old doctor -' ' mean that . strong would only have to say to she husband - do I follow you ? ' say . ' quite so , ' return the other , ' - would only have to say , that she want such and such a thing to be so and so ; and it would be so and so , as a matter of course . ' ' and why as a matter of course , ? ' ask , sedately eat he dinner . ' why , because be a charme young girl , and the old - , I mean - be not quite a charme young boy , ' say , laugh . ' no offence to anybody , . I only mean that I suppose some compensation be fair and reasonable in that sort of marriage . ' ' compensation to the lady , sir ? ' ask gravely . 'to the lady , sir , ' answer , laugh . but appear to remark that go on with he dinner in the same sedate , immovable manner , and that there be no hope of make he relax a muscle of he face , he add : ' however , I have say what I come to say , and , with another apology for this intrusion , I may take myself off . of course I shall observe you direction , in consider the matter as one to be arrange between you and I solely , and not to be refer to , up at the 's . ' ' have you dine ? ' ask , with a motion of he hand towards the table . ' thank 'ee . I be go to dine , ' say , ' with my cousin . good - bye ! ' , without rise , look after he thoughtfully as he go out . he be rather a shallow sort of young gentleman , I think , with a handsome face , a rapid utterance , and a confident , bold air . and this be the first I ever see of ; whom I have not expect to see so soon , when I hear the Doctor speak of he that morning . when we have dine , we go upstairs again , where everything go on exactly as on the previous day . Agnes set the glass and decanter in the same corner , and sit down to drink , and drank a good deal . Agnes play the piano to he , sit by he , and work and talk , and play some game at dominoe with I . in good time she make tea ; and afterwards , when I bring down my book , look into they , and show I what she know of they ( which be no slight matter , though she say it be ) , and what be the best way to learn and understand they . I see she , with she modest , orderly , placid manner , and I hear she beautiful calm voice , as I write these word . the influence for all good , which she come to exercise over I at a later time , begin already to descmend upon my breast . I love little , and I do not love Agne - no , not at all in that way - but I feel that there be goodness , peace , and truth , wherever Agnes be ; and that the soft light of the coloured window in the church , see long ago , fall on she always , and on I when I be near she , and on everything around . the time have come for she withdrawal for the night , and she have leave we , I give my hand , preparatory to go away myself . but he check I and say : ' should you like to stay with we , Trotwood , or to go elsewhere ? ' 'to stay ,' I answer , quickly . ' you be sure ? ' ' if you please . if I may ! ' ' why , it be but a dull life that we lead here , boy , I be afraid ,' he say . ' not more dull for I than Agnes , sir . not dull at all ! ' ' than Agnes ,' he repeat , walk slowly to the great chimney - piece , and lean against it . ' than Agnes ! ' he have drank wine that evening ( or I fancie it ) , until he eye be bloodshot . not that I could see they now , for they be cast down , and shade by he hand ; but I have notice they a little while before . ' now I wonder , ' he mutter , ' whether my Agnes tire of I . when should I ever tire of she ! but that be different , that be quite different . ' he be musing , not speak to I ; so I remain quiet . 'a dull old house , ' he say , ' and a monotonous life ; but I must have she near I . I must keep she near I . if the thought that I may die and leave my darling , or that my darling may die and leave I , come like a spectre , to distress my happiest hour , and be
be only to be drown in -' he do not supply the word ; but pace slowly to the place where he have sit , and mechanically go through the action of pouring wine from the empty decanter , set it down and pace back again . ' if it be miserable to bear , when she be here , ' he say , ' what would it be , and she away ? no , no , no . I can not try that . ' he lean against the chimney - piece , brood so long that I could not decide whether to run the risk of disturb he by go , or to remain quietly where I be , until he should come out of he reverie . at length he arouse himself , and look about the room until he eye encounter mine . ' stay with we , Trotwood , eh ? ' he say in he usual manner , and as if he be answer something I have just say . 'I be glad of it . you be company to we both . it be wholesome to have you here . wholesome for I , wholesome for Agnes , wholesome perhaps for all of we . ' 'I be sure it be for I , sir ,' I say . 'I be so glad to be here . ' ' that be a fine fellow ! ' say . ' as long as you be glad to be here , you shall stay here . ' he shook hand with I upon it , and clap I on the back ; and tell I that when I have anything to do at night after Agnes have leave we , or when I wish to read for my own pleasure , I be free to come down to he room , if he be there and if I desire it for company 's sake , and to sit with he . I thank he for he consideration ; and , as he go down soon afterwards , and I be not tired , go down too , with a book in my hand , to avail myself , for half - a - hour , of he permission . but , see a light in the little round office , and immediately feel myself attract towards , who have a sort of fascination for I , I go in there instead . I find Uriah read a great fat book , with such demonstrative attention , that he lank forefinger follow up every line as he read , and make clammy track along the page ( or so I fully believe ) like a snail . ' you be work late tonight , , ' say I . ' yes , , ' say . as I be get on the stool opposite , to talk to he more conveniently , I observe that he have not such a thing as a smile about he , and that he could only widen he mouth and make two hard crease down he cheek , one on each side , to stand for one . 'I be not do office -work , master , ' say . ' what work , then ? ' I ask . 'I be improve my legal knowledge , master , ' say . 'I be go through 's . oh , what a writer be , ! ' my stool be such a tower of observation , that as I watch he read on again , after this rapturous exclamation , and follow up the line with he forefinger , I observe that he nostril , which be thin and point , with sharp dint in they , have a singular and most uncomfortable way of expand and contract themselves - that they seem to twinkle instead of he eye , which hardly ever twinkle at all . 'I suppose you be quite a great lawyer ? ' I say , after look at he for some time . , ? ' say . 'Oh , no ! I be a very umble person . ' it be no fancy of mine about he hand , I observ ; for he frequently ground the palm against each other as if to squeeze they dry and warm , besides often wip they , in a stealthy way , on he pocket - handkerchief . 'I be well aware that I be the umblest person go , ' say , modestly ; ' let the other be where he may . my mother be likewise a very umble person . we live in a numble abode , master , but have much to be thankful for . my father 's former calling be umble . he be a sexton . ' ' what be he now ? ' I ask . ' he be a partaker of glory at present , master , ' say . ' but we have much to be thankful for . how much have I to be thankful for in live with ! ' I ask if he have be with long ? 'I have be with he , go on four year , master , ' say ; shut up he book , after carefully mark the place where he have leave off . ' since a year after my father 's death . how much have I to be thankful for , in that ! how much have I to be thankful for , in 's kind intention to give I my article , which would otherwise not lay within the umble means of mother and self ! ' ' then , when you article time be over , you will be a regular lawyer , I suppose ? ' say I . ' with the blessing of , , ' return . ' perhaps you
you will be a partner in 's business , one of these day ,' I say , to make myself agreeable ; ' and it will be and , or Heep late . ' ' oh no , , ' return , shak he head , 'I be much too umble for that ! ' he certainly do look uncommonly like the carve face on the beam outside my window , as he sit , in he humility , eye I sideway , with he mouth wide , and the crease in he cheek . ' be a most excellent man , master , ' say . ' if you have know he long , you know it , I be sure , much better than I can inform you . ' I reply that I be certain he be ; but that I have not know he long myself , though he be a friend of my aunt 's . 'Oh , indeed , , ' say . ' you aunt be a sweet lady , ! ' he have a way of writhing when he want to express enthusiasm , which be very ugly ; and which divert my attention from the compliment he have pay my relation , to the snaky twisting of he throat and body . 'a sweet lady , ! ' say . ' she have a great admiration for miss Agnes , master Copperfield , I believe ? ' I say , ' yes , ' boldly ; not that I know anything about it , heaven forgive I ! ' I hope you have , too , , ' say . ' but I be sure you must have . ' ' everybody must have ,' I return . 'Oh , thank you , master , ' say , ' for that remark ! it be so true ! Umble as I be , I know it be so true ! oh , thank you , master Copperfield ! ' he writh himself quite off he stool in the excitement of he feeling , and , be off , begin to make arrangement for go home . ' mother will be expect I ,' he say , refer to a pale , inexpressive - faced watch in he pocket , ' and get uneasy ; for though we be very umble , master , we be much attach to one another . if you would come and see we , any afternoon , and take a cup of tea at we lowly dwelling , mother would be as proud of you company as I should be . ' I say I should be glad to come . ' thank you , master , ' return , put he book away upon the shelf - 'I suppose you stop here , some time , ? ' I say I be go to be bring up there , I believe , as long as I remain at school . 'Oh , indeed ! ' exclaim . 'I should think you would come into the business at last , master Copperfield ! ' I protest that I have no view of that sort , and that no such scheme be entertained in my behalf by anybody ; but insist on blandly reply to all my assurance , , yes , , I should think you would , indeed ! ' and , 'Oh , indeed , , I should think you would , certainly ! ' over and over again . , at last , ready to leave the office for the night , he ask I if it would suit my convenience to have the light put out ; and on my answering ' yes , ' instantly extinguish it . after shak hand with I - he hand feel like a fish , in the dark - he open the door into the street a very little , and creep out , and shut it , leave I to grope my way back into the house : which cost I some trouble and a fall over he stool . this be the proximate cause , I suppose , of my dream about he , for what appear to I to be half the night ; and dream , among other thing , that he have launch 's house on a piratical expedition , with a black flag at the masthead , bear the inscription ' 's ' , under which diabolical ensign he be carry I and little 'ly to the spanish main , to be drown . I get a little the better of my uneasiness when I go to next day , and a good deal the better next day , and so shook it off by degree , that in less than a fortnight I be quite at home , and happy , among my new companion . I be awkward enough in they game , and backward enough in they study ; but custom would improve I in the first respect , I hope , and hard work in the second . accordingly , I go to work very hard , both in play and in earnest , and gain great commendation . and , in a very little while , the and life become so strange to I that I hardly believe in it , while my present life grow so familiar , that I seem to have be lead it a long time . 's be a excellent school ; as different from 's as good be from evil . it be very gravely and decorously order , and on a sound system ; with a appeal , in everything , to the honour and good faith of the boy , and a avow intention to rely on they possession of those quality unless they prove themselves unworthy of it , which work wonder . we all feel
feel that we have a part in the management of the place , and in sustain its character and dignity . hence , we soon become warmly attach to it - I be sure I do for one , and I never know , in all my time , of any other boy be otherwise - and learn with a good will , desire to do it credit . we have noble game out of hour , and plenty of liberty ; but even then , as I remember , we be well speak of in the town , and rarely do any disgrace , by we appearance or manner , to the reputation of and 's boy . some of the higher scholar board in the Doctor 's house , and through they I learn , at second hand , some particular of the 's history - as , how he have not yet be marry twelve month to the beautiful young lady I have see in the study , whom he have marry for love ; for she have not a sixpence , and have a world of poor relation ( so we fellow say ) ready to swarm the Doctor out of house and home . also , how the doctor 's cogitating manner be attributable to he be always engage in look out for root ; which , in my innocence and ignorance , I suppose to be a botanical furor on the Doctor 's part , especially as he always look at the ground when he walk about , until I understand that they be root of word , with a view to a new dictionary which he have in contemplation . Adams , we head - boy , who have a turn for mathematics , have make a calculation , I be inform , of the time this dictionary would take in completing , on the Doctor 's plan , and at the Doctor 's rate of go . he consider that it might be do in one thousand six hundred and forty - nine year , count from the 's last , or sixty - second , birthday . but the Doctor himself be the idol of the whole school : and it must have be a badly compose school if he have be anything else , for he be the kindest of man ; with a simple faith in he that might have touch the stone heart of the very urn upon the wall . as he walk up and down that part of the courtyard which be at the side of the house , with the stray rook and jackdaw look after he with they head cock slyly , as if they know how much more know they be in worldly affair than he , if any sort of vagabond could only get near enough to he creaking shoe to attract he attention to one sentence of a tale of distress , that vagabond be make for the next two day . it be so notorious in the house , that the master and head - boy take pain to cut these marauder off at angles , and to get out of window , and turn they out of the courtyard , before they could make the Doctor aware of they presence ; which be sometimes happily effect within a few yard of he , without he know anything of the matter , as he jog to and fro . outside he own domain , and unprotect , he be a very sheep for the shearer . he would have take he gaiter off he leg , to give away . in fact , there be a story current among we ( I have no idea , and never have , on what authority , but I have believe it for so many year that I feel quite certain it be true ) , that on a frosty day , one winter - time , he actually do bestow he gaiter on a beggar- woman , who occasion some scandal in the neighbourhood by exhibit a fine infant from door to door , wrap in those garment , which be universally recognize , be as well know in the vicinity as the . the legend add that the only person who do not identify they be the Doctor himself , who , when they be shortly afterwards display at the door of a little second - hand shop of no very good repute , where such thing be take in exchange for gin , be more than once observe to handle they approvingly , as if admir some curiious novelty in the pattern , and consider they a improvement on he own . it be very pleasant to see the Doctor with he pretty young wife . he have a fatherly , benignant way of show he fondness for she , which see in itself to express a good man . I often see they walk in the garden where the peach were , and I sometimes have a nearer observation of they in the study or the parlour . she appear to I to take great care of the Doctor , and to like he very much , though I never think she vitally interested in the dictionary : some cumbrous fragment of which work the always carry in he pocket , and in the lining of he hat , and generally seem to be expound to she as they walk about . I see a good deal of strong , both because she have take a liking for I on the morning of my introduction to the Doctor , and be always afterwards kind to I , and interested in I ; and because she be very fond of , and be often backwards and forward at we house . there be a curiious constraint between she and , I
I think ( of whom she seem to be afraid ) , that never wear off . when she come there of a evening , she always shrink from accept he escort home , and run away with I instead . and sometimes , as we be run gaily across the together , expect to meet nobody , we would meet , who be always surprised to see we . 's mama be a lady I take great delight in . she name be ; but we boy use to call she the , on account of she generalship , and the skill with which she marshall great force of relation against the doctor . she be a little , sharp - eyed woman , who use to wear , when she be dress , one unchangeable cap , ornament with some artificial flower , and two artificial butterfly suppose to be hover above the flowers . there be a superstition among we that this cap have come from , and could only originate in the workmanship of that ingenious nation : but all I certainly know about it , be , that it always make its appearance of a evening , wheresoever make she appearance ; that it be carry about to friendly meeting in a basket ; that the butterfly have the gift of trembling constantly ; and that they improve the shining hour at 's expense , like busy be . I observ the - not to adopt the name disrespectfully - to pretty good advantage , on a night which be make memorable to I by something else I shall relate . it be the night of a little party at the 's , which be give on the occasion of 's departure for , whither he be go as a cadet , or something of that kind : have at length arrange the business . it happen to be the 's birthday , too . we have have a holiday , have make present to he in the morning , have make a speech to he through the head - boy , and have cheer he until we be hoarse , and until he have she tear . and now , in the evening , , , and I , go to have tea with he in he private capacity . be there , before we . , dress in white , with cherry - colou ribbon , be play the piano , when we go in ; and he be lean over she to turn the leave . the clear red and white of she complexion be not so blooming and flower - like as usual , I think , when she turn round ; but she look very pretty , wonderfully pretty . 'I have forget , , ' say 's mama , when we be seat , 'to pay you the compliment of the day - though they be , as you may suppose , very far from be mere compliment in my case . allow I to wish you many happy return . ' 'I thank you , ma 'am , ' reply the Doctor . ' many , many , many , happy return , ' say the . ' not only for you own sake , but for 's , and 's , and many other people 's . it seem but yesterday to I , , when you be a little creature , a head shorter than master Copperfield , make baby love to behind the gooseberry bushes in the back - garden . ' ' my dear mama , ' say , ' never mind that now . ' , do not be absurd , ' return she mother . ' if you be to blush to hear of such thing now you be a old married woman , when be you not to blush to hear of they ? ' 'Old ? ' exclaim . ' ? come ! ' ' yes , ,' return the soldier . ' virtually , a old married woman . although not old by year - for when do you ever hear I say , or who have ever hear I say , that a girl of twenty be old by year ! - you cousin be the wife of the doctor , and , as such , what I have describe she . it be well for you , , that you cousin be the wife of the doctor . you have find in he a influential and kind friend , who will be kinder yet , I venture to predict , if you deserve it . I have no false pride . I never hesitate to admit , frankly , that there be some member of we family who want a friend . you be one yourself , before you cousin 's influence raise up one for you . ' the Doctor , in the goodness of he heart , wav he hand as if to make light of it , and save from any further reminder . but change she chair for one next the Doctor 's , and put she fan on he coat - sleeve , say : ' no , really , my dear Doctor , you must excuse I if I appear to dwell on this rather , because I feel so very strongly . I call it quite my monomania , it be such a subject of mine . you be a blessing to we . you really be a , you know . ' ' Nonsense , nonsense , ' say the Doctor . ' no , no , I beg you pardon , ' retort the . ' with nobody present , but we dear and confidential friend , I can not consent to be put down . I shall begin to assert the privileges of a mother - in -
- law , if you go on like that , and scold you . I be perfectly honest and outspoken . what I be say , be what I say when you first overpower I with surprise - you remember how surprised I be ? - by propose for . not that there be anything so very much out of the way , in the mere fact of the proposal - it would be ridiculous to say that ! - but because , you have know she poor father , and have know she from a baby six month old , I have not think of you in such a light at all , or indeed as a marry man in any way , - simply that , you know . ' ' aye , aye , ' return the Doctor , good - humouredly . ' never mind . ' ' but I do mind , ' say the , lay she fan upon he lip . 'i mind very much . I recall these thing that I may be contradict if I be wrong . well ! then I speak to , and I tell she what have happen . I say , " my dear , here be have positively be and make you the subject of a handsome declaration and a offer . " do I press it in the least ? no . I say , " now , , tell I the truth this moment ; be you heart free ? " " mama , " she say cry , " I be extremely young " - which be perfectly true - " and I hardly know if I have a heart at all . " " then , my dear , " I say , " you may rely upon it , it be free . at all event , my love , " say I , " be in a agitate state of mind , and must be answer . he can not be keep in he present state of suspense . " " mama , " say , still cry , " would he be unhappy without I ? if he would , I honour and respect he so much , that I think I will have he . " so it be settled . and then , and not till then , I say to , " , will not only be you husband , but he will represent you late father : he will represent the head of we family , he will represent the wisdom and station , and I may say the means , of we family ; and will be , in short , a Boon to it . " I use the word at the time , and I have use it again , today . if I have any merit it be consistency . ' the daughter have sit quite silent and still during this speech , with she eye fix on the ground ; she cousin stand near she , and look on the ground too . she now say very softly , in a trembling voice : ' mama , I hope you have finish ? ' ' no , my dear , ' return the , 'I have not quite finish . since you ask I , my love , I reply that I have not . I complain that you really be a little unnatural towards you own family ; and , as it be of no use complain to you . I mean to complain to you husband . now , my dear doctor , do look at that silly wife of yours . ' as the turn he kind face , with its smile of simplicity and gentleness , towards she , she droop she head more . I notice that look at she steadily . ' when I happen to say to that naughty thing , the other day , ' pursue she mother , shak she head and she fan at she , playfully , ' that there be a family circumstance she might mention to you - indeed , I think , be bound to mention - she say , that to mention it be to ask a favour ; and that , as you be too generous , and as for she to ask be always to have , she would not . ' , my dear , ' say the Doctor . ' that be wrong . it robb I of a pleasure . ' ' almost the very word I say to she ! ' exclaim she mother . ' now really , another time , when I know what she would tell you but for this reason , and will not , I have a great mind , my dear Doctor , to tell you myself . ' 'I shall be glad if you will , ' return the Doctor . ' shall I ? ' ' certainly . ' ' well , then , I will ! ' say the . ' that be a bargain . ' and have , I suppose , carry she point , she tap the Doctor 's hand several time with she fan ( which she kiss first ) , and return triumphantly to she former station . some more company come in , among whom be the two master and Adams , the talk become general ; and it naturally turn on , and he voyage , and the country he be go to , and he various plan and prospect . he be to leave that night , after supper , in a post-chaise , for ; where the ship , in which he be to make the voyage , lay ; and be to be go - unless he come home on leave , or for he health - I do not
not know how many year . I recollect it be settle by general consent that be quite a misrepresent country , and have nothing objectionable in it , but a tiger or two , and a little heat in the warm part of the day . for my own part , I look on as a modern Sindbad , and picture he the bosom friend of all the Raja in the , sit under canopy , smoke curly golden pipe - a mile long , if they could be straighten out . be a very pretty singer : as i know , who often hear she singe by herself . but , whether she be afraid of singe before people , or be out of voice that even , it be certain that she could not s at all . she try a duet , once , with she cousin , but could not so much as begin ; and afterwards , when she try to s by herself , although she begin sweetly , she voice di away on a sudden , and leave she quite distress , with she head hang down over the key . the good doctor say she be nervous , and , to relieve she , propose a round game at card ; of which he know as much as of the art of play the trombone . but I remark that the take he into custody directly , for she partner ; and instruct he , as the first preliminary of initiation , to give she all the silver he have in he pocket . we have a merry game , not make the less merry by the Doctor 's mistakes , of which he commit a innumerable quantity , in spite of the watchfulness of the butterfly , and to they great aggravation . have decline to play , on the ground of not feel very well ; and she cousin have excuse himself because he have some packing to do . when he have do it , however , he return , and they sit together , talk , on the sofa . from time to time she come and look over the Doctor 's hand , and tell he what to play . she be very pale , as she bend over he , and I think she finger tremble as she point out the card ; but the Doctor be quite happy in she attention , and take no notice of this , if it be so . at supper , we be hardly so gay . everyone appear to feel that a parting of that sort be a awkward thing , and that the nearer it approached , the more awkward it be . try to be very talkative , but be not at he ease , and make matter worse . and they be not improve , as it appear to I , by the : who continually recal passage of 's . the Doctor , however , who feel , I be sure , that he be make everybody happy , be well pleased , and have no suspicion but that we be all at the utmost height of enjoyment . ' , my dear , ' say he , look at he watch , and fill he glass , ' it be past you cousin 's time , and we must not detain he , since time and tide - both concerned in this case - wait for no man . , you have a long voyage , and a strange country , before you ; but many man have have both , and many man will have both , to the end of time . the wind you be go to tempt , have waft thousand upon thousand to fortune , and bring thousand upon thousand happily back . ' ' it be a affecting thing , ' say - ' however it be view , it be affect , to see a fine young man one have know from a infant , go away to the other end of the world , leave all he know behind , and not know what be before he . a young man really well deserve constant support and patronage , ' look at the Doctor , ' who make such sacrifice . ' ' time will go fast with you , , ' pursue the Doctor , ' and fast with all of we . some of we can hardly expect , perhaps , in the natural course of thing , to greet you on you return . the next best thing be to hope to do it , and that be my case . I shall not weary you with good advice . you have long have a good model before you , in you cousin . Imitate she virtue as nearly as you can . ' fan herself , and shake she head . ' farewell , , ' say the Doctor , stand up ; on which we all stand up . 'a prosperous voyage out , a thrive career abroad , and a happy return home ! ' we all drank the toast , and all shook hand with ; after which he hastily take leave of the ladie who be there , and hurrie to the door , where he be receive , as he get into the chaise , with a tremendous broadside of cheer dischar by we boy , who have assemble on the lawn for the purpose . run in among they to swell the rank , I be very near the chaise when it roll away ; and I have a lively impression make upon I , in the midst of the noise and dust , of have see rattle past with a agitate face , and something cherry - coloured in he hand . after another broadside
broadside for the doctor , and another for the 's wife , the boy disperse , and I go back into the house , where I find the guest all stand in a group about the Doctor , discuss how have go away , and how he have borne it , and how he have feel it , and all the rest of it . in the midst of these remark , cry : ' 's ? ' no be there ; and when they call to she , no Annies reply . but all press out of the room , in a crowd , to see what be the matter , we find she lie on the hall floor . there be great alarm at first , until it be find that she be in a swoon , and that the swoon be yield to the usual means of recovery ; when the Doctor , who have lift she head upon he knee , put she curl aside with he hand , and say , look around : ' poor ! she be so faithful and tender - hear ! it be the parting from she old playfellow and friend - she favourite cousin - that have do this . ah ! it be a pity ! I be very sorry ! ' when she open she eye , and see where she be , and that we be all stand about she , she arise with assistance : turn she head , as she do so , to lay it on the Doctor 's shoulder - or to hide it , I do not know which . we go into the drawing - room , to leave she with the Doctor and she mother ; but she say , it seem , that she be better than she have be since morning , and that she would rather be bring among we ; so they bring she in , look very white and weak , I think , and sit she on a sofa . , my dear , ' say she mother , do something to she dress . ' see here ! you have lose a bow . will anybody be so good as find a ribbon ; a cherry - coloured ribbon ? ' it be the one she have wear at she bosom . we all look for it ; I myself look everywhere , I be certain - but nobody could find it . ' do you recollect where you have it last , ? ' say she mother . I wonder how I could have think she look white , or anything but burn red , when she answer that she have have it safe , a little while ago , she think , but it be not worth look for . nevertheless , it be look for again , and still not find . she entreate that there might be no more search ; but it be still seek for , in a desultory way , until she be quite well , and the company take they departure . we walk very slowly home , , , and I - and I admir the moonlight , and scarcely raise he eye from the ground . when we , at last , reach we own door , discover that she have leave she little reticule behind . delighte to be of any service to she , I run back to fetch it . I go into the supper - room where it have be leave , which be desert and dark . but a door of communication between that and the Doctor 's study , where there be a light , be open , I pass on there , to say what I want , and to get a candle . the Doctor be sit in he easy - chair by the fireside , and he young wife be on a stool at he foot . the Doctor , with a complacent smile , be read aloud some manuscript explanation or statement of a theory out of that interminable dictionary , and she be look up at he . but with such a face as I never see . it be so beautiful in its form , it be so ashy pale , it be so fix in its abstraction , it be so full of a wild , sleep - walking , dreamy horror of I do not know what . the eyes be wide open , and she brown hair fall in two rich cluster on she shoulders , and on she white dress , disorder by the want of the lost ribbon . Distinctly as I recollect she look , I can not say of what it be expressive , I can not even say of what it be expressive to I now , rise again before my older judgement . Penitence , humiliation , shame , pride , love , and trustfulness - I see they all ; and in they all , I see that horror of I do not know what . my entrance , and my say what I want , rouse she . it disturb the too , for when I go back to replace the candle I have take from the table , he be pat she head , in he fatherly way , and say he be a merciless drone to let she tempt he into read on ; and he would have she go to bed . but she ask he , in a rapid , urgent manner , to let she stay - to let she feel assure ( I hear she murmur some break word to this effect ) that she be in he confidence that night . and , as she turn again towards he , after glance at I as I leave the room and go out at
at the door , I see she cross she hand upon he knee , and look up at he with the same face , something quiet , as he resume he reading . it make a great impression on I , and I remember it a long time afterwards ; as I shall have occasion to narrate when the time come . chapter 17 it have not occur to I to mention since I run away ; but , of course , I write she a letter almost as soon as I be house at , and another , and a longer letter , contain all particular fully related , when my aunt take I formally under she protection . on my be settle at 's I write to she again , detaile my happy condition and prospect . I never could have derive anything like the pleasure from spend the money have give I , that I feel in send a gold half - guinea to , per post , enclose in this last letter , to discharge the sum I have borrowed of she : in which epistle , not before , I mention about the young man with the donkey - cart . to these communications reply as promptly , if not as concisely , as a merchant 's clerk . she utmost power of expression ( which be certainly not great in ink ) be exhaust in the attempt to write what she feel on the subject of my journey . four side of incoherent and interjectional beginning of sentence , that have no end , except blot , be inadequate to afford she any relief . but the blot be more expressive to I than the best composition ; for they show I that have be cry all over the paper , and what could I have desire more ? I make out , without much difficulty , that she could not take quite kindly to my aunt yet . the notice be too short after so long a prepossession the other way . we never know a person , she write ; but to think that should seem to be so different from what she have be think to be , be a Moral ! - that be she word . she be evidently still afraid of , for she send she grateful duty to she but timidly ; and she be evidently afraid of I , too , and entertaine the probability of my run away again soon : if I might judge from the repeat hints she throw out , that the coach - fare to be always to be have of she for the asking . she give I one piece of intelligence which affect I very much , namely , that there have be a sale of the furniture at we old home , and that and be go away , and the house be shut up , to be let or sell . know I have no part in it while they remain there , but it pain I to think of the dear old place as altogether abandon ; of the weed grow tall in the garden , and the fallen leave lie thick and wet upon the path . I imagine how the wind of winter would howl round it , how the cold rain would beat upon the window - glass , how the moon would make ghost on the wall of the empty room , watch they solitude all night . I think afresh of the grave in the churchyard , underneath the tree : and it seem as if the house be dead too , now , and all connect with my father and mother be fad away . there be no other news in 's letter . be a excellent husband , she say , though still a little near ; but we all have we fault , and she have plenty ( though I be sure I do not know what they be ) ; and he send he duty , and my little bedroom be always ready for I . be well , and be well , and .. be but poorly , and little 'ly would not send she love , but say that might send it , if she like . all this intelligence I dutifully impart to my aunt , only reserve to myself the mention of little , to whom I instinctively feel that she would not very tenderly incline . while I be yet new at 's , she make several excursion over to to see I , and always at unseasonable hour : with the view , I suppose , of take I by surprise . but , find I well employ , and bear a good character , and hear on all hand that I rise fast in the school , she soon discontinue these visit . I see she on a , every third or fourth week , when I go over to for a treat ; and I see every alternate , when he arrive by stage - coach at noon , to stay until next morning . on these occasion never travel without a leathern writing - desk , contain a supply of stationery and the memorial ; in relation to which document he have a notion that time be begin to press now , and that it really must be get out of hand . be very partial to gingerbread . to render he visit the more agreeable , my aunt have instruct I to open a credit for he at a cake shop , which be hamper with the stipulation that he should not be serve with more than one shilling 's - worth in the course of any one day . this , and the reference of all he little bills at the county inn where he sleep ,
, to my aunt , before they be pay , induce I to suspect that he be only allow to rattle he money , and not to spend it . I find on further investigation that this be so , or at least there be a agreement between he and my aunt that he should account to she for all he disbursement . as he have no idea of deceive she , and always desire to please she , he be thus make chary of launch into expense . on this point , as well as on all other possible point , be convinc that my aunt be the wisest and most wonderful of woman ; as he repeatedly tell I with infinite secrecy , and always in a whisper . ' Trotwood , ' say , with a air of mystery , after impart this confidence to I , one ; ' who be the man that hide near we house and frighten she ? ' ' Frighten my aunt , sir ? ' nod . 'I think nothing would have frightene she ,' he say , ' for she be -' here he whisper softly , ' do not mention it - the wisest and most wonderful of woman . ' have say which , he draw back , to observe the effect which this description of she make upon I . ' the first time he come , ' say , ' be - let I see - sixteen hundred and forty - nine be the date of 's execution . I think you say sixteen hundred and forty - nine ? ' ' yes , sir . ' 'I do not know how it can be , ' say , sorely puzzl and shake he head . 'I do not think I be as old as that . ' ' be it in that year that the man appear , sir ? ' I ask . ' why , really ' say , 'I do not see how it can have be in that year , . do you get that date out of history ? ' ' yes , sir . ' 'i suppose history never lie , do it ? ' say , with a gleam of hope . ' oh dear , no , sir ! ' I reply , most decisively . I be ingenuous and young , and I think so . 'I can not make it out , ' say , shak he head . ' there be something wrong , somewhere . however , it be very soon after the mistake be make of put some of the trouble out of 's head into my head , that the man first come . I be walk out with after tea , just at dark , and there he be , close to we house . ' ' walk about ? ' I inquire . ' walk about ? ' repeat . ' let I see , I must recollect a bit . - no , no ; he be not walk about . ' I ask , as the shortest way to get at it , what he be do . ' well , he be not there at all , ' say , ' until he come up behind she , and whispered . then she turn round and faint , and I stand still and look at he , and he walk away ; but that he should have be hide ever since ( in the ground or somewhere ) , be the most extraordinary thing ! ' ' have he be hide ever since ? ' I ask . 'To be sure he have , ' retort , nodd he head gravely . ' never come out , till last night ! we be walk last night , and he come up behind she again , and I know he again . ' ' and do he frighten my aunt again ? ' ' all of a shiver , ' say , counterfeit that affection and make he tooth chatter . ' hold by the paling . cry . but , Trotwood , come here , ' get I close to he , that he might whisper very softly ; ' why do she give he money , boy , in the moonlight ? ' ' he be a beggar , perhaps . ' shook he head , as utterly renounce the suggestion ; and have reply a great many time , and with great confidence , ' no beggar , no beggar , no beggar , sir ! ' go on to say , that from he window he have afterwards , and late at night , see my aunt give this person money outside the garden rail in the moonlight , who then slink away - into the ground again , as he think probable - and be see no more : while my aunt come hurriedly and secretly back into the house , and have , even that morning , be quite different from she usual self ; which prey on 's mind . I have not the least belief , in the outset of this story , that the unknown be anything but a delusion of 's , and one of the line of that ill - fate who occasion he so much difficulty ; but after some reflection I begin to entertain the question whether a attempt , or threat of a attempt , might have be twice make to take poor himself from under my aunt 's protection , and whether my aunt , the strength of whose kind feel towards he I know from herself , might have be induce to pay a price for he peace and quiet . as I be already much attach to , and very solicitous for he welfare , my fear favour this supposition
supposition ; and for a long time he hardly ever come round , without my entertaining a misgiving that he would not be on the coach - box as usual . there he always appear , however , grey - head , laugh , and happy ; and he never have anything more to tell of the man who could frighten my aunt . these Wednesday be the happiest day of 's life ; they be far from be the least happy of mine . he soon become known to every boy in the school ; and though he never take a active part in any game but kite - fly , be as deeply interested in all we sport as anyone among we . how often have I see he , intend upon a match at marble or pegtop , look on with a face of unutterable interest , and hardly breathing at the critical time ! how often , at hare and hound , have I see he mount on a little knoll , cheer the whole field on to action , and wave he hat above he grey head , oblivious of the 's head , and all belong to it ! how many a summer hour have I know to be but blissful minute to he in the cricket - field ! how many winter day have I see he , stand blue - nos , in the snow and east wind , look at the boy go down the long slide , and clapp he worsted glove in rapture ! he be a universal favourite , and he ingenuity in little thing be transcendent . he could cut orang into such device as none of we have a idea of . he could make a boat out of anything , from a skewer upward . he could turn cramp - bone into chessman ; fashion Roman chariot from old court card ; make spok wheel out of cotton reel , and bird - cage of old wire . but he be greatest of all , perhaps , in the article of string and straw ; with which we be all persuade he could do anything that could be do by hand . 's renown be not long confin to we . after a few , himself make some inquirie of I about he , and I tell he all my aunt have tell I ; which interest the Doctor so much that he request , on the occasion of he next visit , to be present to he . this ceremony I perform ; and the Doctor begge , whensoever he should not find I at the coach office , to come on there , and rest himself until we morning 's work be over , it soon pass into a custom for to come on as a matter of course , and , if we be a little late , as often happen on a , to walk about the courtyard , wait for I . here he make the acquaintance of the 's beautiful young wife ( paler than formerly , all this time ; more rarely see by I or anyone , I think ; and not so gay , but not less beautiful ) , and so become more and more familiar by degree , until , at last , he would come into the school and wait . he always sit in a particular corner , on a particular stool , which be call ' ' , after he ; here he would sit , with he grey head bend forward , attentively listen to whatever might be go on , with a profound veneration for the learning he have never be able to acquire . this veneration extend to the Doctor , whom he think the most subtle and accomplish philosopher of any age . it be long before ever speak to he otherwise than bareheade ; and even when he and the Doctor have struck up quite a friendship , and would walk together by the hour , on that side of the courtyard which be know among we as the 's , would pull off he hat at interval to show he respect for wisdom and knowledge . how it ever come about that the Doctor begin to read out scrap of the famous , in these walk , I never know ; perhaps he feel it all the same , at first , as read to himself . however , it pass into a custom too ; and , listen with a face shining with pride and pleasure , in he heart of heart believe the to be the most delightful book in the world . as I think of they go up and down before those schoolroom window - the Doctor read with he complacent smile , a occasional flourish of the manuscript , or grave motion of he head ; and listen , enchain by interest , with he poor wit calmly wander know where , upon the wing of hard word - I think of it as one of the pleasantest thing , in a quiet way , that I have ever see . I feel as if they might go walk to and for for ever , and the world might somehow be the better for it - as if a thousand thing it make a noise about , be not one half so good for it , or I . Agnes be one of 's friend , very soon ; and in often come to the house , he make acquaintance with . the friendship between himself and I increase continually , and it be maintain on this odd footing : that , while come professedly to look after I as my guardian , he always consult I in any little matter of doubt that arise , and invariably guide himself by
by my advice ; not only have a high respect for my native sagacity , but consider that I inherit a good deal from my aunt . one morning , when I be about to walk with from the hotel to the coach office before go back to school ( for we have a hour 's school before breakfast ) , I meet in the street , who remind I of the promise I have make to take tea with himself and he mother : add , with a writhe , ' but I do not expect you to keep it , master Copperfield , we be so very umble . ' I really have not yet be able to make up my mind whether I like or detest he ; and I be very doubtful about it still , as I stand look he in the face in the street . but I feel it quite a affront to be suppose proud , and say I only want to be ask . 'Oh , if that be all , master , ' say , ' and it really be not we umbleness that prevent you , will you come this evening ? but if it be we umbleness , I hope you will not mind own to it , ; for we be well aware of we condition . ' I say I would mention it to , and if he approve , as I have no doubt he would , I would come with pleasure . so , at six o'clock that eve , which be one of the early office evening , I announce myself as ready , to . ' mother will be proud , indeed ,' he say , as we walk away together . ' or she would be proud , if it be not sinful , . ' ' yet you do not mind suppose I be proud this morning ,' I return . ' oh dear , no , ! ' return . 'Oh , believe I , no ! such a thought never come into my head ! I should not have deem it at all proud if you have think too umble for you . because we be so very umble . ' ' have you be study much law lately ? ' I ask , to change the subject . 'Oh , ,' he say , with a air of self - denial , 'my read be hardly to be call study . I have pass a hour or two in the evening , sometimes , with . ' ' rather hard , I suppose ? ' say I . ' he be hard to I sometimes , ' return . ' but I do not know what he might be to a gift person . ' after beat a little tune on he ching as he walk on , with the two forefinger of he skeleton right hand , he add : ' there be expression , you see , - word and term - in , that be try to a reader of my umble attainment . ' ' would you like to be teach ? ' I say briskly . 'I will teach it you with pleasure , as I learn it . ' 'Oh , thank you , master Copperfield ,' he answer , shak he head . 'I be sure it be very kind of you to make the offer , but I be much too umble to accept it . ' ' what nonsense , ! ' 'Oh , indeed you must excuse I , master Copperfield ! I be greatly oblige , and I should like it of all thing , I assure you ; but I be far too umble . there be people enough to tread upon I in my lowly state , without my do outrage to they feeling by possessing learn . learning be not for I . a person like myself have better not aspire . if he be to get on in life , he must get on umbly , ! ' I never see he mouth so wide , or the crease in he cheek so deep , as when he deliver himself of these sentiment : shak he head all the time , and writh modestly . 'I think you be wrong , Uriah ,' I say . 'I dare say there be several thing that I could teach you , if you would like to learn they . ' ' oh , I do not doubt that , master Copperfield ,' he answer ; ' not in the least . but not be umble yourself , you do not judge well , perhaps , for they that be . I will not provoke my betters with knowledge , thank you . I be much too umble . here be my umble dwelling , ! ' we enter a low , old - fashioned room , walk straight into from the street , and find there Mrs . Heep , who be the dead image of , only short . she receive I with the utmost humility , and aologize to I for give she son a kiss , observe that , lowly as they be , they have they natural affections , which they hope would give no offence to anyone . it be a perfectly decent room , half parlour and half kitchen , but not at all a snug room . the tea - thing be set upon the table , and the kettle be boil on the hob . there be a chest of drawer with a escritoire top , for to read or write at of a evening ; there be 's blue bag lie down and vomit papers ; there be a company of 's book command by ; there be a corner cupboard : and there be the
the usual article of furniture . I do not remember that any individual object have a bare , pinched , spare look ; but I do remember that the whole place have . it be perhaps a part of . 's humility , that she still wear weed . Notwithstand the lapse of time that have occur since 's decease , she still wear weed . I think there be some compromise in the cap ; but otherwise she be as weedy as in the early day of she mourn . ' this be a day to be remembe , my , I be sure , ' say . Heep , make the tea , ' when master pay we a visit . ' 'I say you would think so , mother , ' say . ' if I could have wish father to remain among we for any reason , ' say . Heep , ' it would have be , that he might have know he company this afternoon . ' I feel embarrassed by these compliment ; but I be sensible , too , of be entertain as a honoured guest , and I think . Heep a agreeable woman . ' my , ' say . Heep , ' have look forward to this , sir , a long while . he have he fear that we umbleness stood in the way , and I join in they myself . Umble we be , umble we have be , umble we shall ever be , ' say . 'I be sure you have no occasion to be so , ma 'am ,' I say , ' unless you like . ' ' thank you , sir , ' retort . ' we know we station and be thankful in it . ' I find that . Heep gradually get nearer to I , and that gradually get opposite to I , and that they respectfully ply I with the choicest of the eatables on the table . there be nothing particularly choice there , to be sure ; but I take the will for the deed , and feel that they be very attentive . presently they begin to talk about aunt , and then I tell they about mine ; and about fathers and mother , and then I tell they about mine ; and then . begin to talk about fathers - in - law , and then I begin to tell she about mine - but stop , because my aunt have advise I to observe a silence on that subject . a tender young cork , however , would have have no more chance against a pair of corkscrew , or a tender young tooth against a pair of dentist , or a little shuttlecock against two battledore , than I have against and . they do just what they like with I ; and worm thing out of I that I have no desire to tell , with a certainty I blush to think of , the more especially , as in my juvenile frankness , I take some credit to myself for be so confidential and feel that I be quite the patron of my two respectful entertainer . they be very fond of one another : that be certain . I take it , that have it be effect upon I , as a touch of nature ; but the skill with which the one follow up whatever the other say , be a touch of art which I be still less proof against . when there be nothing more to be get out of I about myself ( for on the and life , and on my journey , I be dumb ) , they begin about and . throw the ball to , . Heep catch it and throw it back to , keep it up a little while , then send it back to . Heep , and so they go on toss it about until I have no idea who have get it , and be quite bewildered . the ball itself be always change too . now it be , now Agnes , now the excellence of , now my admiration of ; now the extent of 's business and resource , now we domestic life after dinner ; now , the wine that take , the reason why he take it , and the pity that it be he take so much ; now one thing , now another , then everything at once ; and all the time , without appear to speak very often , or to do anything but sometimes encourage they a little , for fear they should be overcome by they humility and the honour of my company , I find myself perpetually lette out something or other that I have no business to let out and see the effect of it in the twinkling of 's dinted nostril . I have begin to be a little uncomfortable , and to wish myself well out of the visit , when a figure come down the street pass the door - it stand open to air the room , which be warm , the weather be close for the time of year - come back again , look in , and walk in , exclaim loudly , ' ! be it possible ? ' it be ! it be , with he eye - glass , and he walking - stick , and he shirt - collar , and he genteel air , and the condescending roll in he voice , all complete ! ' my dear , ' say , put out he hand , ' this be indeed a meeting which be calculate to impress the mind with a sense of the instability and uncertainty of all human - in short , it be a most extraordinary meeting
meeting . walk along the street , reflect upon the probability of something turn up ( of which I be at present rather sanguine ) , I find a young but value friend turn up , who be connect with the most eventful period of my life ; I may say , with the turning - point of my existence . , my dear fellow , how do you do ? ' I can not say - I really can not say - that I be glad to see there ; but I be glad to see he too , and shake hand with he , heartily , inquire how be . ' thank you , ' say , wave he hand as of old , and settle he ching in he shirt -collar . ' she be tolerably convalescent . the twin no longer derive they sustenance from 's fount - in short , ' say , in one of he burst of confidence , ' they be wean - and be , at present , my travel companion . she will be rejoice , , to renew she acquaintance with one who have prove himself in all respects a worthy minister at the sacred altar of friendship . ' I say I should be delighted to see she . ' you be very good , ' say . then smile , settle he ching again , and look about he . 'I have discover my friend , ' say genteelly , and without address himself particularly to anyone , ' not in solitude , but partak of a social meal in company with a widow lady , and one who be apparently she offspring - in short , ' say , in another of he burst of confidence , 'her son . I shall esteem it a honour to be present . ' I could do no less , under these circumstance , than make know to and he mother ; which I accordingly do . as they abase themselves before he , take a seat , and wave he hand in he most courtly manner . ' any friend of my friend 's , ' say , ' have a personal claim upon myself . ' 'we be too umble , sir , ' say . Heep , 'my son and I , to be the friend of master Copperfield . he have be so good as take he tea with we , and we be thankful to he for he company , also to you , sir , for you notice . ' ' ma 'am , ' return , with a bow , ' you be very obliging : and what be you do , ? still in the wine trade ? ' I be excessively anxious to get away ; and reply , with my hat in my hand , and a very red face , I have no doubt , that I be a pupil at 's . 'A pupil ? ' say , raise he eyebrow . 'I be extremely happy to hear it . although a mind like my friend 's ' - to and . Heep - ' do not require that cultivation which , without he knowledge of man and thing , it would require , still it be a rich soil teem with latent vegetation - in short , ' say , smile , in another burst of confidence , ' it be a intellect capable of get up the classic to any extent . ' Uriah , with he long hand slowly twin over one another , make a ghastly writhe from the waist upward , to express he concurrence in this estimation of I . ' shall we go and see , ? ' I say , to get away . ' if you will do she that favour , , ' reply , rise . 'I have no scruple in say , in the presence of we friend here , that I be a man who have , for some year , contende against the pressure of pecuniary difficulty . ' I know he be certain to say something of this kind ; he always would be so boastful about he difficulty . ' sometimes I have risen superior to my difficulty . sometimes my difficulty have - in short , have floor I . there have be time when I have administer a succession of facer to they ; there have been time when they have be too many for I , and I have give in , and say to , in the word of , " Plato , thou reasonest well . it be all up now . I can show fight no more . " but at no time of my life , ' say , ' have I enjoy a higher degree of satisfaction than in pour my grief ( if I may describe difficulty , chiefly arise out of warrant of attorney and promissory note at two and four month , by that word ) into the bosom of my friend . ' close this handsome tribute by say , ' ! good evening . ! you servant , ' and then walk out with I in he most fashionable manner , make a good deal of noise on the pavement with he shoe , and hum a tune as we go . it be a little inn where put up , and he occupy a little room in it , partition off from the commercial room , and strongly flavoure with tobacco - smoke . I think it be over the kitchen , because a warm greasy smell appear to come up through the chink in the floor , and there be a flabby perspiration on the wall . I know it be near the bar , on account of the smell of spirit and jingling of glass .
. here , recumbend on a small sofa , underneath a picture of a race - horse , with she head close to the fire , and she foot push the mustard off the dumb -waiter at the other end of the room , be , to whom enter first , say , ' my dear , allow I to introduce to you a pupil of 's . ' I notice , by the by , that although be just as much confused as ever about my age and stand , he always remember , as a genteel thing , that I be a pupil of 's . be amaze , but very glad to see I . I be very glad to see she too , and , after a affectionate greeting on both side , sit down on the small sofa near she . ' my dear , ' say , ' if you will mention to Copperfield what we present position be , which I have no doubt he will like to know , I will go and look at the paper the while , and see whether anything turn up among the advertisement . ' 'I think you be at , ma 'am ,' I say to , as he go out . ' my dear master , ' she reply , 'we go to . ' 'To be on the spot ,' I hint . ' just so , ' say . 'To be on the spot . but , the truth be , talent be not want in the . the local influence of my family be quite unavailing to obtain any employment in that department , for a man of 's ability . they would rather not have a man of 's ability . he would only show the deficiency of the other . apart from which , ' say , 'I will not disguise from you , my dear master , that when that branch of my family which be settle in , become aware that be accompany by myself , and by little Wilkins and he sister , and by the twin , they do not receive he with that ardour which he might have expect , be so newly release from captivity . in fact , ' say , lower she voice , - ' this be between ourselves - we reception be cool . ' ' dear I ! ' I say . ' yes , ' say . ' it be truly painful to contemplate mankind in such a aspect , master , but we reception be , decidedly , cool . there be no doubt about it . in fact , that branch of my family which be settle in become quite personal to , before we have be there a week . ' I say , and think , that they ought to be asham of themselves . ' , so it be , 's continue . ' under such circumstance , what could a man of 's spirit do ? but one obvious course be leave . to borrow , on that branch of my family , the money to return to , and to return at any sacrifice . ' ' then you all come back again , ma'am ? ' I say . ' we all come back again , ' reply . ' since then , I have consult other branch of my family on the course which it be most expedient for to take - for I maintain that he must take some course , master , ' say , argumentatively . ' it be clear that a family of six , not include a domestic , can not live upon air . ' ' certainly , ma 'am , ' say I . ' the opinion of those other branch of my family , ' pursue , 'is , that should immediately turn he attention to coal . ' ' to what , ma 'am ? ' 'to coal , ' say . 'to the coal trade . be induce to think , on inquiry , that there might be a opening for a man of he talent in the . then , as very properly say , the first step to be take clearly be , to come and see the Medway . which we come and see . I say " we " , master Copperfield ; for I never will , ' say with emotion , 'I never will desert . ' I murmure my admiration and approbation . ' we come , ' repeat , ' and see the Medway . my opinion of the coal trade on that river be , that it may require talent , but that it certainly require capital . , have ; capital , have not . we see , I think , the greater part of the ; and that be my individual conclusion . be so near here , be of opinion that it would be rash not to come on , and see the Cathedral . firstly , on account of its be so well worth see , and we never have see it ; and secondly , on account of the great probability of something turn up in a cathedral town . we have be here , ' say , ' three day . nothing have , as yet , turn up ; and it may not surprise you , my dear master , so much as it would a stranger , to know that we be at present waiting for a remittance from , to discharge we pecuniary obligation at this hotel . until the arrival of that remittance , ' say Micawber with much feeling , 'I be cut off from my home ( I allude to lodging in ) , from my boy and girl , and from my twin . ' I feel
feel the utmost sympathy for and in this anxious extremity , and say as much to , who now return : add that I only wish I have money enough , to lend they the amount they need . 's answer express the disturbance of he mind . he say , shak hand with I , ' Copperfield , you be a true friend ; but when the worst come to the worst , no man be without a friend who be possess of shaving material . ' at this dreadful hint throw she arm round 's neck and entreate he to be calm . he weep ; but so far recover , almost immediately , as to ring the bell for the waiter , and bespeak a hot kidney pudding and a plate of shrimp for breakfast in the morning . when I take my leave of they , they both press I so much to come and dine before they go away , that I could not refuse . but , as I know I could not come next day , when I should have a good deal to prepare in the evening , arrange that he would call at 's in the course of the morning ( have a presentiment that the remittance would arrive by that post ) , and propose the day after , if it would suit I better . accordingly I be call out of school next forenoon , and find in the parlour ; who have call to say that the dinner would take place as propose . when I ask he if the remittance have come , he press my hand and depart . as I be look out of window that same evening , it surprise I , and make I rather uneasy , to see and walk past , arm in arm : Uriah humbly sensible of the honour that be do he , and take a bland delight in extend he patronage to . but I be still more surprised , when I go to the little hotel next day at the appointed dinner - hour , which be four o'clock , to find , from what say , that he have go home with , and have drunk brandy - and - water at . 's . ' and I will tell you what , my dear Copperfield , ' say , ' you friend be a young fellow who might be attorney - general . if I have know that young man , at the period when my difficulty come to a crisis , all I can say be , that I believe my creditor would have be a great deal better manage than they be . ' I hardly understand how this could have be , see that have pay they nothing at all as it be ; but I do not like to ask . neither do I like to say , that I hope he have not be too communicative to ; or to inquire if they have talk much about I . I be afraid of hurt 's feeling , or , at all event , 's , she be very sensitive ; but I be uncomfortable about it , too , and often think about it afterwards . we have a beautiful little dinner . quite a elegant dish of fish ; the kidney - end of a loin of veal , roast ; fry sausage - meat ; a partridge , and a pudding . there be wine , and there be strong ale ; and after dinner Mr . make we a bowl of hot punch with she own hand . be uncommonly convivial . I never see he such good company . he make he face shine with the punch , so that it look as if it have be varnish all over . he get cheerfully sentimental about the town , and propose success to it ; observe that . and himself have be make extremely snug and comfortable there and that he never should forget the agreeable hour they have pass in . he propose I afterwards ; and he , and , and I , take a review of we past acquaintance , in the course of which we sell the property all over again . then I propose : or , at least , say , modestly , ' if you will allow I , . , I shall now have the pleasure of drink you health , ma'am . ' on which deliver a eulogium on 's character , and say she have ever be he guide , philosopher , and friend , and that he would recommend I , when I come to a marry time of life , to marry such another woman , if such another woman could be find . as the punch disappear , become still more friendly and convivial . 's spirit become elevate , too , we sang ' . when we come to ' here be a hand , my trusty frere ' , we all join hand round the table ; and when we declare we would 's take a right gude ' , and have not the least idea what it mean , we be really affect . in a word , I never see anybody so thoroughly jovial as be , down to the very last moment of the evening , when I take a hearty farewell of himself and he amiable wife . consequently , I be not prepare , at seven o'clock next morning , to receive the follow communication , date half past nine in the evening ; a quarter of a hour after I have leave he : - ' my yong , ' the die be cast - all be over . hide the ravage of care with a sickly mask of mirth , I have not inform
inform you , this evening , that there be no hope of the remittance ! under these circumstance , alike humiliat to endure , humiliate to contemplate , and humiliate to relate , I have discharge the pecuniary liability contract at this establishment , by give a note of hand , make payable fourteen day after date , at my residence , , . when it become due , it will not be take up . the result be destruction . the bolt be impend , and the tree must fall . ' let the wretch man who now address you , my dear Copperfield , be a beacon to you through life . he write with that intention , and in that hope . if he could think himself of so much use , one gleam of day might , by possibility , penetrate into the cheerless dungeon of he remain existence - though he longevity be , at present ( to say the least of it ) , extremely problematical . ' this be the last communication , my dear Copperfield , you will ever receive ' from ' the ' Beggared outcast , ' . ' I be so shocked by the contents of this heart - rende letter , that I run off directly towards the little hotel with the intention of take it on my way to 's , and try to soothe Micawber with a word of comfort . but , half - way there , I meet the coach with and up behind ; , the very picture of tranquil enjoyment , smile at 's conversation , eat walnuts out of a paper bag , with a bottle stick out of he breast pocket . as they do not see I , I think it best , all thing consider , not to see they . so , with a great weight take off my mind , I turn into a by - street that be the nearest way to school , and feel , upon the whole , relieve that they be go ; though I still like they very much , nevertheless . chapter 18 a retrospect my school - day ! the silent gliding on of my existence - the unseen , unfelt progress of my life - from childhood up to ! let I think , as I look back upon that flow water , now a dry channel overgrow with leave , whether there be any mark along its course , by which I can remember how it run . a moment , and I occupy my place in the , where we all go together , every morning , assemble first at school for that purpose . the earthy smell , the sunless air , the sensation of the world be shut out , the resounding of the organ through the black and white arch galleries and aisle , be wing that take I back , and hold I hover above those day , in a half - sleeping and half - wake dream . I be not the last boy in the school . I have risen in a few month , over several head . but the first boy seem to I a mighty creature , dwell afar off , whose giddy height be unattainable . Agnes say ' no , ' but I say ' yes , ' and tell she that she little think what store of knowledge have be master by the wonderful , at whose place she think I , even I , weak aspirant , may arrive in time . he be not my private friend and public patron , as be , but I hold he in a reverential respect . I chiefly wonder what he will be , when he leave 's , and what mankind will do to maintain any place against he . but who be this that break upon I ? this be , whom I love . be a boarder at the 's establishment . I adore . she be a little girl , in a spencer , with a round face and curly flaxen hair . the ' young lady come to the too . I can not look upon my book , for I must look upon . when the chorister chaunt , I hear . in the service I mentally insert 's name - I put she in among the . at home , in my own room , I be sometimes move to cry out , , ! ' in a transport of love . for some time , I be doubtful of 's feeling , but , at length , Fate be propitious , we meet at the dancing - school . I have for my partner . I touch 's glove , and feel a thrill go up the right arm of my jacket , and come out at my hair . I say nothing to , but we understand each other . and myself live but to be . why do I secretly give twelve nut for a present , I wonder ? they be not expressive of affection , they be difficult to pack into a parcel of any regular shape , they be hard to crack , even in room door , and they be oily when crack ; yet I feel that they be appropriate to . , seedy biscuit , also , I bestow upon shepherd ; and orang innumerable . once , I kiss shepherd in the cloak - room . Ecstasy ! what be my agony and indignation next day , when I hear a fly rumour that the have stand Shepherd in the stock for turn in she toe ! shepherd be the one pervading theme and vision of my life , how do I ever come to break with she ? I can not conceive . and yet a coolness
coolness grow between and myself . Whispers reach I of have say she wish I would not stare so , and have avow a preference for - for ! a boy of no merit whatever ! the gulf between I and . at last , one day , I meet the 's establishment out walk . shepherd make a face as she go by , and laugh to she companion . all be over . the devotion of a life - it seem a life , it be all the same - be at a end ; Shepherd come out of the morning service , and the family know she no more . I be higher in the school , and no one break my peace . I be not at all polite , now , to the ' young lady , and should not dote on any of they , if they be twice as many and twenty time as beautiful . I think the dancing - school a tiresome affair , and wonder why the girl can not dance by themselves and leave we alone . I be grow great in latin verse , and neglect the lace of my boot . refer to I in public as a promise young scholar . be wild with joy , and my aunt remit I a guinea by the next post . the shade of a young butcher rise , like the apparition of a armed head in . who be this young butcher ? he be the terror of the youth of . there be a vague belief abroad , that the beef suet with which he anoint he hair give he unnatural strength , and that he be a match for a man . he be a broad - faced , bull - necke , young butcher , with rough red cheek , a ill - condition mind , and a injuriious tongue . he main use of this tongue , be , to disparage 's young gentleman . he say , publicly , that if they want anything he will give it th'ey . he name individual among they ( myself include ) , whom he could undertake to settle with one hand , and the other tie behind he . he waylay the smaller boy to punch they unprotected head , and call challenge after I in the open street . for these sufficient reason I resolve to fight the butcher . it be a summer evening , down in a green hollow , at the corner of a wall . I meet the butcher by appointment . I be attend by a select body of we boy ; the butcher , by two other butchers , a young publican , and a sweep . the preliminary be adjust , and the butcher and myself stand face to face . in a moment the butcher lights ten thousand candle out of my left eyebrow . in another moment , I do not know where the wall be , or where I be , or where anybody be . I hardly know which be myself and which the butcher , we be always in such a tangle and tussle , knock about upon the trodden grass . sometimes I see the butcher , bloody but confident ; sometimes I see nothing , and sit gasping on my second 's knee ; sometimes I go in at the butcher madly , and cut my knuckle open against he face , without appear to discompose he at all . at last I awake , very queer about the head , as from a giddy sleep , and see the butcher walk off , congratulate by the two other butchers and the sweep and publican , and put on he coat as he go ; from which I augur , justly , that the victory be he . I be take home in a sad plight , and I have beef - steak put to my eye , and be rub with vinegar and brandy , and find a great puffy place burst out on my upper lip , which swell immoderately . for three or four day I remain at home , a very ill - look subject , with a green shade over my eye ; and I should be very dull , but that be a sister to I , and condole with I , and read to I , and make the time light and happy . Agnes have my confidence completely , always ; I tell she all about the butcher , and the wrongs he have heape upon I ; she think i could not have do otherwise than fight the butcher , while she shrink and tremble at my have fight he . have steal on unobserved , for Adams be not the head - boy in the day that be come now , nor have he be this many and many a day . Adams have leave the school so long , that when he come back , on a visit to , there be not many there , besides myself , who know he . Adam be go to be call to the bar almost directly , and be to be a advocate , and to wear a wig . I be surprised to find he a meeker man than I have think , and less imposing in appearance . he have not stagger the world yet , either ; for it go on ( as well as I can make out ) pretty much the same as if he have never join it . a blank , through which the warrior of poetry and history march on in stately host that seem to have no end - and what come next ! I be the head - boy , now ! I look down on the line of boy below I
I , with a condescending interest in such of they as bring to my mind the boy I be myself , when I first come there . that little fellow seem to be no part of I ; I remember he as something leave behind upon the road of life - as something I have pass , rather than have actually be - and almost think of he as of someone else . and the little girl I see on that first day at 's , where be she ? go also . in she stead , the perfect likeness of the picture , a child likeness no more , move about the house ; and - my sweet sister , as I call she in my thought , my counsellor and friend , the better angel of the life of all who come within she calm , good , self - deny influence - be quite a woman . what other change have come upon I , besides the change in my growth and look , and in the knowledge I have garner all this while ? I wear a gold watch and chain , a ring upon my little finger , and a long - tail coat ; and I use a great deal of bear 's grease - which , take in conjunction with the ring , look bad . be I in love again ? I be . I worship the eldest . the eldest be not a little girl . she be a tall , dark , black - eyed , fine figure of a woman . the eldest be not a chicken ; for the youngest be not that , and the eldest must be three or four year older . perhaps the eldest may be about thirty . my passion for she be beyond all bound . the eldest know officer . it be a awful thing to bear . I see they speak to she in the street . I see they cross the way to meet she , when she bonnet ( she have a bright taste in bonnet ) be see come down the pavement , accompany by she sister 's bonnet . she laugh and talk , and seem to like it . I spend a good deal of my own spare time in walk up and down to meet she . if I can bow to she once in the day ( I know she to bow to , know ) , I be happier . I deserve a bow now and then . the raging agony I suffer on the night of the , where I know the eldest miss Larkins will be dance with the military , ought to have some compensation , if there be even - hand justice in the world . my passion take away my appetite , and make I wear my newest silk neckerchief continually . I have no relief but in put on my best clothes , and have my boot clean over and over again . I seem , then , to be worthier of the eldest . everything that belong to she , or be connect with she , be precious to I . ( a gruff old gentleman with a double ching , and one of he eyes immovable in he head ) be fraught with interest to I . when I can not meet he daughter , I go where I be likely to meet he . to say ' how do you do , ? be the young lady and all the family quite well ? ' seem so pointed , that I blush . I think continually about my age . say I be seventeen , and say that seventeen be young for the eldest , what of that ? besides , I shall be one - and - twenty in no time almost . I regularly take walk outside 's house in the evening , though it cut I to the heart to see the officer go in , or to hear they up in the drawing - room , where the eldest play the harp . I even walk , on two or three occasion , in a sickly , spoony manner , round and round the house after the family be go to bed , wonder which be the eldest 's chamber ( and pitch , I dare say now , on 's instead ) ; wish that a fire would burst out ; that the assemble crowd would stand appal ; that I , dash through they with a ladder , might rear it against she window , save she in my arm , go back for something she have leave behind , and perish in the flame . for I be generally disinterest in my love , and think I could be content to make a figure before , and expire . generally , but not always . sometimes brighter vision rise before I . when I dress ( the occupation of two hour ) , for a great ball give at the 's ( the anticipation of three week ) , I indulge my fancy with pleasing image . I picture myself take courage to make a declaration to . I picture sink she head upon my shoulder , and say , , , can I believe my ear ! ' I picture wait on I next morning , and say , ' my dear Copperfield , my daughter have tell I all . be no objection . here be twenty thousand pound . be happy ! ' I picture my aunt relent , and bless we ; and and be present at the marriage ceremony . I be a sensible fellow , I believe - I believe , on look back , I mean - and modest I be sure ; but all this go on notwithstanding .
. I repair to the enchant house , where there be light , chatter , music , flower , officer ( I be sorry to see ) , and the eldest , a blaze of beauty . she be dress in blue , with blue flower in she hair - forget -me - not - as if she have any need to wear forget -me - not . it be the first really grow - up party that I have ever be invite to , and I be a little uncomfortable ; for I appear not to belong to anybody , and nobody appear to have anything to say to I , except , who ask I how my schoolfellow be , which he need not do , as I have not come there to be insult . but after I have stand in the doorway for some time , and feast my eye upon the goddess of my heart , she approach I - she , the eldest miss Larkins ! - and ask I pleasantly , if I dance ? I stammer , with a bow , ' with you , . ' ' with no one else ? ' inquire . 'I should have no pleasure in dancing with anyone else . ' laugh and blush ( or I think she blush ) , and say , ' next time but one , I shall be very glad . ' the time arrive . ' it be a waltz , I think ,' doubtfully observe , when I present myself . ' do you waltz ? if not , -' but I do waltz ( pretty well , too , as it happen ) , and I take out . I take she sternly from the side of . he be wretch , I have no doubt ; but he be nothing to I . I have be wretch , too . I waltz with the eldest miss Larkins ! I do not know where , among whom , or how long . I only know that I swim about in space , with a blue angel , in a state of blissful delirium , until I find myself alone with she in a little room , rest on a sofa . she admire a flower ( pink camellia japonica , price half - a - crown ) , in my button - hole . I give it she , and say : ' I ask a inestimable price for it , . ' ' indeed ! what be that ? ' return . 'A flower of yours , that I may treasure it as a miser do gold . ' ' you be a bold boy , ' say . ' there . ' she give it I , not displease ; and I put it to my lip , and then into my breast . , laugh , draw she hand through my arm , and say , ' now take I back to . ' I be lose in the recollection of this delicious interview , and the waltz , when she come to I again , with a plain elderly gentleman who have be play whist all night , upon she arm , and say : 'Oh ! here be my bold friend ! want to know you , . ' I feel at once that he be a friend of the family , and be much gratify . 'I admire you taste , sir , ' say . ' it do you credit . I suppose you do not take much interest in hops ; but I be a pretty large grower myself ; and if you ever like to come over to we neighbourhood - neighbourhood of - and take a run about we place , - we shall be glad for you to stop as long as you like . ' I thank warmly , and shake hand . I think I be in a happy dream . I waltz with the eldest once again . she say I waltz so well ! I go home in a state of unspeakable bliss , and waltz in imagination , all night long , with my arm round the blue waist of my dear divinity . for some day afterwards , I be lose in rapturous reflection ; but I neither see she in the street , nor when I call . I be imperfectly consol for this disappointment by the sacred , the perished flower . ' Trotwood , ' say Agnes , one day after dinner . ' who do you think be go to be marry tomorrow ? someone you admire . ' ' not you , I suppose , ? ' ' not I ! ' raise she cheerful face from the music she be copy . ' do you hear he , ? - the eldest miss Larkins . ' 'To - to ? ' I have just enough power to ask . ' no ; to no captain . to , a hop - grower . ' I be terribly deject for about a week or two . I take off my ring , I wear my worst clothes , I use no bear 's grease , and I frequently lament over the late 's faded flower . , by that time , rather tired of this kind of life , and have receive new provocation from the butcher , I throw the flower away , go out with the butcher , and gloriously defeat he . this , and the resumption of my ring , as well as of the bear 's grease in moderation , be the last mark I can discern , now , in my progress to seventee . chapter 19 I look about I , and make a Discovery I be doubtful whether I be at heart glad or sorry , when
when my school - day drew to a end , and the time come for my leave 's . I have be very happy there , I have a great attachment for the Doctor , and I be eminent and distinguished in that little world . for these reason I be sorry to go ; but for other reason , unsubstantial enough , I be glad . Misty idea of be a young man at my own disposal , of the importance attach to a young man at he own disposal , of the wonderful thing to be see and do by that magnificent animal , and the wonderful effect he could not fail to make upon society , lure I away . so powerful be these visionary consideration in my boyish mind , that I seem , accord to my present way of think , to have leave school without natural regret . the separation have not make the impression on I , that other separation have . I try in vain to recall how I feel about it , and what its circumstance be ; but it be not momentous in my recollection . I suppose the opening prospect confuse I . I know that my juvenile experience go for little or nothing then ; and that life be more like a great fairy story , which I be just about to begin to read , than anything else . my aunt and I have hold many grave deliberation on the calling to which I should be devote . for a year or more I have endeavoure to find a satisfactory answer to she often - repeat question , ' what I would like to be ? ' but I have no particular liking , that I could discover , for anything . if I could have be inspire with a knowledge of the science of navigation , take the command of a fast - sailing expedition , and go round the world on a triumphant voyage of discovery , I think I might have consider myself completely sui . but , in the absence of any such miraculous provision , my desire be to apply myself to some pursuit that would not lie too heavily upon she purse ; and to do my duty in it , whatever it might be . have regularly assist at we councils , with a meditative and sage demeanour . he never make a suggestion but once ; and on that occasion ( I do not know what put it in he head ) , he suddenly propose that I should be ' . my aunt receive this proposal so very ungraciously , that he never venture on a second ; but ever afterwards confin himself to look watchfully at she for she suggestion , and ratt he money . ' trot , I tell you what , my dear , ' say my aunt , one morning in the season when I leave school : 'as this knotty point be still unsettled , and as we must not make a mistake in we decision if we can help it , I think we have better take a little breathing - time . in the meanwhile , you must try to look at it from a new point of view , and not as a schoolboy . ' 'I will , aunt . ' ' it have occur to I , ' pursue my aunt , ' that a little change , and a glimpse of life out of door , may be useful in help you to know you own mind , and form a cooler judgement . suppose you be to go down into the old part of the country again , for instance , and see that - that out - of - the - way woman with the savagest of name , ' say my aunt , rub she nose , for she could never thoroughly forgive Peggotty for be so call . ' of all thing in the world , aunt , I should like it best ! ' ' well , ' say my aunt , ' that be lucky , for I should like it too . but it be natural and rational that you should like it . and I be very well persuade that whatever you do , , will always be natural and rational . ' 'i hope so , aunt . ' ' you sister , , ' say my aunt , ' would have be as natural and rational a girl as ever breathe . you will be worthy of she , will not you ? ' 'i hope I shall be worthy of you , aunt . that will be enough for I . ' ' it be a mercy that poor dear baby of a mother of yours do not live , ' say my aunt , look at I approvingly , 'or she would have be so vain of she boy by this time , that she soave little head would have be completely turn , if there be anything of it leave to turn . ' ( my aunt always excuse any weakness of she own in my behalf , by transfer it in this way to my poor mother . ) ' bless I , Trotwood , how you do remind I of she ! ' ' pleasantly , I hope , aunt ? ' say I . 'he be as like she , , ' say my aunt , emphatically , ' he be as like she , as she be that afternoon before she begin to fret - bless my heart , he be as like she , as he can look at I out of he two eye ! ' ' be he indeed ? ' say . ' and he be like , too , ' say my aunt , decisively
decisively . ' he be very like ! ' say . ' but what I want you to be , , ' resume my aunt , ' - I do not mean physically , but morally ; you be very well physically - be , a firm fellow . a fine firm fellow , with a will of you own . with resolution , ' say my aunt , shak she cap at I , and clench she hand . ' with determination . with character , - with strength of character that be not to be influence , except on good reason , by anybody , or by anything . that be what I want you to be . that be what you father and mother might both have be , know , and be the better for it . ' I intimate that I hope I should be what she describe . ' that you may begin , in a small way , to have a reliance upon yourself , and to act for yourself , ' say my aunt , 'I shall send you upon you trip , alone . I do think , once , of 's go with you ; but , on second thought , I shall keep he to take care of I . ' , for a moment , look a little disappointed ; until the honour and dignity of have to take care of the most wonderful woman in the world , restore the sunshine to he face . ' , ' say my aunt , ' there be the memorial -' 'Oh , certainly , ' say , in a hurry , 'I intend , , to get that do immediately - it really must be do immediately ! and then it will go in , you know - and then - ' say , after check himself , and pause a long time , ' there will be a pretty kettle of fish ! ' in pursuance of my aunt 's kind scheme , I be shortly afterwards fitte out with a handsome purse of money , and a portmanteau , and tenderly dismiss upon my expedition . at parting , my aunt give I some good advice , and a good many kiss ; and say that as she object be that I should look about I , and should think a little , she would recommend I to stay a few day in , if I like it , either on my way down into , or in come back . in a word , I be at liberty to do what I would , for three week or a month ; and no other condition be impos upon my freedom than the before - mention think and look about I , and a pledge to write three time a week and faithfully report myself . I go to first , that I might take leave of and ( my old room in whose house I have not yet relinquish ) , and also of the good doctor . be very glad to see I , and tell I that the house have not be like itself since I have leave it . 'I be sure I be not like myself when I be away , ' say I . 'I seem to want my right hand , when I miss you . though that be not say much ; for there be no head in my right hand , and no heart . everyone who know you , consult with you , and be guide by you , . ' ' everyone who know I , spoil I , I believe , ' she answer , smile . ' no . it be because you be like no one else . you be so good , and so sweet -temper . you have such a gentle nature , and you be always right . ' ' you talk , ' say , break into a pleasant laugh , as she sit at work , 'as if I be the late miss Larkins . ' ' come ! it be not fair to abuse my confidence ,' I answer , redden at the recollection of my blue enslaver . ' but I shall confide in you , just the same , Agnes . I can never grow out of that . whenever I fall into trouble , or fall in love , I shall always tell you , if you will let I - even when I come to fall in love in earnest . ' ' why , you have always be in earnest ! ' say , laugh again . 'Oh ! that be as a child , or a schoolboy , ' say I , laugh in my turn , not without be a little shame - face . ' time be alter now , and I suppose I shall be in a terrible state of earnestness one day or other . my wonder be , that you be not in earnest yourself , by this time , Agnes . ' Agnes laugh again , and shake she head . ' oh , I know you be not ! ' say I , ' because if you have be you would have tell I . or at least ' - for I see a faint blush in she face , ' you would have let I find it out for myself . but there be no one that I know of , who deserve to love you , . someone of a nobler character , and more worthy altogether than anyone I have ever see here , must rise up , before I give my consent . in the time to come , I shall have a wary eye on all admirer ; and shall exact a great deal from the successful one , I
I assure you . ' we have go on , so far , in a mixture of confidential jest and earnest , that have long grow naturally out of we familiar relation , begin as mere child . but Agnes , now suddenly lift up she eye to mine , and speak in a different manner , say : ' Trotwood , there be something that I want to ask you , and that I may not have another opportunity of ask for a long time , perhaps - something I would ask , I think , of no one else . have you observ any gradual alteration in ? ' I have observ it , and have often wonder whether she have too . I must have show as much , now , in my face ; for she eye be in a moment cast down , and I see tear in they . ' tell I what it be , ' she say , in a low voice . 'I think - shall I be quite plain , Agnes , like he so much ? ' ' yes , ' she say . ' I think he do himself no good by the habit that have increase upon he since I first come here . he be often very nervous - or I fancy so . ' ' it be not fancy , ' say , shak she head . ' he hand tremble , he speech be not plain , and he eye look wild . I have remark that at those time , and when he be least like himself , he be most certain to be want on some business . ' ' by , ' say . ' yes ; and the sense of be unfit for it , or of not have understand it , or of have show he condition in spite of himself , seem to make he so uneasy , that next day he be worse , and next day worse , and so he become jaded and haggard . do not be alarm by what I say , , but in this state I see he , only the other evening , lay down he head upon he desk , and she tear like a child . ' she hand pass softly before my lip while I be yet speak , and in a moment she have meet she father at the door of the room , and be hang on he shoulder . the expression of she face , as they both look towards I , I feel to be very touching . there be such deep fondness for he , and gratitude to he for all he love and care , in she beautiful look ; and there be such a fervent appeal to I to deal tenderly by he , even in my inmost thought , and to let no harsh construction find any place against he ; she be , at once , so proud of he and devote to he , yet so compassionate and sorry , and so reliant upon I to be so , too ; that nothing she could have say would have express more to I , or move I more . we be to drink tea at the Doctor 's . we go there at the usual hour ; and round the study fireside find the Doctor , and he young wife , and she mother . the Doctor , who make as much of my go away as if I be go to , receive I as a honoured guest ; and call for a log of wood to be throw on the fire , that he might see the face of he old pupil redden in the blaze . 'I shall not see many more new face in 's stead , , ' say the Doctor , warm he hand ; 'I be get lazy , and want ease . I shall relinquish all my young people in another six month , and lead a quieter life . ' ' you have say so , any time these ten year , ,' answer . ' but now I mean to do it , ' return the Doctor . ' my first master will succeed I - I be in earnest at last - so you will soon have to arrange we contract , and to bind we firmly to they , like a couple of knave . ' ' and to take care , ' say , ' that you be not impos on , eh ? as you certainly would be , in any contract you should make for yourself . well ! I be ready . there be worse task than that , in my calling . ' 'I shall have nothing to think of then , ' say the , with a smile , ' but my dictionary ; and this other contract - bargain - . ' as glance towards she , sit at the tea table by , she seem to I to avoid he look with such unwonted hesitation and timidity , that he attention become fix upon she , as if something be suggest to he thought . ' there be a post come in from , I observe , ' he say , after a short silence . ' by the by ! and letter from ! ' say the Doctor . ' indeed ! ' ' poor dear ! ' say , shak she head . ' that trye climate ! - like live , they tell I , on a sand - heap , underneath a burn - glass ! he look strong , but he be not . my dear doctor , it be he spirit , not he constitution , that he venture on so boldly . , my dear , I be sure you must
must perfectly recollect that you cousin never be strong - not what can be call , you know , ' say , with emphasis , and look round upon we generally , ' - from the time when my daughter and himself be child together , and walk about , arm -in - arm , the livelong day . ' , thus address , make no reply . ' do I gather from what you say , ma 'am , that be ill ? ' ask . ' ! ' reply the . ' my dear sir , he be all sort of thing . ' ' except well ? ' say . ' except well , indeed ! ' say the . ' he have have dreadful stroke of the sun , no doubt , and jungle fevers and ague , and every kind of thing you can mention . as to he liver , ' say the resignedly , ' that , of course , he give up altogether , when he first go out ! ' ' do he say all this ? ' ask . ' ? my dear sir , ' return , shak she head and she fan , ' you little know my poor when you ask that question . ? not he . you might drag he at the heel of four wild horsis first . ' ' mama ! ' say . , my dear , ' return she mother , ' once for all , I must really beg that you will not interfere with I , unless it be to confirm what I say . you know as well as I do that you cousin would be drag at the heel of any number of wild horse - why should I confine myself to four ! I will not confine myself to four - eight , sixteen , two - and - thirty , rather than say anything calculate to overturn the Doctor 's plan . ' ' 's plan , ' say the Doctor , strok he face , and look penitently at he adviser . ' that be to say , we jous not plan for he . I say myself , abroad or at home . ' ' and I say ' add gravely , ' abroad . I be the means of send he abroad . it be my responsibility . ' 'Oh ! responsibility ! ' say the . ' everything be do for the best , my dear ; everything be do for the kindest and best , we know . but if the dear fellow can not live there , he can not live there . and if he can not live there , he will die there , sooner than he will overturn the Doctor 's plan . I know he , ' say the , fan herself , in a sort of calm prophetic agony , ' and I know he will die there , sooner than he will overturn the Doctor 's plan . ' ' well , well , ma 'am , ' say the cheerfully , 'I be not bigote to my plan , and I can overturn they myself . I can substitute some other plan . if come home on account of ill health , he must not be allow to go back , and we must endeaavor to make some more suitable and fortunate provision for he in this country . ' be so overcome by this generous speech - which , I need not say , she have not at all expect or lead up to - that she could only tell the Doctor it be like himself , and go several time through that operation of kiss the stick of she fan , and then tap he hand with it . after which she gently chide she daughter , for not be more demonstrative when such kindness be shower , for she sake , on she old playfellow ; and entertaine we with some particular concern other deserving member of she family , whom it be desirable to set on they deserving leg . all this time , she daughter never once speak , or lift up she eye . all this time , have he glance upon she as she sit by he own daughter 's side . it appear to I that he never think of be observe by anyone ; but be so intent upon she , and upon he own thought in connexion with she , as to be quite absorbed . he now ask what have actually write in reference to himself , and to whom he have write ? ' why , here , ' say , take a letter from the chimney -piece above the Doctor 's head , ' the dear fellow say to the Doctor himself - where be it ? oh ! - " I be sorry to inform you that my health be suffer severely , and that I fear I may be reduce to the necessity of return home for a time , as the only hope of restoration . " that be pretty plain , poor fellow ! he only hope of restoration ! but 's letter be plainer still . , show I that letter again . ' ' not now , mama , ' she plead in a low tone . ' my dear , you absolutely be , on some subject , one of the most ridiculous person in the world , ' return she mother , ' and perhaps the most unnatural to the claim of you own family . we never should have hear of the letter at all , I believe , unless I have ask for it myself . do you call that confidence , my love , towards ? I be surprise . you ought to know better . ' the letter
letter be reluctantly produce ; and as I hand it to the old lady , I see how the unwilling hand from which I take it , tremble . ' now let we see , ' say , put she glass to she eye , ' where the passage be . " the remembrance of old time , my dearest " - and so forth - it be not there . " the amiable old Proctor " - who be he ? dear I , , how illegibly you cousin write , and how stupid I be ! " Doctor , " of course . ah ! amiable indeed ! ' here she leave off , to kiss she fan again , and shake it at the Doctor , who be look at we in a state of placid satisfaction . ' now I have find it . " you may not be surprised to hear , , " - no , to be sure , knowe that he never be really strong ; what do I say just now ? - " that I have undergone so much in this distant place , as to have decide to leave it at all hazard ; on sick leave , if I can ; on total resignation , if that be not to be obtain . what I have endure , and do endure here , be insupportable . " and but for the promptitude of that best of creature , ' say , telegraph the Doctor as before , and refold the letter , ' it would be insupportable to I to think off . ' say not one word , though the old lady look to he as if for he commentary on this intelligence ; but sit severely silent , with he eye fix on the ground . Long after the subject be dismiss , and other topics occupy we , he remain so ; seldom raise he eye , unless to rest they for a moment , with a thoughtful frown , upon the Doctor , or he wife , or both . the Doctor be very fond of music . Agnes sang with great sweetness and expression , and so do . they sang together , and play duet together , and we have quite a little concert . but I remark two thing : first , that though soon recover she composure , and be quite herself , there be a blank between she and which separate they wholly from each other ; secondly , that seem to dislike the intimacy between she and , and to watch it with uneasiness . and now , I must confess , the recollection of what I have see on that night when go away , first begin to return upon I with a meaning it have never have , and to trouble I . the innocent beauty of she face be not as innocent to I as it have be ; I mistrust the natural grace and charm of she manner ; and when I look at by she side , and think how good and true Agnes be , suspicion arise within I that it be a ill - assort friendship . she be so happy in it herself , however , and the other be so happy too , that they make the evening fly away as if it be but a hour . it close in a incident which I well remember . they be take leave of each other , and be go to embrace she and kiss she , when step between they , as if by accident , and draw quickly away . then I see , as though all the intervening time have be cancel , and I be still stand in the doorway on the night of the departure , the expression of that night in the face of , as it confront he . I can not say what a impression this make upon I , or how impossible I find it , when I think of she afterwards , to separate she from this look , and remember she face in its innocent loveliness again . it haunt I when I get home . I seem to have leave the Doctor 's roof with a dark clould lower on it . the reverence that I have for he grey head , be mingl with commiseration for he faith in those who be treacherous to he , and with resentment against those who injure he . the impending shadow of a great affliction , and a great disgrace that have no distinct form in it yet , fall like a stain upon the quiet place where I have work and play as a boy , and do it a cruel wrong . I have no pleasure in thinking , any more , of the grave old broad - leave aloe - tree , which remaine shut up in themselves a hundred year together , and of the trim smooth grass - plot , and the stone urn , and the Doctor 's walk , and the congenial sound of the bell hover above they all . it be as if the tranquil sanctuary of my boyhood have be sack before my face , and it be peace and honour give to the wind . but morning bring with it my part from the old house , which have fill with she influence ; and that occupy my mind sufficiently . I should be there again soon , no doubt ; I might sleep again - perhaps often - in my old room ; but the day of my inhabiting there be gone , and the old time be past . I be heavier at heart when I pack up such of my book and clothes as still remain there to be send to , than I care to show
show to ; who be so officious to help I , that I uncharitably think he mighty glad that I be go . I get away from and she father , somehow , with a indifferent show of be very manly , and take my seat upon the box of the coach . I be so soften and forgive , go through the town , that I have half a mind to nod to my old enemy the butcher , and throw he five shilling to drink . but he look such a very obdurate butcher as he stand scrape the great block in the shop , and moreover , he appearance be so little improve by the loss of a front tooth which I have knock out , that I think it best to make no advance . the main object on my mind , I remember , when we get fairly on the road , be to appear as old as possible to the coachman , and to speak extremely gruff . the latter point I achieve at great personal inconvenience ; but I stick to it , because I feel it be a grow - up sort of thing . ' you be go through , sir ? ' say the coachman . ' yes , ,' I say , condescendingly ( I know he ) ; 'I be go to . I shall go down into afterwards . ' ' shoot , sy ? ' say the coachman . he know as well as I do that it be just as likely , at that time of year , I be go down there whal ; but I feel complimented , too . 'I do not know ,' I say , pretend to be undecided , ' whether I shall take a shot or not . ' ' bird be get wery shy , I be tell , ' say . ' so I understand , ' say I . 'is Suffolk you county , sir ? ' ask . ' yes ,' I say , with some importance . ' 's my county . ' 'I be tell the dumpling be uncommon fine down there , ' say . I be not aware of it myself , but I feel it necessary to uphold the institution of my county , and to evince a familiarity with they ; so I shook my head , as much as to say , 'I believe you ! ' ' and the punche , ' say . ' there be cattle ! a , when he be a good un , be worth he weight in gold . do you ever breed any yourself , sir ? ' - no ,' I say , ' not exactly . ' ' here be a gan 'lm and behind I , I will pound it , ' say , have breed th'ey by wholesale . ' the gentleman speak of be a gentleman with a very unpromising squint , and a prominent ching , who have a tall white hat on with a narrow flat brim , and whose close - fitting drab trousers seem to button all the way up outside he leg from he boot to he hip . he ching be cocke over the coachman 's shoulder , so near to I , that he breath quite tick the back of my head ; and as I look at he , he leer at the leader with the eye with which he do not squint , in a very knowing manner . ' be not you ? ' ask . ' be not I what ? ' say the gentleman behind . ' breed they by wholesale ? ' 'I should think so , ' say the gentleman . ' there be not no sort of orse that I be not breed , and no sort of dorg . Orse and dorg be some man 's fancy . they be wittle and drink to I - lodging , wife , and child - reading , write , and Arithmetic - snuff , tobacker , and sleep . ' ' that be not a sort of man to see sit behind a coach - box , be it though ? ' say in my ear , as he handle the rein . I construe this remark into a indication of a wish that he should have my place , so I blushingly offer to resign it . ' well , if you do not mind , sir , ' say , ' I think it would be more correct . ' I have always consider this as the first fall I have in life . when I book my place at the coach office I have have ' box seat ' write against the entry , and have give the book - keeper half - a - crown . I be get up in a special great - coat and shawl , expressly to do honou to that distinguished eminence ; have glorify myself upon it a good deal ; and have felt that I be a credit to the coach . and here , in the very first stage , I be supplant by a shabby man with a squint , who have no other merit than smell like a livery - stable , and be able to walk across I , more like a fly than a human being , while the horse be at a canter ! a distrust of myself , which have often beset I in life on small occasion , when it would have be better away , be assuredly not stop in its growth by this little incident outside the coach . it be in vain to take refuge in gruffness of speech . I speak from the pit of my stomach for the rest of the journey , but I feel completely
completely extinguished , and dreadfully young . it be curious and interesting , nevertheless , to be sit up there behind four horse : well educate , well dress , and with plenty of money in my pocket ; and to look out for the place where I have sleep on my weary journey . I have abundant occupation for my thought , in every conspicuous landmark on the road . when I look down at the tramper whom we pass , and see that well - remember style of face turn up , I feel as if the tinker 's blacken hand be in the bosom of my shirt again . when we clatter through the narrow street of , and I catch a glimpse , in passing , of the lane where the old monster liv who have buy my jacket , I stretch my neck eagerly to look for the place where I have sit , in the sun and in the shade , wait for my money . when we come , at last , within a stage of , and pass the veritable Salem House where have laid about he with a heavy hand , I would have give all I have , for lawful permission to get down and thrash he , and let all the boy out like so many cage sparrow . we go to the at , then a mouldy sort of establishment in a close neighbourhood . a waiter show I into the coffee - room ; and a chambermaid introduce I to my small bedchamber , which smelt like a hackney - coach , and be shut up like a family vault . I be still painfully conscious of my youth , for nobody stood in any awe of I at all : the chambermaid be utterly indifferent to my opinion on any subject , and the waiter be familiar with I , and offer advice to my inexperience . ' well now , ' say the waiter , in a tone of confidence , ' what would you like for dinner ? young gentleman like poultry in general : have a fowl ! ' I tell he , as majestically as I could , that I be not in the humour for a fowl . ' be not you ? ' say the waiter . ' young gentleman be generally tired of beef and mutton : have a weal cutlet ! ' I assent to this proposal , in default of be able to suggest anything else . ' do you care for tater ? ' say the waiter , with a insinuat smile , and he head on one side . 'Yong gentleman generally have be overdose with tater . ' I command he , in my deepest voice , to order a veal cutlet and potatoe , and all thing fit ; and to inquire at the bar if there be any letter for , - which I know there be not , and could not be , but think it manly to appear to expect . he soon come back to say that there be none ( at which I be much surprise ) and begin to lay the cloth for my dinner in a box by the fire . while he be so engage , he ask I what I would take with it ; and on my replying ' Half a pint of sherry , 'thotch it a favourable opportunity , I be afraid , to extract that measure of wine from the stale leaving at the bottom of several small decanter . I be of this opinion , because , while I be read the newspaper , I observe he behind a low wooden partition , which be he private apartment , very busy pour out of a number of those vessel into one , like a chemist and druggist make up a prescription . when the wine come , too , I think it flat ; and it certainly have more English crumb in it , than be to be expect in a foreign wine in anything like a pure state , but I be bashful enough to drink it , and say nothing . be then in a pleasant frame of mind ( from which I infer that poisoning be not always disagreeable in some stage of the process ) , I resolve to go to the play . it be that I choose ; and there , from the back of a centre box , I see and the new Pantomime . to have all those noble Roman alive before I , and walk in and out for my entertainment , instead of be the stern taskmaster they have be at school , be a most novel and delightful effect . but the mingled reality and mystery of the whole show , the influence upon I of the poetry , the light , the music , the company , the smooth stupendous change of glittering and brilliant scenery , be so dazzling , and open up such illimitable region of delight , that when I come out into the rainy street , at twelve o'clock at night , I feel as if I have come from the cloud , where I have be lead a romantic life for age , to a bawling , splashing , link - light , umbrella - struggling , hackney - coach - jostling , patten - clinking , muddy , miserable world . I have emerge by another door , and stand in the street for a little while , as if I really be a stranger upon earth : but the unceremonious pushing and hustl that I receive , soon recal I to myself , and put I in the road back to the hotel ; whither I go , revolve the glorious vision all the way ; and where , after some
some porter and oyster , I sit revolve it still , at past one o'clock , with my eye on the coffee - room fire . I be so fill with the play , and with the past - for it be , in a manner , like a shining transparency , through which I see my earlier life move along - that I do not know when the figure of a handsome well - form young man dress with a tasteful easy negligence which I have reason to remember very well , become a real presence to I . but I recollect be conscious of he company without have notice he come in - and my still sit , musing , over the coffee - room fire . at last I rise to go to bed , much to the relief of the sleepy waiter , who have get the fidget in he leg , and be twist they , and hit they , and put they through all kind of contortion in he small pantry . in go towards the door , I pass the person who have come in , and see he plainly . I turn directly , come back , and look again . he do not know I , but I know he in a moment . at another time I might have want the confidence or the decision to speak to he , and might have put it off until next day , and might have lose he . but , in the then condition of my mind , where the play be still run high , he former protection of I appear so deserving of my gratitude , and my old love for he overflow my breast so freshly and spontaneously , that I go up to he at once , with a fast - beat heart , and say : ' ! will not you speak to I ? ' he look at I - just as he use to look , sometimes - but I see no recognition in he face . ' you do not remember I , I be afraid , ' say I . ! ' he suddenly exclaim . ' it be little ! ' I grasp he by both hand , and could not let they go . but for very shame , and the fear that it might displease he , I could have hold he round the neck and cry . never , never , never be so glad ! my dear Steerforth , I be so overjoyed to see you ! ' ' and I be rejoice to see you , too ! ' he say , shak my hand heartily . ' why , , old boy , do not be overpower ! ' and yet he be glad , too , I think , to see how the delight I have in meeting he affect I . I brush away the tear that my utmost resolution have not be able to keep back , and I make a clumsy laugh of it , and we sit down together , side by side . ' why , how do you come to be here ? ' say , clapp I on the shoulder . 'I come here by the coach , today . I have be adopt by a aunt down in that part of the country , and have just finish my education there . how do you come to be here , ? ' ' well , I be what they call a Oxford man ,' he return ; ' that be to say , I get bore to death down there , periodically - and I be on my way now to my mother 's . you be a devilish amiable - look fellow , . just what you use to be , now I look at you ! not alter in the least ! ' 'I know you immediately ,' I say ; ' but you be more easily remember . ' he laugh as he run he hand through the clustering curl of he hair , and say gaily : ' yes , I be on a expedition of duty . my mother live a little way out of town ; and the roads be in a beastly condition , and we house tedious enough , I remain here tonight instead of go on . I have not be in town half - a - dozen hour , and those I have be do and grumbl away at the play . ' 'I have be at the play , too , ' say I . ' at . what a delightful and magnificent entertainment , ! ' laugh heartily . ' my dear young , ' he say , clapp I on the shoulder again , ' you be a very daisy . the daisy of the field , at sunrise , be not fresher than you be . I have be at , too , and there never be a more miserable business . Holloa , you sir ! ' this be address to the waiter , who have be very attentive to we recognition , at a distance , and now come forward deferentially . ' where have you put my friend , ? ' say . ' beg you pardon , sir ? ' ' where do he sleep ? what be he number ? you know what i mean , ' say . ' well , sir , ' say the waiter , with a apologetic air . ' be at present in forty - four , sir . ' ' and what the do you mean , ' retort , ' by put into a little loft over a stable ? ' ' why , you see we be not aware , sir , ' return the waiter , still apologetically ,
, 'as be anyways particular . we can give seventy - two , sir , if it would be prefer . next you , sir . ' ' of course it would be prefer , ' say . ' and do it at once . ' the waiter immediately withdraw to make the exchange . , very much amuse at my have be put into forty - four , laugh again , and clap I on the shoulder again , and invite I to breakfast with he next morning at ten o'clock - a invitation I be only too proud and happy to accept . it be now pretty late , we take we candle and go upstairs , where we part with friendly heartiness at he door , and where I find my new room a great improvement on my old one , it not be at all musty , and have a immense four -post bedstead in it , which be quite a little landed estate . here , among pillow enough for six , I soon fall asleep in a blissful condition , and dream of ancient , , and friendship , until the early morning coach , rumbl out of the archway underneath , make I dream of thunder and the gods . chapter 20 's when the chambermaid tap at my door at eight o'clock , and inform I that my shaving - water be outside , I feel severely the have no occasion for it , and blush in my bed . the suspicion that she laugh too , when she say it , prey upon my mind all the time I be dress ; and give I , I be conscious , a sneaking and guilty air when I pass she on the staircase , as I be go down to breakfast . I be so sensitively aware , indeed , of be younger than I could have wished , that for some time I could not make up my mind to pass she at all , under the ignoble circumstance of the case ; but , hear she there with a broom , stood pee out of window at on horseback , surround by a maze of hackney - coach , and look anything but regal in a drizzling rain and a dark - brown fog , until I be admonish by the waiter that the gentleman be wait for I . it be not in the coffee - room that I find expect I , but in a snug private apartment , red -curtained and - carpet , where the fire burnt bright , and a fine hot breakfast be set forth on a table cover with a clean cloth ; and a cheerful miniature of the room , the fire , the breakfast , , and all , be shine in the little round mirror over the sideboard . I be rather bashful at first , be so self - possess , and elegant , and superior to I in all respects ( age include ) ; but he easy patronage soon put that to rights , and make I quite at home . I could not enough admire the change he have wrotch in the ; or compare the dull forlorn state I have hold yesterday , with this morning 's comfort and this morning 's entertainment . as to the waiter 's familiarity , it be quench as if it have never be . he attend on we , as I may say , in sackcloth and ash . ' now , , ' say , when we be alone , 'I should like to hear what you be do , and where you be go , and all about you . I feel as if you be my property . ' glow with pleasure to find that he have still this interest in I , I tell he how my aunt have propose the little expedition that I have before I , and whither it ten . ' as you be in no hurry , then , ' say , ' come home with I to Highgate , and stay a day or two . you will be pleased with my mother - she be a little vain and prosy about I , but that you can forgive she - and she will be pleased with you . ' 'I should like to be as sure of that , as you be kind enough to say you be ,' I answer , smile . 'Oh ! ' say , ' everyone who like I , have a claim on she that be sure to be acknowledged . ' ' then I think I shall be a favourite , ' say I . ' good ! ' say . ' come and prove it . we will go and see the lion for a hour or two - it be something to have a fresh fellow like you to show they to , - and then we will journey out to Highgate by the coach . ' I could hardly believe but that I be in a dream , and that I should wake presently in number forty - four , to the solitary box in the coffee - room and the familiar waiter again . after I have write to my aunt and tell she of my fortunate meeting with my admired old schoolfellow , and my acceptance of he invitation , we go out in a hackney - chariot , and see a and some other sight , and take a walk through the , where I could not help observe how much , on a infinite variety of subject , and of how little account he seem to make he knowledge . ' you will take a high degree at college , , ' say I , ' if you have not do so already ;
; and they will have good reason to be proud of you . ' 'I take a degree ! ' cry . ' not I ! my dear - will you mind my call you ? ' ' not at all ! ' say I . ' that be a good fellow ! my dear , ' say , laugh . 'I have not the least desire or intention to distinguish myself in that way . I have do quite sufficient for my purpose . I find that I be heavy company enough for myself as I be . ' ' but the fame -' I be begin . ' you romantic ! ' say , laugh still more heartily : ' why should I trouble myself , that a parcel of heavy - head fellow may gape and hold up they hand ? let they do it at some other man . there be fame for he , and he be welcome to it . ' I be abash at have make so great a mistake , and be glad to change the subject . fortunately it be not difficult to do , for could always pass from one subject to another with a carelessness and lightness that be he own . Lunch succeed to we sight - see , and the short winter day wore away so fast , that it be dusk when the stage - coach stop with we at a old brick house at on the summit of the hill . a elderly lady , though not very far advanced in year , with a proud carriage and a handsome face , be in the doorway as we alight ; and greet as ' my dearest , ' fold he in she arm . to this lady he present I as he mother , and she give I a stately welcome . it be a genteel old - fashioned house , very quiet and orderly . from the window of my room I see all lie in the distance like a great vapour , with here and there some light twinkl through it . I have only time , in dressing , to glance at the solid furniture , the framed piece of work ( do , I suppose , by 's mother when she be a girl ) , and some picture in crayon of lady with powdered hair and bodice , come and go on the wall , as the newly - kind fire crack and sputter , when I be call to dinner . there be a second lady in the dining - room , of a slight short figure , dark , and not agreeable to look at , but with some appearance of good look too , who attract my attention : perhaps because I have not expect to see she ; perhaps because I find myself sit opposite to she ; perhaps because of something really remarkable in she . she have black hair and eager black eye , and be thin , and have a scar upon she lip . it be a old scar - I should rather call it seam , for it be not discoloure , and have heal year ago - which have once cut through she mouth , downward towards the ching , but be now barely visible across the table , except above and on she upper lip , the shape of which it have alte . I conclude in my own mind that she be about thirty year of age , and that she wish to be marry . she be a little dilapidate - like a house - with have be so long to let ; yet have , as I have say , a appearance of good look . she thinness seem to be the effect of some waste fire within she , which find a vent in she gaunt eye . she be introduce as , and both and he mother call she . I find that she live there , and have be for a long time 's companion . it appear to I that she never say anything she want to say , outright ; but hint it , and make a great deal more of it by this practice . for example , when observ , more in jest than earnest , that she fear she son lead but a wild life at college , put in thus : 'Oh , really ? you know how ignorant I be , and that I only ask for information , but be not it always so ? I think that kind of life be on all hand understand to be - eh ? ' ' it be education for a very grave profession , if you mean that , ,' answer with some coldness . ' oh ! yes ! that be very true , ' return . ' but be not it , though ? - I want to be put right , if I be wrong - be not it , really ? ' ' really what ? ' say . 'Oh ! you mean it be not ! ' return . ' well , I be very glad to hear it ! now , I know what to do ! that be the advantage of ask . I shall never allow people to talk before I about wastefulness and profligacy , and so forth , in connexion with that life , any more . ' ' and you will be right , ' say . ' my son 's tutor be a conscientious gentleman ; and if I have not implicit reliance on my son , I should have reliance on he . ' ' should you ? ' say . ' dear I ! conscientious , be he ? really conscientious , now ? ' ' yes , I be convince of it ,
, ' say . ' how very nice ! ' exclaim . ' what a comfort ! really conscientious ? then he be not - but of course he can not be , if he be really conscientious . well , I shall be quite happy in my opinion of he , from this time . you can not think how it elevate he in my opinion , to know for certain that he be really conscientious ! ' she own view of every question , and she correction of everything that be say to which she be oppose , insinuate in the same way : sometimes , I could not conceal from myself , with great power , though in contradiction even of . a instance happen before dinner be done . speak to I about my intention of go down into , I say at hazard how glad I should be , if would only go there with I ; and explain to he that I be go to see my old nurse , and 's family , I remind he of the boatman whom he have see at school . ' oh ! that bluff fellow ! ' say . ' he have a son with he , have not he ? ' ' no . that be he nephew ,' I reply ; ' whom he adopt , though , as a son . he have a very pretty little niece too , whom he adopt as a daughter . in short , he house - or rather he boat , for he live in one , on dry land - be full of people who be object of he generosity and kindness . you would be delighted to see that household . ' ' should I ? ' say . ' well , I think I should . I must see what can be do . it would be worth a journey ( not to mention the pleasure of a journey with you , ) , to see that sort of people together , and to make one of th'ey . ' my heart leape with a new hope of pleasure . but it be in reference to the tone in which he have speak of ' that sort of people ' , that , whose sparkl eye have be watchful of we , now break in again . 'Oh , but , really ? do tell I . be they , though ? ' she say . ' be they what ? and be who what ? ' say . ' that sort of people . - be they really animal and clod , and being of another order ? I want to know so much . ' ' why , there be a pretty wide separation between they and we , ' say , with indifference . ' they be not to be expect to be as sensitive as we be . they delicacy be not to be shocke , or hurt easily . they be wonderfully virtuous , I dare say - some people contmend for that , at least ; and I be sure I do not want to contradict they - but they have not very fine nature , and they may be thankful that , like they coarse rough skins , they be not easily wounded . ' ' really ! ' say . ' well , I do not know , now , when I have be better pleased than to hear that . it be so consol ! it be such a delight to know that , when they suffer , they do not feel ! sometimes I have be quite uneasy for that sort of people ; but now I shall just dismiss the idea of they , altogether . and learn . I have my doubt , I confess , but now they be clear up . I do not know , and now I do know , and that show the advantage of ask - do not it ? ' I believe that have say what he have , in jest , or to draw out ; and I expect he to say as much when she be go , and we two be sit before the fire . but he merely ask I what I think of she . ' she be very clever , be she not ? ' I ask . ' Clever ! she bring everything to a grindstone , ' say , and sharpen it , as she have sharpen she own face and figure these year past . she have wear herself away by constant sharpening . she be all edge . ' ' what a remarkable scar that be upon she lip ! ' I say . 's face fell , and he pause a moment . ' why , the fact be , ' he return , 'I do that . ' ' by a unfortunate accident ! ' ' no . I be a young boy , and she exasperate I , and I throw a hammer at she . a promise young angel I must have be ! ' I be deeply sorry to have touch on such a painful theme , but that be useless now . ' she have borne the mark ever since , as you see , ' say ; 'and she will bear it to she grave , if she ever rest in one - though I can hardly believe she will ever rest anywhere . she be the motherless child of a sort of cousin of my father 's . he die one day . my mother , who be then a widow , bring she here to be company to she . she have a couple of thousand pound of she own , and save the interest of it every year , to add to the principal .
. there be the history of for you . ' ' and I have no doubt she love you like a brother ? ' say I . 'Humph ! ' retort , look at the fire . ' some brother be not love over much ; and some love - but help yourself , ! we will drink the daisie of the field , in compliment to you ; and the lily of the valley that toil not , neither do they spin , in compliment to I - the more shame for I ! ' a moody smile that have overspread he feature clear off as he say this merrily , and he be he own frank , win self again . I could not help glance at the scar with a painful interest when we go in to tea . it be not long before I observ that it be the most susceptible part of she face , and that , when she turn pale , that alte first , and become a dull , lead - coloured streak , lengthen out to it be full extent , like a mark in invisible ink bring to the fire . there be a little altercation between she and about a cast of the dice at back gammon - when I think she , for one moment , in a storm of rage ; and then I see it start forth like the old write on the wall . it be no matter of to I to find devote to she son . she seem to be able to speak or think about nothing else . she show I he picture as a infant , in a locket , with some of he baby - hair in it ; she show I he picture as he have be when I first know he ; and she wear at she breast he picture as he be now . all the letter he have ever write to she , she keep in a cabinet near she own chair by the fire ; and she would have read I some of they , and I should have be very glad to hear they too , if he have not interpose , and coax she out of the design . ' it be at 's , my son tell I , that you first become acquainted , ' say , as she and I be talk at one table , while they play backgammon at another . ' indeed , I recollect he speak , at that time , of a pupil younger than himself who have take he fancy there ; but you name , as you may suppose , have not live in my memory . ' ' he be very generous and noble to I in those day , I assure you , ma 'am , ' say I , ' and I stand in need of such a friend . I should have be quite crush without he . ' ' he be always generous and noble , ' say , proudly . I subscribe to this with all my heart , know . she know I do ; for the stateliness of she manner already abate towards I , except when she speak in praise of he , and then she air be always lofy . ' it be not a fit school generally for my son , ' say she ; ' far from it ; but there be particular circumstance to be consider at the time , of more importance even than that selection . my son 's high spirit make it desirable that he should be place with some man who feel its superiority , and would be content to bow himself before it ; and we find such a man there . ' I know that , know the fellow . and yet I do not despise he the more for it , but think it a redeem quality in he if he could be allow any grace for not resist one so irresistible as . ' my son 's great capacity be tempt on , there , by a feeling of voluntary emulation and conscious pride , ' the fond lady go on to say . ' he would have risen against all constraint ; but he find himself the monarch of the place , and he haughtily determi to be worthy of he station . it be like himself . ' I echo , with all my heart and soul , that it be like himself . ' so my son take , of he own will , and on no compulsion , to the course in which he can always , when it be he pleasure , outstrip every competitor , ' she pursue . ' my son inform I , , that you be quite devoted to he , and that when you meet yesterday you make yourself know to he with tear of joy . I should be a affect woman if I make any pretence of be surprise by my son 's inspire such emotion ; but I can not be indifferent to anyone who be so sensible of he merit , and I be very glad to see you here , and can assure you that he feel a unusual friendship for you , and that you may rely on he protection . ' play backgammon as eagerly as she do everything else . if I have see she , first , at the board , I should have fancie that she figure have get thin , and she eye have get large , over that pursuit , and no other in the world . but I be very much mistaken if she miss a word of this , or lose a look of mine as I receive it with the utmost pleasure , and honoure by 's confidence
confidence , feel older than I have do since I leave . when the evening be pretty far spend , and a tray of glass and decanter come in , promise , over the fire , that he would seriously think of go down into the country with I . there be no hurry , he say ; a week hence would do ; and he mother hospitably say the same . while we be talk , he more than once call I ; which bring out again . ' but really , , ' she ask , ' be it a nickname ? and why do he give it you ? be it - eh ? - because he think you young and innocent ? I be so stupid in these thing . ' I colou in replying that I believe it be . ' oh ! ' say . ' now I be glad to know that ! I ask for information , and I be glad to know it . he think you young and innocent ; and so you be he friend . well , that be quite delightful ! ' she go to be soon after this , and retire too . and I , after linger for half - a - hour over the fire , talk about Traddles and all the rest of they at old , go upstairs together . 's room be next to mine , and I go in to look at it . it be a picture of comfort , full of easy - chair , cushion and footstool , work by he mother 's hand , and with no sort of thing omit that could help to render it complete . finally , she handsome feature look down on she darling from a portrait on the wall , as if it be even something to she that she likeness should watch he while he sleep . I find the fire burn clear enough in my room by this time , and the curtain draw before the window and round the bed , give it a very snug appearance . I sit down in a great chair upon the hearth to meditate on my happiness ; and have enjoy the contemplation of it for some time , when I find a likeness of look eagerly at I from above the chimney - piece . it be a startling likeness , and necessarily have a startling look . the painter have not make the scar , but I make it ; and there it be , come and go ; now confin to the upper lip as I have see it at dinner , and now show the whole extent of the wound inflict by the hammer , as I have see it when she be passionate . I wonder peevishly why they could not put she anywhere else instead of quarter she on I . to get rid of she , I undress quickly , extinguish my light , and go to bed . but , as I fall asleep , I could not forget that she be still there look , ' be it really , though ? I want to know ' ; and when I awoke in the night , I find that I be uneasily ask all sort of people in my dream whether it really be or not - without know what I mean . chapter 21 Little there be a servant in that house , a man who , I understand , be usually with , and have come into he service at the , who be in appearance a pattern of respectability . I believe there never exist in he station a more respectable - look man . he be taciturn , soave - foot , very quiet in he manner , deferential , observant , always at hand when want , and never near when not want ; but he great claim to consideration be he respectability . he have not a pliant face , he have rather a stiff neck , rather a tight smooth head with short hair clinging to it at the side , a soft way of speaking , with a peculiar habit of whisper the letter 's so distinctly , that he seem to use it oftener than any other man ; but every peculiarity that he have he make respectable . if he nose have be upside - down , he would have make that respectable . he surround himself with a atmosphere of respectability , and walk secure in it . it would have be next to impossible to suspect he of anything wrong , he be so thoroughly respectable . nobody could have think of put he in a livery , he be so highly respectable . to have impos any derogatory work upon he , would have be to inflict a wanton insult on the feeling of a most respectable man . and of this , I notice - the woman - servants in the household be so intuitively conscious , that they always do such work themselves , and generally while he read the paper by the pantry fire . such a self - contain man I never see . but in that quality , as in every other he possess , he only seem to be the more respectable . even the fact that no one know he name , seem to form a part of he respectability . nothing could be object against he surname , , by which he be know . might have be hang , or transport ; but be perfectly respectable . it be occasion , I suppose , by the reverend nature of respectability in the abstract , but I feel particularly young in this man 's presence . how old he be himself , I could not guess - and that again go to
to he credit on the same score ; for in the calmness of respectability he might have number fifty year as well as thirty . be in my room in the morning before I be up , to bring I that reproachful shaving - water , and to put out my clothes . when I undraw the curtain and look out of bed , I see he , in a equable temperature of respectability , unaffecte by the east wind of , and not even breathe frostily , stand my boot right and leave in the first dancing position , and blow speck of dust off my coat as he lay it down like a baby . I give he good morning , and ask he what o'clock it be . he take out of he pocket the most respectable hunting - watch I ever see , and prevent the spring with he thumb from opening far , look in at the face as if he be consult a oracular oyster , shut it up again , and say , if I please , it be half past eight . ' will be glad to hear how you have rest , sir . ' ' thank you , ' say I , ' very well indeed . be quite well ? ' ' thank you , sir , be tolerably well . ' another of he characteristic - no use of superlative . a cool calm medium always . ' be there anything more I can have the honour of do for you , sir ? the warning - bell will ring at nine ; the family take breakfast at half past nine . ' ' nothing , I thank you . ' 'I thank you , sir , if you please ' ; and with that , and with a little inclination of he head when he pass the bed - side , as a apology for correct I , he go out , shut the door as delicately as if I have just fall into a sweet sleep on which my life depend . every morning we hold exactly this conversation : never any more , and never any less : and yet , invariably , however far I might have be lift out of myself over -night , and advanc towards maturer year , by 's companionship , or 's confidence , or 's conversation , in the presence of this most respectable man I become , as we smaller poet sing , 'a boy again ' . he get horse for we ; and , who know everything , give I lesson in riding . he provide foil for we , and give I lesson in fencing - glove , and I begin , of the same master , to improve in boxing . it give I no manner of concern that should find I a novice in these sciences , but I never could bear to show my want of skill before the respectable Littimer . I have no reason to believe that understand such art himself ; he never lead I to suppose anything of the kind , by so much as the vibration of one of he respectable eyelash ; yet whenever he be by , while we be practise , I feel myself the greenest and most inexperienced of mortal . I be particular about this man , because he make a particular effect on I at that time , and because of what take place thereafter . the week pass away in a most delightful manner . it pass rapidly , as may be suppose , to one entrance as I be ; and yet it give I so many occasion for know Steerforth better , and admir he more in a thousand respects , that at its close I seem to have be with he for a much longer time . a dashing way he have of treat I like a plaything , be more agreeable to I than any behaviour he could have adopt . it remind I of we old acquaintance ; it seem the natural sequel of it ; it show I that he be unchanged ; it relieve I of any uneasiness I might have feel , in compare my merit with he , and measure my claim upon he friendship by any equal standard ; above all , it be a familiar , unrestrained , affectionate demeanour that he use towards no one else . as he have treat I at school differently from all the rest , I joyfully believe that he treat I in life unlike any other friend he have . I believe that I be nearer to he heart than any other friend , and my own heart warm with attachment to he . he make up he mind to go with I into the country , and the day arrive for we departure . he have be doubtful at first whether to take or not , but decide to leave he at home . the respectable creature , satisfy with he let whatever it be , arrange we portmanteaux on the little carriage that be to take we into , as if they be intend to defy the shocks of age , and receive my modestly proffer donation with perfect tranquillity . we bade adieu to and , with many thanks on my part , and much kindness on the devoted mother 's . the last thing I see be 's unruffled eye ; fraught , as I fancie , with the silent conviction that I be very young indeed . what I feel , in return so auspiciously to the old familiar place , I shall not endeaavor to describe . we go down by the mail . I be so concerned , I recollect , even for the honour of , that when say , as we drive through
through its dark street to the inn , that , as well as he could make out , it be a good , queer , out - of - the - way kind of hole , I be highly pleased . we go to be on we arrival ( I observe a pair of dirty shoe and gaiter in connexion with my old friend the as we pass that door ) , and breakfast late in the morning . , who be in great spirit , have be stroll about the beach before I be up , and have make acquaintance , he say , with half the boatman in the place . moreover , he have see , in the distance , what he be sure must be the identical house of , with smoke come out of the chimney ; and have have a great mind , he tell I , to walk in and swear he be myself grow out of knowledge . ' when do you propose to introduce I there , ? ' he say . 'I be at you disposal . make you own arrangement . ' ' why , I be think that this evening would be a good time , , when they be all sit round the fire . I should like you to see it when it be snug , it be such a curiious place . ' 'So be it ! ' return . ' this evening . ' 'I shall not give they any notice that we be here , you know , ' say I , delight . ' we must take they by surprise . ' 'Oh , of course ! it be no fun , ' say , ' unless we take they by surprise . let we see the native in they aboriginal condition . ' ' though they be that sort of people that you mention ,' I return . ' ! what ! you recollect my skirmish with , do you ? ' he exclaim with a quick look . ' Confound the girl , I be half afraid of she . she be like a goblin to I . but never mind she . now what be you go to do ? you be go to see you nurse , I suppose ? ' ' why , yes ,' I say , ' I must see first of all . ' ' well , ' reply , look at he watch . ' suppose I deliver you up to be cry over for a couple of hour . be that long enough ? ' I answer , laugh , that I think we might get through it in that time , but that he must come also ; for he would find that he renown have proceed he , and that he be almost as great a personage as I be . 'I will come anywhere you like , ' say , 'or do anything you like . tell I where to come to ; and in two hour I will produce myself in any state you please , sentimental or comical . ' I give he minute direction for find the residence of , carrier to and elsewhere ; and , on this understanding , go out alone . there be a sharp brace air ; the ground be dry ; the sea be crisp and clear ; the sun be diffuse abundance of light , if not much warmth ; and everything be fresh and lively . I be so fresh and lively myself , in the pleasure of be there , that I could have stop the people in the street and shake hand with they . the street look small , of course . the streets that we have only see as child always do , I believe , when we go back to they . but I have forget nothing in they , and find nothing change , until I come to 's shop . and be now write up , where Omer use to be ; but the inscription , , , , , & c. , remain as it be . my footstep seem to tend so naturally to the shop door , after I have read these word from over the way , that I go across the road and look in . there be a pretty woman at the back of the shop , dance a little child in she arm , while another little fellow clung to she apron . I have no difficulty in recognizing either or 's child . the glass door of the parlour be not open ; but in the workshop across the yard I could faintly hear the old tune play , as if it have never leave off . 'Is at home ? ' say I , enter . 'I should like to see he , for a moment , if he be . ' ' oh yes , sir , he be at home , ' say ; ' the weather do not suit he asthma out of door . , call you grandfather ! ' the little fellow , who be hold she apron , give such a lusty shout , that the sound of it make he bashful , and he bury he face in she skirt , to she great admiration . I hear a heavy puffing and blow come towards we , and soon , shorter - win than of , but not much older - look , stand before I . ' servant , sir , ' say . ' what can I do for you , sir ? ' ' you can shake hand with I , , if you please , ' say I , put out my own . ' you be very good - nature to I once , when I be afraid I do not
not show that I think so . ' ' be I though ? ' return the old man . 'I be glad to hear it , but I do not remember when . be you sure it be I ? ' ' . ' 'I think my memory have get as short as my breath , ' say , look at I and shake he head ; ' for I do not remember you . ' ' do not you remember you come to the coach to meet I , and my have breakfast here , and we ride out to together : you , and I , and , and too - who be not she husband then ? ' ' why , bless my soul ! ' exclaim , after be throw by he surprise into a fit of coughing , ' you do not say so ! , my dear , you recollect ? dear I , yes ; the party be a lady , I think ? ' ' my mother ,' I rejoin . 'To - be - sure , ' say , touch my waistcoat with he forefinger , ' and there be a little child too ! there be two party . the little party be laid along with the other party . over at it be , of course . dear I ! and how have you be since ? ' very well , I thank he , as I hope he have be too . 'Oh ! nothing to grumble at , you know , ' say . 'I find my breath get short , but it seldom get longer as a man get older . I take it as it come , and make the most of it . that be the best way , be not it ? ' coughe again , in consequence of laughing , and be assist out of he fit by he daughter , who now stand close beside we , dance she smallest child on the counter . ' dear I ! ' say . ' yes , to be sure . two party ! why , in that very ride , if you will believe I , the day be name for my to marry . " do name it , sir , " say . " yes , do , father , " say . and now he be come into the business . and look here ! the youngest ! ' laugh , and strok she ban hair upon she temple , as she father put one of he fat finger into the hand of the child she be dance on the counter . ' two party , of course ! ' say , nodd he head retrospectively . 'Ex - actly so ! and be at work , at this minute , on a grey one with silver nails , not this measurement ' - the measurement of the dancing child upon the counter - ' by a good two inche . - will you take something ? ' I thank he , but decline . ' let I see , ' say . ' Barkis be the carrier 's wife - be the boatman 's sister - she have something to do with you family ? she be in service there , sure ? ' my answer in the affirmative give he great satisfaction . 'I believe my breath will get long next , my memory 's get so much so , ' say . ' well , sir , we have get a young relation of hers here , under article to we , that have as elegant a taste in the dress - make business - I assure you I do not believe there be a Duchess in can touch she . ' ' not little Em'ly ? ' say I , involuntarily . ' be she name , ' say , ' and she be little too . but if you will believe I , she have such a face of she own that half the woman in this town be mad against she . ' ' Nonsense , father ! ' cry . ' my dear , ' say , 'I do not say it be the case with you , ' wink at I , ' but I say that half the woman in - ah ! and in five mile round - be mad against that girl . ' ' then she should have keep to she own station in life , father , ' say , ' and not have give they any hold to talk about she , and then they could not have do it . ' ' could not have do it , my dear ! ' retort . ' could not have do it ! be that you knowledge of life ? what be there that any woman could not do , that she should not do - especially on the subject of another woman 's good look ? ' I really think it be all over with , after he have utter this libellous pleasantry . he cough to that extent , and he breath elude all he attempt to recover it with that obstinacy , that I fully expect to see he head go down behind the counter , and he little black breech , with the rusty little bunch of ribbon at the knee , come quiver up in a last ineffectual struggle . at length , however , he get better , though he still pante hard , and be so exhaust that he be oblige to sit on the stool of the shop - desk . ' you see ,' he say , wip he head , and breathe with difficulty , ' she have not take much to any companion here ; she have not take kindly to any particular acquaintance and friend
friend , not to mention sweetheart . in consequence , a ill - natured story get about , that 'ly want to be a lady . now my opinion be , that it come into circulation principally on account of she sometimes say , at the school , that if she be a lady she would like to do so - and - so for she uncle - do not you see ? - and buy he such - and - such fine thing . ' 'I assure you , , she have say so to I ,' I return eagerly , ' when we be both child . ' nod he head and rub he ching . ' just so . then out of a very little , she could dress herself , you see , better than most other could out of a deal , and that make thing unpleasant . moreover , she be rather what might be call wayward - I will go so far as to say what I should call wayward myself , ' say ; ' - do not know she own mind quite - a little spoiled - and could not , at first , exactly bind herself down . no more than that be ever say against she , ? ' 'no , father , ' say . ' that be the worst , I believe . ' ' so when she get a situation , ' say , 'to keep a fractious old lady company , they do not very well agree , and she do not stop . at last she come here , apprentice for three year . nearly two of th'ey be over , and she have be as good a girl as ever be . worth any six ! , be she worth any six , now ? ' ' yes , father , ' reply . ' never say I detract from she ! ' ' very good , ' say . ' that be right . and so , young gentleman ,' he add , after a few moment ' further rubbing of he ching , ' that you may not consider I long - win as well as short - breathe , I believe that be all about it . ' as they have speak in a subdue tone , while speak of 'ly , I have no doubt that she be near . on my ask now , if that be not so , nod yes , and nod towards the door of the parlour . my hurry inquiry if I might peep in , be answer with a free permission ; and , look through the glass , I see she sit at she work . I see she , a most beautiful little creature , with the cloudless blue eye , that have look into my childish heart , turn laughingly upon another child of 's who be play near she ; with enough of wilfulness in she bright face to justify what I have hear ; with much of the old capricious coyness lurking in it ; but with nothing in she pretty look , I be sure , but what be mean for goodness and for happiness , and what be on a good and happy course . the tune across the yard that seem as if it never have leave off - ala ! it be the tune that never do leave off - be beat , softly , all the while . ' would not you like to step in , ' say , ' and speak to she ? walk in and speak to she , sir ! make yourself at home ! ' I be too bashful to do so then - I be afraid of confuse she , and I be no less afraid of confuse myself .- but I inform myself of the hour at which she leave of a evening , in order that we visit might be time accordingly ; and take leave of , and he pretty daughter , and she little child , go away to my dear old 's . here she be , in the tiled kitchen , cook dinner ! the moment I knock at the door she open it , and ask I what I pleas to want . I look at she with a smile , but she give I no smile in return . I have never cease to write to she , but it must have be seven year since we have meet . 'Is at home , ma 'am ? ' I say , feign to speak roughly to she . 'he be at home , sir , ' return , ' but he be bad a with the rheumatic . ' ' do not he go over to now ? ' I ask . ' when he be well he do , ' she answer . ' do you ever go there , ? ' she look at I more attentively , and I notice a quick movement of she hand towards each other . ' because I want to ask a question about a house there , that they call the - what be it ? - the , ' say I . she take a step backward , and put out she hand in a undecided frightened way , as if to keep I off . ' ! ' I cry to she . she cry , ' my darling boy ! ' and we both burst into tear , and be lock in one another 's arm . what extravagance she commit ; what laugh and cry over I ; what pride she show , what joy , what sorrow that she whose pride and joy I might have be , could never hold I in a fond embrace ; I have not the heart to tell
tell . I be troublead with no misgiving that it be young in I to respond to she emotion . I have never laugh and cry in all my life , I dare say - not even to she - more freely than I do that morning . ' Barkis will be so glad , ' say , wip she eye with she apron , ' that it will do he more good than pint of liniment . may I go and tell he you be here ? will you come up and see he , my dear ? ' of course I would . but could not get out of the room as easily as she mean to , for as often as she get to the door and look round at I , she come back again to have another laugh and another cry upon my shoulder . at last , to make the matter easier , I go upstairs with she ; and have wait outside for a minute , while she say a word of preparation to , present myself before that invalid . he receive I with absolute enthusiasm . he be too rheumatic to be shake hand with , but he beg I to shake the tassel on the top of he nightcap , which I do most cordially . when I sit down by the side of the bed , he say that it do he a world of good to feel as if he be drive I on the road again . as he lay in bed , face upward , and so cover , with that exception , that he seem to be nothing but a face - like a conventional cherubim - he look the queerest object I ever beheld . ' what name be it , as I write up in the cart , sir ? ' say , with a slow rheumatic smile . 'Ah ! , we have some grave talk about that matter , have not we ? ' be willin ' a long time , sir ? ' say . 'a long time , ' say I . ' and I do not regret it , ' say . ' do you remember what you tell I once , about she make all the apple parsty and do all the cooking ? ' ' yes , very well ,' I return . ' it be as true , ' say , 'as turnip be . it be as true , ' say , nodd he nightcap , which be he only means of emphasis , 'as tax be . and nothing be truer than they . ' turn he eye upon I , as if for my assent to this result of he reflection in bed ; and I give it . ' nothing be truer than they , ' repeat ; man as poor as I be , find that out in he mind when he be laid up . I be a very poor man , sir ! ' 'I be sorry to hear it , . ' 'a very poor man , indeed I be , ' say . here he right hand come slowly and feebly from under the bedclothes , and with a purposeless uncertain grasp take hold of a stick which be loosely tie to the side of the bed . after some pok about with this instrument , in the course of which he face assume a variety of distracted expression , pok it against a box , a end of which have be visible to I all the time . then he face become composed . ' old clothes , ' say . 'Oh ! ' say I . 'I wish it be money , sir , ' say . 'I wish it be , indeed , ' say I . ' but it be not , ' say , open both he eye as wide as he possibly wcould . I express myself quite sure of that , and , turn he eye more gently to he wife , say : ' she be the usefullest and best of woman , . all the praise that anyone can give to , she deserve , and more ! my dear , you will get a dinner today , for company ; something good to eat and drink , will you ? ' I should have protest against this unnecessary demonstration in my honour , but that I see , on the opposite side of the bed , extremely anxious I should not . so I hold my peace . 'I have get a trifle of money somewhere about I , my dear , ' say , ' but I be a little tired . if you and will leave I for a short nap , I will try and find it when I wake . ' we leave the room , in compliance with this request . when we get outside the door , inform I that , be now 'a little nearer ' than he use to be , always resort to this same device before produce a single coin from he store ; and that he endure unheard - of agony in crawl out of bed alone , and take it from that unlucky box . in effect , we presently hear he utter suppress groan of the most dismal nature , as this magpie proceeding rack he in every joint ; but while 's eye be full of compassion for he , she say he generous impulse would do he good , and it be better not to check it . so he groane on , until he have get into bed again , suffer , I have no doubt , a martyrdom ; and then call we in , pretend to have just wake up from a refresh sleep , and to produce a
a guinea from under he pillow . he satisfaction in which happy imposition on we , and in have preserve the impenetrable secret of the box , appear to be a sufficient compensation to he for all he torture . I prepare for 's arrival and it be not long before he come . I be persuade she know no difference between he have be a personal benefactor of hers , and a kind friend to I , and that she would have receive he with the utmost gratitude and devotion in any case . but he easy , spirit good humour ; he genial manner , he handsome look , he natural gift of adapt himself to whomsoever he please , and make direct , when he care to do it , to the main point of interest in anybody 's heart ; bound she to he wholly in five minute . he manner to I , alone , would have win she . but , through all these cause combine , I sincerely believe she have a kind of adoration for he before he leave the house that night . he stay there with I to dinner - if I be to say willingly , I should not half express how readily and gaily . he go into 's room like light and air , brighten and refresh it as if he be healthy weather . there be no noise , no effort , no consciousness , in anything he do ; but in everything a indescribable lightness , a seem impossibility of do anything else , or do anything better , which be so graceful , so natural , and agreeable , that it overcome I , even now , in the remembrance . we make merry in the little parlour , where the of , unthumbed since my time , be lay out upon the desk as of old , and where I now turn over its terrific picture , remember the old sensation they have awaken , but not feel they . when speak of what she call my room , and of its be ready for I at night , and of she hope I would occupy it , before I could so much as look at , hesitat , he be possess of the whole case . ' of course , ' he say . ' you will sleep here , while we stay , and I shall sleep at the hotel . ' ' but to bring you so far ,' I return , ' and to separate , seem bad companionship , . ' ' why , in the name of , where do you naturally belong ? ' he say . ' what be " seem " , compare to that ? ' it be settle at once . he maintain all he delightful quality to the last , until we start forth , at eight o'clock , for 's . indeed , they be more and more brightly exhibit as the hour go on ; for I think even then , and I have no doubt now , that the consciousness of success in he determination to please , inspire he with a new delicacy of perception , and make it , subtle as it be , more easy to he . if anyone have tell I , then , that all this be a brilliant game , play for the excitement of the moment , for the employment of high spirit , in the thoughtless love of superiority , in a mere wasteful careless course of win what be worthless to he , and next minute throw away - I say , if anyone have tell I such a lie that night , I wonder in what manner of receive it my indignation would have find a vent ! probably only in a increase , have that be possible , of the romantic feeling of fidelity and friendship with which I walk beside he , over the dark wintry sands towards the old boat ; the wind sigh around we even more mournfully , than it have sigh and moan upon the night when I first darken 's door . ' this be a wild kind of place , , be it not ? ' 'Dismal enough in the dark , ' he say : ' and the sea roar as if it be hungry for we . be that the boat , where I see a light yonder ? ' ' that be the boat , ' say I . ' and it be the same I see this morning , ' he return . 'I come straight to it , by instinct , I suppose . ' we say no more as we approach the light , but make softly for the door . I lay my hand upon the latch ; and whisper to keep close to I , go in . a murmur of voice have be audible on the outside , and , at the moment of we entrance , a clapping of hand : which latter noise , I be surprised to see , proceed from the generally disconsolate . but be not the only person there who be unusually excited . , he face lighte up with uncommon satisfaction , and laugh with all he might , hold he rough arm wide open , as if for little 'ly to run into they ; , with a mixed expression in he face of admiration , exultation , and a lumbering sort of bashfulness that sit upon he very well , hold little 'ly by the hand , as if he be present she to ; little 'ly herself , blushing and shy , but delighte with 's delight , as she joyous eye express , be stop by we entrance ( for she see we first ) in the very act of
of springing from to in 's embrace . in the first glimpse we have of they all , and at the moment of we passing from the dark cold night into the warm light room , this be the way in which they be all employ : in the background , clapp she hand like a madwoman . the little picture be so instantaneously dissolve by we go in , that one might have doubt whether it have ever be . I be in the midst of the astonished family , face to face with , and hold out my hand to he , when shoute : ' ! it be ! ' in a moment we be all shak hand with one another , and ask one another how we do , and tell one another how glad we be to meet , and all talk at once . be so proud and overjoy to see we , that he do not know what to say or do , but keep over and over again shak hand with I , and then with , and then with I , and then ruffl he shaggy hair all over he head , and laugh with such glee and triumph , that it be a treat to see he . ' why , that you two gent'lmen - gent'lmen grow - should come to this here roof tonight , of all night in my life , ' say , 'is such a thing as never happen afore , I do rightly believe ! 'ly , my darling , come here ! come here , my little witch ! there be 's friend , my dear ! there be the gent'lman as you have heered on , 'ly . he come to see you , along with , on the brightest night of you uncle 's life as ever be or will be , Gorm the t'other one , and horroar for it ! ' after deliver this speech all in a breath , and with extraordinary animation and pleasure , put one of he large hand rapturously on each side of he niece 's face , and kiss it a dozen time , laid it with a gentle pride and love upon he broad chest , and pat it as if he hand have be a lady 's . then he let she go ; and as she run into the little chamber where I use to sleep , look round upon we , quite hot and out of breath with he uncommon satisfaction . ' if you two gent'lman - gent'lman grow now , and such gent'lman - ' say . 'So th ' be , so th ' be ! ' cry . ' well say ! so th ' be . ma 'r Davy borg - gent'lman grow - so th ' be ! ' ' if you two gent'lman , gent'lmen grow , ' say , 'do not ex-cuse I for be in a state of mind , when you understand matter , I will ark you pardon . 'ly , my dear ! - she know I be a go to tell , ' here he delight break out again , ' and have make off . would you be so good as look arter she , , for a minute ? ' nod and disappear . ' if this be not , ' say , sit down among we by the fire , ' the brightest night of ' my life , I be a shellfish - bile too - and more I can not say . this here little Em'ly , sir , ' in a low voice to , ' - she as you see a blushing here just now -' Steerforth only nod ; but with such a pleased expression of interest , and of participation in 's feeling , that the latter answer he as if he have speak . 'To be sure , ' say . ' that be she , and so she be . Thankee , sir . ' nod to I several time , as if he would have say so too . ' this here little 'ly of ours , ' say , ' have be , in we house , what I suppose ( I be a ignorant man , but that be my belief ) no one but a little bright - eyed creetur can be in a house . she be not my child ; I never have one ; but I could not love she more . you understand ! I could not do it ! ' 'I quite understand , ' say . 'I know you do , sir , ' return , ' and thankee again . , he can remember what she be ; you may judge for you own self what she be ; but neither of you can not fully know what she have be , be , and will be , to my loving art . I be rough , sir , ' say , 'I be as rough as a ; but no one , unless , mayhap , it be a woman , can know , I think , what we little 'ly be to I . and betwixt ourselves , ' sink he voice lower yet , ' that woman 's name be not neither , though she have a world of merit . ' ruffle he hair again , with both hand , as a further preparation for what he be go to say , and go on , with a hand upon each of he knee : ' there be a certain person as have know have we Em'ly , from the time when she father be drownd ; as have see she constant ; when a babby , when a young gal , when a woman . not much of a person
person to look at , he war not , ' say , ' something of ' my own build - rough - a good deal of ' the sou'-wester in he - wery salt - but , on the whole , a honest sort of a chap , with he art in the right place . ' I think I have never see grin to anything like the extent to which he sit grinning at we now . ' what do this here bless tarpaulin go and do , ' say , with he face one high noon of enjoyment , ' but he lose that there art of he to we little Em'ly . he foller she about , he make hisself a sort of ' servant to she , he lose in a great measure he relish for he wittle , and in the long - run he make it clear to I wot 's amiss . now I could wish myself , you see , that we little 'ly be in a fair way of be marry . I could wish to see she , at all ewent , under article to a honest man as have a right to defend she . I do not know how long I may live , or how soon I may die ; but I know that if I be capsize , any night , in a gale of wind in here , and be to see the town - light shining for the last time over the roller as I could not make no head against , I could go down quieter for thinking " there be a man ashore there , iron -true to my little em 'ly , bless she , and no wrong can touch my em 'ly while so be as that man life . " ' , in simple earnestness , wav he right arm , as if he be wave it at the town - light for the last time , and then , exchange a nod with , whose eye he catch , proceed as before . ' well ! I counsel he to speak to . he be big enough , but he be bashfuller than a little un , and he do not like . so I speak . " what ! ! " say Em'ly . " he that I have know have so intimate so many year , and like so much . oh , uncle ! I never can have he . he be such a good fellow ! " I give she a kiss , and I say no more to she than , " my dear , you be right to speak out , you be to choose for yourself , you be as free as a little bird . " then I away to he , and I say , " I wish it could have be so , but it can not . but you can both be as you be , and wot I say to you be , be as you be with she , like a man . " he say to I , a - shaking of my hand , " I will ! " he say . and he be - honourable and manful - for two year go on , and we be just the same at home here as afore . ' 's face , which have vari in its expression with the various stage of he narrative , now resume all its former triumphant delight , as he lay a hand upon my knee and a hand upon 's ( previously wett they both , for the greater emphasis of the action ) , and divide the follow speech between we : ' all of a sudden , one evening - as it might be tonight - come little 'ly from she work , and he with she ! there be not so much in that , you will say . no , because he take care on she , like a brother , arter dark , and indeed afore dark , and at all time . but this tarpaulin chap , he take hold of she hand , and he cry out to I , joyful , " look here ! this be to be my little wife ! " and she say , half bold and half shy , and half a laughing and half a crying , " yes , uncle ! if you please . " - if I please ! ' cry , rol he head in a ecstasy at the idea ; ' , as if I should do anythink else ! - " if you please , I be steadier now , and I have think better of it , and I will be as good a little wife as I can to he , for he be a dear , good fellow ! " then , she clap she hand like a play , and you come in . ! the murder 's out ! ' say - ' you come in ! it take place this here present hour ; and here be the man that will marry she , the minute she be out of she time . ' stagger , as well he might , under the blow deal he in he unbounded joy , as a mark of confidence and friendship ; but feel call upon to say something to we , he say , with much faltering and great difficulty : ' she war not no higher than you be , - when you first come - when I think what she would grow up to be . I see she grow up - gent'lman - like a flower . I would lay down my life for she - - oh ! most content and cheerful ! she be more to I -
- gent'lman - than - she be all to I that ever I can want , and more than ever I - than ever I could say . I - I love she true . there be not a gent'lman in all the land - nor yet sail upon all the sea - that can love he lady more than I love she , though there be many a common man - would say better - what he mean . ' I think it affect to see such a sturdy fellow as be now , trembl in the strength of what he feel for the pretty little creature who have win he heart . I think the simple confidence repose in we by and by himself , be , in itself , affect . I be affect by the story altogether . how far my emotion be influence by the recollection of my childhood , I do not know . whether I have come there with any lingering fancy that I be still to love little Em'ly , I do not know . I know that I be fill with pleasure by all this ; but , at first , with a indescribably sensitive pleasure , that a very little would have change to pain . therefore , if it have depend upon I to touch the prevailing chord among they with any skill , I should have make a poor hand of it . but it depend upon ; and he do it with such address , that in a few minute we be all as easy and as happy as it be possible to be . ' ,' he say , ' you be a thoroughly good fellow , and deserve to be as happy as you be tonight . my hand upon it ! , I give you joy , my boy . my hand upon that , too ! , stir the fire , and make it a brisk one ! and , unless you can induce you gentle niece to come back ( for whom I vacate this seat in the corner ) , I shall go . any gap at you fireside on such a night - such a gap least of all - I would not make , for the wealth of the Indy ! ' so go into my old room to fetch little Em'ly . at first little 'ly do not like to come , and then go . presently they bring she to the fireside , very much confused , and very shy , - but she soon become more assure when she find how gently and respectfully speak to she ; how skilfully he avoid anything that would embarrass she ; how he talk to of boat , and ship , and tide , and fish ; how he refer to I about the time when he have see at ; how delighte he be with the boat and all belong to it ; how lightly and easily he carry on , until he bring we , by degree , into a charmed circle , and we be all talk away without any reserve . Em'ly , indeed , say little all the evening ; but she look , and listen , and she face get animated , and she be charme . tell a story of a dismal shipwreck ( which arise out of he talk with ) , as if he see it all before he - and little 's eye be fasten on he all the time , as if she see it too . he tell we a merry adventure of he own , as a relief to that , with as much gaiety as if the narrative be as fresh to he as it be to we - and little 'ly laugh until the boat ring with the musical sound , and we all laugh ( too ) , in irresistible sympathy with what be so pleasant and light - hear . he get to s , or rather to roar , ' when the stormy wind do blow , do blow , do blow ' ; and he sang a sailor 's song himself , so pathetically and beautifully , that I could have almost fancied that the real wind creep sorrowfully round the house , and murmur low through we unbroken silence , be there to listen . as to , he rouse that victim of despondency with a success never attaine by anyone else ( so inform I ) , since the decease of the old one . he leave she so little leisure for be miserable , that she say next day she think she must have be bewitch . but he set up no monopoly of the general attention , or the conversation . when little 'ly grow more courageous , and talk ( but still bashfully ) across the fire to I , of we old wandering upon the beach , to pick up shells and pebble ; and when I ask she if she recollect how I use to be devote to she ; and when we both laugh and redden , cast these look back on the pleasant old time , so unreal to look at now ; he be silent and attentive , and observe we thoughtfully . she sit , at this time , and all the evening , on the old locker in she old little corner by the fire - beside she , where I use to sit . I could not satisfy myself whether it be in she own little tormenting way , or in a maidenly reserve before we , that she keep quite close to the wall , and away from he ; but I observe that she do so , all the evening . as I remember , it be almost midnight when we take we leave . we
we have have some biscuit and dry fish for supper , and have produce from he pocket a full flask of , which we man ( I may say we men , now , without a blush ) have empty . we parte merrily ; and as they all stood crowd round the door to light we as far as they could upon we road , I see the sweet blue eye of little 'ly pee after we , from behind , and hear she soft voice call to we to be careful how we go . 'a most engage little ! ' say , take my arm . ' well ! it be a quaint place , and they be quaint company , and it be quite a new sensation to mix with they . ' ' how fortunate we be , too ,' I return , 'too have arrive to witness they happiness in that intend marriage ! I never see people so happy . how delightful to see it , and to be make the sharer in they honest joy , as we have be ! ' ' that be rather a chuckle - head fellow for the girl ; be not he ? ' say . he have be so hearty with he , and with they all , that I feel a shock in this unexpected and cold reply . but turn quickly upon he , and see a laugh in he eye , I answer , much relieve : , ! it be well for you to joke about the poor ! you may skirmish with , or try to hide you sympathy in jest from I , but I know better . when I see how perfectly you understand they , how exquisitely you can enter into happiness like this plain fisherman 's , or humwe a love like my old nurse 's , I know that there be not a joy or sorrow , not a emotion , of such people , that can be indifferent to you . and I admire and love you for it , , twenty time the more ! ' he stop , and , look in my face , say , ' , I believe you be in earnest , and be good . I wish we all be ! ' next moment he be gaily singing 's song , as we walk at a round pace back to . chapter 22 , and and I stay for more than a fortnight in that part of the country . we be very much together , I need not say ; but occasionally we be asunder for some hour at a time . he be a good sailor , and I be but a indifferent one ; and when he go out boat with , which be a favourite amusement of he , I generally remain ashore . my occupation of 's spare - room put a constraint upon I , from which he be free : for , know how assiduously she attend on all day , I do not like to remain out late at night ; whereas , lie at the , have nothing to consult but he own humour . thus it come about , that I hear of he make little treat for the fisherman at 's house of call , ' the ' , after I be in bed , and of he be afloat , wrap in fisherman 's clothes , whole moonlight night , and come back when the morning tide be at flood . by this time , however , I know that he restless nature and bold spirit delighted to find a vent in rough toil and hard weather , as in any other means of excitement that present itself freshly to he ; so none of he proceedings surprise I . another cause of we be sometimes apart , be , that I have naturally a interest in go over to , and revisit the old familiar scene of my childhood ; while , after be there once , have naturally no great interest in go there again . hence , on three or four day that I can at once recall , we go we several way after a early breakfast , and meet again at a late dinner . I have no idea how he employ he time in the interval , beyond a general knowledge that he be very popular in the place , and have twenty means of actively divert himself where another man might not have find one . for my own part , my occupation in my solitary pilgrimage be to recall every yard of the old road as I go along it , and to haunt the old spot , of which I never ti . I haunt they , as my memory have often do , and linger among they as my younger thought have linger when I be far away . the grave beneath the tree , where both my parent lay - on which I have look out , when it be my father 's only , with such curiious feeling of compassion , and by which I have stood , so desolate , when it be opened to receive my pretty mother and she baby - the grave which 's own faithful care have ever since keep neat , and make a garden of , I walk near , by the hour . it lay a little off the churchyard path , in a quiet corner , not so far remove but I could read the name upon the stone as I walk to and fro , start by the sound of the church - bell when it strike the hour , for it be like a depart voice to I . my reflection at these time be always associate with the figure I be to
to make in life , and the distinguished thing I be to do . my echo footstep go to no other tune , but be as constant to that as if I have come home to build my castle in the air at a liive mother 's side . there be great change in my old home . the rag nests , so long desert by the rook , be go ; and the tree be lop and top out of they remember shape . the garden have run wild , and half the window of the house be shut up . it be occupy , but only by a poor lunatic gentleman , and the people who take care of he . he be always sit at my little window , look out into the churchyard ; and I wonder whether he rambl thought ever go upon any of the fancie that use to occupy mine , on the rosy morning when I pee out of that same little window in my night - clothes , and see the sheep quietly feed in the light of the rise sun . we old neighbour , and , be go to , and the rain have make its way through the roof of they empty house , and stain the outer wall . be marry again to a tall , raw - bone , high - nos wife ; and they have a weazen little baby , with a heavy head that it could not hold up , and two weak staring eye , with which it seem to be always wonder why it have ever be bear . it be with a singular jumble of sadness and pleasure that I use to linger about my native place , until the redden winter sun admonish I that it be time to start on my return walk . but , when the place be leave behind , and especially when and I be happily seate over we dinner by a blazing fire , it be delicious to think of have be there . so it be , though in a softened degree , when I go to my neat room at night ; and , turn over the leaf of the crocodile - book ( which be always there , upon a little table ) , remember with a grateful heart how blest I be in have such a friend as , such a friend as , and such a substitute for what I have lose as my excellent and generous aunt . my nearest way to , in come back from these long walk , be by a ferry . it land I on the flat between the town and the sea , which I could make straight across , and so save myself a considerable circuit by the high road . 's house be on that waste - place , and not a hundred yard out of my track , I always look in as I go by . be pretty sure to be there expect I , and we go on together through the frosty air and gather fog towards the twinkling light of the town . one dark evening , when I be later than usual - for I have , that day , be make my parting visit to , as we be now about to return home - I find he alone in 's house , sit thoughtfully before the fire . he be so intent upon he own reflection that he be quite unconscious of my approach . this , indeed , he might easily have be if he have be less absorbed , for footstep fall noiselessly on the sandy ground outside ; but even my entrance fail to rouse he . I be stand close to he , look at he ; and still , with a heavy brow , he be lose in he meditations . he give such a start when I put my hand upon he shoulder , that he make I start too . ' you come upon I ,' he say , almost angrily , ' like a reproachful ghost ! ' 'I be oblige to announce myself , somehow ,' I reply . ' have I call you down from the star ? ' ' no ,' he answer . ' no . ' ' up from anywhere , then ? ' say I , take my seat near he . be look at the picture in the fire , ' he return . ' but you be spoile they for I , ' say I , as he stir it quickly with a piece of burn wood , strike out of it a train of red - hot spark that go career up the little chimney , and roar out into the air . ' you would not have see they , ' he return . 'I detest this mongrel time , neither day nor night . how late you be ! where have you be ? ' 'I have be take leave of my usual walk , ' say I . ' and I have be sit here , ' say , glance round the room , ' think that all the people we find so glad on the night of we come down , might - to judge from the present waste air of the place - be disperse , or dead , or come to I do not know what harm . , I wish to I have have a judicious father these last twenty year ! ' 'my dear , what be the matter ? ' 'I wish with all my soul I have be better guide ! ' he exclaim . 'I wish with all my soul I could guide myself better ! ' there be a passionate dejection in he manner that quite amaze I . he be more unlike himself
himself than I could have suppose possible . ' it would be better to be this poor Peggotty , or he lout of a nephew ,' he say , get up and lean moodily against the chimney - piece , with he face towards the fire , ' than to be myself , twenty time richer and twenty time wiser , and be the torment to myself that I have be , in this 's bark of a boat , within the last half - hour ! ' I be so confound by the alteration in he , that at first I could only observe he in silence , as he stand lean he head upon he hand , and look gloomily down at the fire . at length I beg he , with all the earnestness I feel , to tell I what have occur to cross he so unusually , and to let I sympathize with he , if I could not hope to advise he . before I have well conclude , he begin to laugh - fretfully at first , but soon with return gaiety . ' , it be nothing , ! nothing ! ' he reply . 'I tell you at the inn in , I be heavy company for myself , sometimes . I have be a nightmare to myself , just now - must have have one , I think . at odd dull time , nursery tales come up into the memory , unrecognize for what they be . I believe I have be confound myself with the bad boy who " do not care " , and become food for lions - a grander kind of go to the dog , I suppose . what old woman call the horror , have be creepe over I from head to foot . I have be afraid of myself . ' ' you be afraid of nothing else , I think , ' say I . ' perhaps not , and yet may have enough to be afraid of too ,' he answer . ' well ! so it go by ! I be not about to be hip again , ; but I tell you , my good fellow , once more , that it would have be well for I ( and for more than I ) if I have have a steadfast and judicious father ! ' he face be always full of expression , but I never see it express such a dark kind of earnestness as when he say these word , with he glance bend on the fire . 'So much for that ! ' he say , make as if he toss something light into the air , with he hand . " ' why , be go , I be a man again , " like . and now for dinner ! if I have not ( - like ) break up the feast with most admired disorder , . ' ' but where be they all , I wonder ! ' say I . ' know , ' say . 'After stroll to the ferry look for you , I stroll in here and find the place desert . that set I think , and you find I think . ' the advent of with a basket , explain how the house have happen to be empty . she have hurry out to buy something that be need , against 's return with the tide ; and have leave the door open in the meanwhile , lest and little Em'ly , with whom it be a early night , should come home while she be go . , after very much improve 's spirit by a cheerful salutation and a jocose embrace , take my arm , and hurrie I away . he have improve he own spirit , no less than 's , for they be again at they usual flow , and he be full of vivacious conversation as we go along . ' and so ,' he say , gaily , 'we abandon this buccaneer life tomorrow , do we ? ' ' so we agree ,' I return . ' and we place by the coach be take , you know . ' 'Ay ! there be no help for it , I suppose , ' say . 'I have almost forgotten that there be anything to do in the world but to go out toss on the sea here . I wish there be not . ' 'as long as the novelty should last , ' say I , laugh . ' like enough ,' he return ; ' though there be a sarcastic meaning in that observation for a amiable piece of innocence like my young friend . well ! I dare say I be a capricious fellow , . I know I be ; but while the iron be hot , I can strike it vigorously too . I could pass a reasonably good examination already , as a pilot in these water , I think . ' ' say you be a wonder ,' I return . 'a nautical phenomenon , eh ? ' laugh . ' indeed he do , and you know how truly ; I know how ardent you be in any pursuit you follow , and how easily you can master it . and that amaze I most in you , - that you should be contente with such fitful use of you power . ' ' Content ? ' he answer , merrily . 'I be never contente , except with you freshness , my gentle daisy . as to fitfulness , I have never lear not the art of bind myself to any of the wheel on which the Ixion of these day be turn round and round . I miss it somehow in a bad apprenticeship , and now
now do not care about it . - you know I have buy a boat down here ? ' ' what a extraordinary fellow you be , ! ' I exclaim , stop - for this be the first I have hear of it . ' when you may never care to come near the place again ! ' 'I do not know that , ' he return . 'I have take a fancy to the place . at all event , ' walk I briskly on , 'I have buy a boat that be for sale - a clipper , say ; and so she be - and will be master of she in my absence . ' ' now I understand you , ! ' say I , exultingly . ' you pretend to have buy it for yourself , but you have really do so to confer a benefit on he . I might have know as much at first , know you . my dear kind Steerforth , how can I tell you what I think of you generosity ? ' ' Tush ! ' he answer , turn red . ' the less say , the better . ' ' do not I know ? ' cry I , ' do not I say that there be not a joy , or sorrow , or any emotion of such honest heart that be indifferent to you ? ' ' aye , aye ,' he answer , ' you tell I all that . there let it rest . we have say enough ! ' afraid of offend he by pursue the subject when he make so light of it , I only pursue it in my thought as we go on at even a quicker pace than before . ' she must be newly rig , ' say , ' and I shall leave behind to see it do , that I may know she be quite complete . do I tell you have come down ? ' ' no . ' ' oh yes ! come down this morning , with a letter from my mother . ' as we look meet , I observe that he be pale even to he lip , though he look very steadily at I . I fear that some difference between he and he mother might have lead to he be in the frame of mind in which I have find he at the solitary fireside . I hint so . ' oh no ! ' he say , shak he head , and give a slight laugh . ' nothing of the sort ! yes . he be come down , that man of mine . ' ' the same as ever ? ' say I . ' the same as ever , ' say . ' distant and quiet as the . he shall see to the boat be fresh name . she be the " " now . what do care for ! I will have she christen again . ' ' by what name ? ' I ask . ' the " 'ly " . ' as he have continue to look steadily at I , I take it as a reminder that he object to be extoll for he consideration . I could not help show in my face how much it please I , but I say little , and he resume he usual smile , and seem relieved . ' but see here , ' he say , look before we , ' where the original little 'ly come ! and that fellow with she , eh ? upon my soul , he be a true knight . he never leave she ! ' be a boat - builder in these day , have improve a natural ingenuity in that handicraft , until he have become a skilled workman . he be in he working - dress , and look rug enough , but manly withal , and a very fit protector for the blooming little creature at he side . indeed , there be a frankness in he face , a honesty , and a undisguised show of he pride in she , and he love for she , which be , to I , the best of good look . I think , as they come towards we , that they be well match even in that particular . she withdraw she hand timidly from he arm as we stop to speak to they , and blush as she give it to and to I . when they pass on , after we have exchange a few word , she do not like to replace that hand , but , still appear timid and constrain , walk by herself . I think all this very pretty and engage , and seem to think so too , as we look after they fad away in the light of a young moon . suddenly there pass we - evidently follow they - a young woman whose approach we have not observe , but whose face I see as she go by , and think I have a faint remembrance of . she be lightly dress ; look bold , and haggard , and flaunt , and poor ; but seem , for the time , to have give all that to the wind which be blowing , and to have nothing in she mind but go after they . as the dark distant level , absorb they figure into itself , leave but itself visible between we and the sea and cloud , she figure disappear in like manner , still no nearer to they than before . ' that be a black shadow to be follow the girl , ' say , stand still ; ' what do it mean ? ' he speak in a low voice that sound
sound almost strange to I . ' she must have it in she mind to beg of they , I think , ' say I . 'A beggar would be no novelty , ' say ; ' but it be a strange thing that the beggar should take that shape tonight . ' ' why ? ' I ask . ' for no better reason , truly , than because I be think , ' he say , after a pause , 'or something like it , when it come by . where the do it come from , I wonder ! ' ' from the shadow of this wall , I think , ' say I , as we emerge upon a road on which a wall abut . ' it be gone ! ' he return , look over he shoulder . ' and all ill go with it . now for we dinner ! ' but he look again over he shoulder towards the sea - line glimmer afar off , and yet again . and he wonder about it , in some broken expression , several time , in the short remainder of we walk ; and only seem to forget it when the light of fire and candle shone upon we , seat warm and merry , at table . be there , and have he usual effect upon I . when I say to he that I hope and were well , he answer respectfully ( and of course respectably ) , that they be tolerably well , he thank I , and have send they compliment . this be all , and yet he seem to I to say as plainly as a man could say : ' you be very young , sir ; you be exceedingly young . ' we have almost finished dinner , when take a step or two towards the table , from the corner where he keep watch upon we , or rather upon I , as I feel , he say to he master : 'I beg you pardon , sir . be down here . ' ' who ? ' cry , much astonished . ' , . ' ' why , what on earth do she do here ? ' say . ' it appear to be she native part of the country , sir . she inform I that she make one of she professional visit here , every year , sir . I meet she in the street this afternoon , and she wish to know if she might have the honour of waiting on you after dinner , sir . ' ' do you know the Giantess in question , ? ' inquire . I be oblige to confess - I feel asham , even of be at this disadvantage before - that and I be wholly unacquainted . ' then you shall know she , ' say , ' for she be one of the seven wonder of the world . when come , show she in . ' I feel some curiosity and excitement about this lady , especially as burst into a fit of laugh when I refer to she , and positively refuse to answer any question of which i make she the subject . I remain , therefore , in a state of considerable expectation until the cloth have be remove some half a hour , and we be sit over we decanter of wine before the fire , when the door open , and , with he habitual serenity quite undisturbed , announce : ' ! ' I look at the doorway and see nothing . I be still look at the doorway , think that be a long while make she appearance , when , to my infinite astonishment , there come waddl round a sofa which stand between I and it , a pursy dwarf , of about forty or forty - five , with a very large head and face , a pair of roguish grey eye , and such extremely little arm , that , to enable herself to lay a finger archly against she snub nose , as she ogle , she be obliged to meet the finger half - way , and lay she nose against it . she ching , which be what be call a double ching , be so fat that it entirely swallow up the string of she bonnet , bow and all . Throat she have none ; waist she have none ; leg she have none , worth mention ; for though she be more than full - size down to where she waist would have be , if she have have any , and though she terminate , as human being generally do , in a pair of foot , she be so short that she stand at a common - size chair as at a table , rest a bag she carry on the seat . this lady - dress in a off - hand , easy style ; bring she nose and she forefinger together , with the difficulty I have describe ; stand with she head necessarily on one side , and , with one of she sharp eye shut up , make a uncommonly know face - after ogl for a few moment , break into a torrent of word . ' what ! my flower ! ' she pleasantly begin , shak she large head at he . ' you be there , be you ! oh , you naughty boy , fie for shame , what do you do so far away from home ? up to mischief , I will be bound . oh , you be a downy fellow , , so you be , and I be another , be not I ? , ha , ha ! you would have bet a hundred
hundred pound to five , now , that you would not have see I here , would not you ? bless you , man alive , I be everywhere . I be here and there , and where not , like the conjurer 's half - cry in the lady 's handkercher . talk of handkercher - and talk of lady - what a comfort you be to you bless mother , be not you , my dear boy , over one of my shoulders , and I do not say which ! ' untie she bonnet , at this passage of she discourse , throw back the string , and sit down , pante , on a footstool in front of the fire - make a kind of arbour of the dining table , which spread its mahogany shelter above she head . ' oh my star and what be - they - name ! ' she go on , clapp a hand on each of she little knee , and glance shrewdly at I , 'I be of too full a habit , that be the fact , . after a flight of stair , it give I as much trouble to draw every breath I want , as if it be a bucket of water . if you see I look out of a upper window , you would think I be a fine woman , would not you ? ' 'I should think that , wherever I see you , ' reply . 'Go along , you dog , do ! ' cry the little creature , make a whisk at he with the handkerchief with which she be wip she face , ' and do not be impudent ! but I give you my word and honour I be at 's last week - there be a woman ! how she wear ! - and himself come into the room where I be wait for she - there be a man ! how he wear ! and he wig too , for he be have it these ten year - and he go on at that rate in the complimentary line , that I begin to think I should be oblige to ring the bell . ! ha ! ha ! he be a pleasant wretch , but he want principle . ' ' what be you do for ? ' ask . ' that be tellings , my bless infant , ' she retort , tap she nose again , screw up she face , and twinkl she eye like a imp of supernatural intelligence . ' never you mind ! you would like to know whether I stop she hair from fall off , or dye it , or touch up she complexion , or improve she eyebrow , would not you ? and so you shall , my darling - when I tell you ! do you know what my great grandfather 's name be ? ' ' no , ' say . ' it be , my sweet pet , ' reply , ' and he come of a long line of Walkers , that I inherit all the from . ' I never beheld anything approach to 's wink except 's self - possession . she have a wonderful way too , when listen to what be say to she , or when wait for a answer to what she have say herself , of pause with she head cunningly on one side , and one eye turn up like a magpie 's . altogether I be lose in amazement , and sit staring at she , quite oblivious , I be afraid , of the law of politeness . she have by this time draw the chair to she side , and be busily engage in producing from the bag ( plunge in she short arm to the shoulder , at every dive ) a number of small bottle , sponge , comb , brush , bit of flannel , little pair of curling - iron , and other instrument , which she tumble in a heap upon the chair . from this employment she suddenly desiste , and say to , much to my confusion : ' who be you friend ? ' ' , ' say ; 'he want to know you . ' ' well , then , he shall ! I think he look as if he do ! ' return , waddl up to I , bag in hand , and laugh on I as she come . ' face like a peach ! ' stand on tiptoe to pinch my cheek as I sit . ' quite tempting ! I be very fond of peach . happy to make you acquaintance , , I be sure . ' I say that I congratulate myself on have the honour to make hers , and that the happiness be mutual . ' oh , my goodness , how polite we be ! ' exclaim , make a preposterous attempt to cover she large face with she morsel of a hand . ' what a world of gammon and spinnage it be , though , be not it ! ' this be address confidentially to both of we , as the morsel of a hand come away from the face , and bury itself , arm and all , in the bag again . ' what do you mean , ? ' say . ! ha ! ha ! what a refresh set of humbug we be , to be sure , be not we , my sweet child ? ' reply that morsel of a woman , feel in the bag with she head on one side and she eye in the air . ' look here ! ' take something out . ' scrap of the 's nails . turn topsy - turvy , I
I call he , for he name 's get all the letter in it , higgledy - piggledy . ' ' the be a client of yours , be he ? ' say . 'I believe you , my pet , ' reply . 'I keep he nail in order for he . twice a week ! finger and toe . ' ' he pay well , I hope ? ' say . ' pay , as he speak , my dear child - through the nose , ' reply . ' none of you close shaver the be not . you would say so , if you see he moustachio . re by nature , black by art . ' ' by you art , of course , ' say . wink assent . ' force to send for I . could not help it . the climate affect he dye ; it do very well in , but it be no go here . you never see such a rusty in all you born day as he be . like old iron ! ' ' be that why you call he a humbug , just now ? ' inquire . 'Oh , you be a broth of a boy , be not you ? ' return , shak she head violently . 'I say , what a set of humbug we be in general , and I show you the scrap of the 's nail to prove it . the 's nails do more for I in private family of the genteel sort , than all my talents put together . I always carry th'ey about . they be the best introduction . if cut the 's nail , she must be all right . I give 'em away to the young lady . they put th'ey in album , I believe . ! ha ! ha ! upon my life , " the whole social system " ( as the man call it when they make speeches in parliament ) be a system of 's nail ! ' say this least of woman , try to fold she short arm , and nodd she large head . laugh heartily , and I laugh too . continue all the time to shake she head ( which be very much on one side ) , and to look into the air with one eye , and to wink with the other . ' well , well ! ' she say , smit she small knee , and rise , ' this be not business . come , Steerforth , let 's explore the polar region , and have it over . ' she then select two or three of the little instrument , and a little bottle , and ask ( to my surprise ) if the table would bear . on 's reply in the affirmative , she push a chair against it , and begge the assistance of my hand , mount up , pretty nimbly , to the top , as if it be a stage . ' if either of you see my ankle , ' she say , when she be safely elevated , ' say so , and I will go home and destroy myself ! ' 'I do not , ' say . 'I do not , ' say I . ' well then , ' cry ,' I will consent to live . now , ducky , ducky , ducky , come to Mrs . bond and be kill . ' this be a invocation to to place himself under she hand ; who , accordingly , sit himself down , with he back to the table , and he laugh face towards I , and submit he head to she inspection , evidently for no other purpose than we entertainment . to see stand over he , look at he rich profusion of brown hair through a large round magnify glass , which she take out of she pocket , be a most amazing spectacle . ' you be a pretty fellow ! ' say , after a brief inspection . ' you would be as bald as a friar on the top of you head in twelve month , but for I . just half a minute , my young friend , and we will give you a polishing that shall keep you curl on for the next ten year ! ' with this , she tilte some of the contents of the little bottle on to one of the little bit of flannel , and , again impart some of the virtue of that preparation to one of the little brush , begin rub and scrape away with both on the crown of 's head in the busiest manner I ever witness , talk all the time . ' there be , the duke 's son , ' she say . ' you know ? ' pee round into he face . 'a little , ' say . ' what a man he be ! there be a whisker ! as to 's leg , if they be only a pair ( which they be not ) , they would defy competition . would you believe he try to do without I - in the life - guard , too ? ' ' ! ' say . ' it look like it . however , mad or sane , he try , ' return . ' what do he do , but , lo and behold you , he go into a perfumer 's shop , and want to buy a bottle of the . ' ' do ? ' say . ' do . but they have not get any of the . ' ' what be it ? something to drink ? ' ask . 'to drink ? ' return , stop to slap he cheek .
. 'to doctor he own moustachio with , you know . there be a woman in the shop - elderly female - quite a - who have never even hear of it by name . " Begge pardon , sir , " say the to , " it be not - not - not Rouge , be it ? " " , " say to the . " what the unmentionable to ear polite , do you think I want with rouge ? " " no offence , sir , " say the ; " we have it ask for by so many name , I think it might be . " now that , my child , ' continue , rub all the time as busily as ever , 'i another instance of the refresh humbug I be speak of . I do something in that way myself - perhaps a good deal - perhaps a little - sharp be the word , my dear boy - never mind ! ' ' in what way do you mean ? in the rouge way ? ' say . ' put this and that together , my tender pupil , ' return the wary Mowcher , touch she nose , ' work it by the rule of Secrets in all trade , and the product will give you the desire result . I say I do a little in that way myself . one Dowager , she call it lip - salve . another , she call it glove . another , she call it tucker - edging . another , she call it a fan . I call it whatever they call it . I supply it for th'ey , but we keep up the trick so , to one another , and make believe with such a face , that they have as soon think of lay it on , before a whole drawing - room , as before I . and when I wait upon th'ey , they will say to I sometimes - with it on - thick , and no mistake - " how be I look , ? be I pale ? " ! ha ! ha ! ha ! be not that refresh , my young friend ! ' I never do in my day behold anything like as she stand upon the dining table , intensely enjoy this refreshment , rub busily at 's head , and wink at I over it . ' ah ! ' she say . ' such thing be not much in demand hereabout . that set I off again ! I have not see a pretty woman since I have be here , . ' ' no ? ' say . ' not the ghost of one , ' reply . ' we could show she the substance of one , I think ? ' say , address he eye to mine . 'Eh , ? ' ' yes , indeed , ' say I . ' ? ' cry the little creature , glance sharply at my face , and then pee round at 's . ' Umph ? ' the first exclamation sound like a question put to both of we , and the second like a question put to only . she seem to have find no answer to either , but continue to rub , with she head on one side and she eye turn up , as if she be look for a answer in the air and be confident of its appear presently . 'A sister of yours , ? ' she cry , after a pause , and still keep the same look - out . ' aye , aye ? ' ' no , ' say , before I could reply . ' nothing of the sort . on the contrary , use - or I be much mistaken - to have a great admiration for she . ' ' why , have not he now ? ' return . ' be he fickle ? oh , for shame ! do he sip every flower , and change every hour , until Polly he passion requit ? - be she name ? ' the suddenness with which she pounce upon I with this question , and a search look , quite disconcert I for a moment . 'no , ,' I reply . ' she name be Emily . ' ' ? ' she cry exactly as before . ' Umph ? what a rattle I be ! , be not I volatile ? ' she tone and look imply something that be not agreeable to I in connexion with the subject . so I say , in a graver manner than any of we have yet assume : ' she be as virtuous as she be pretty . she be engage to be marry to a most worthy and deserve man in she own station of life . I esteem she for she good sense , as much as I admire she for she good look . ' ' well say ! ' cry . 'Hear , hear , hear ! now I will quench the curiosity of this little , my dear daisy , by leave she nothing to guess at . she be at present apprentice , , or article , or whatever it may be , to and , , , and so forth , in this town . do you observe ? and . the promise of which my friend have speak , be make and enter into with she cousin ; name , ; surname , Peggotty ; occupation , boat - builder ; also of this town . she live with a relative ; name , unknown ; surname , Peggotty ; occupation , seafar ; also of this town . she be the prettiest and most engage little fairy in the world
world . I admire she - as my friend do - exceedingly . if it be not that I might appear to disparage she intend , which I know my friend would not like , I would add , that to I she seem to be throw herself away ; that I be sure she might do better ; and that I swear she be bear to be a lady . ' listen to these word , which be very slowly and distinctly speak , with she head on one side , and she eye in the air as if she be still look for that answer . when he cease she become brisk again in a instant , and rattle away with surprising volubility . 'Oh ! and that be all about it , be it ? ' she exclaim , trimm he whisker with a little restless pair of scissors , that go glance round he head in all direction . ' very well : very well ! quite a long story . ought to end " and they liv happy ever afterwards " ; ought not it ? ah ! what be that game at forfeit ? I love my love with a e , because she be entice ; I hate she with a e , because she be engage . I take she to the sign of the exquisite , and treat she with a elopement , she name 's , and she live in the east ? ! ha ! ha ! , be not I volatile ? ' merely look at I with extravagant slyness , and not wait for any reply , she continue , without draw breath : ' there ! if ever any scapegrace be trim and touch up to perfection , you be , . if I understand any noddle in the world , I understand yours . do you hear I when I tell you that , my darling ? I understand yours , ' pee down into he face . ' now you may mizzle , jemmy ( as we say at ) , and if Copperfield will take the chair I will operate on he . ' ' what do you say , ? ' inquire , laugh , and resign he seat . ' will you be improve ? ' ' thank you , , not this evening . ' ' do not say no , ' return the little woman , look at I with the aspect of a connoisseur ; 'a little bit more eyebrow ? ' ' thank you ,' I return , ' some other time . ' ' have it carry half a quarter of a inch towards the temple , ' say . ' we can do it in a fortnight . ' ' no , I thank you . not at present . ' ' go in for a tip , ' she ur . ' no ? let 's get the scaffolding up , then , for a pair of whisker . come ! ' I could not help blush as I decline , for I feel we be on my weak point , now . but , find that I be not at present dispose for any decoration within the range of she art , and that I be , for the time be , proor against the blandishment of the small bottle which she hold up before one eye to enforce she persuasion , say we would make a beginning on a early day , and request the aid of my hand to descmend from she elevate station . thus assist , she skip down with much agility , and begin to tie she double ching into she bonnet . ' the fee , ' say , - ' ' five , ' reply , ' and dirt cheap , my chicken . be not I volatile , ? ' I reply politely : ' not at all . ' but I think she be rather so , when she toss up he two half - crown like a goblin pieman , catch they , drop they in she pocket , and give it a loud slap . ' that be the ! ' observ , stand at the chair again , and replace in the bag a miscellaneous collection of little object she have empty out of it . ' have I get all my trap ? it seem so . it will not do to be like long Ned , when they take he to church " to marry he to somebody " , as he say , and leave the bride behind . ! ha ! ha ! a wick rascal , , but droll ! now , I know I be go to break you heart , but I be force to leave you . you must call up all you fortitude , and try to bear it . good - bye , ! take care of yourself , jockey of ! how I have be ratt on ! it be all the fault of you two wretch . I forgive you ! " ! " - as the say for " good night " , when he first learn , and think it so like . " , " my duck ! ' with the bag sling over she arm , and ratt as she waddle away , she waddle to the door , where she stop to inquire if she should leave we a lock of she hair . ' be not I volatile ? ' she add , as a commentary on this offer , and , with she finger on she nose , depart . laugh to that degree , that it be impossible for I to help laugh too ; though I be not sure I should have do so , but for this inducement . when
when we have have we laugh quite out , which be after some time , he tell I that have quite a extensive connexion , and make herself useful to a variety of people in a variety of way . some people trifle with she as a mere oddity , he say ; but she be as shrewdly and sharply observant as anyone he know , and as long - head as she be short-armed . he tell I that what she have say of be here , and there , and everywhere , be true enough ; for she make little dart into the province , and seem to pick up customer everywhere , and to know everybody . I ask he what she disposition be : whether it be at all mischievous , and if she sympathy be generally on the right side of thing : but , not succeed in attract he attention to these question after two or three attempt , I forbore or forget to repeat they . he tell I instead , with much rapidity , a good deal about she skill , and she profit ; and about she be a scientific cupper , if I should ever have occasion for she service in that capacity . she be the principal theme of we conversation during the evening : and when we parte for the night call after I over the banister , ' swore ! ' as I go downstairs . I be surprise , when I come to 's house , to find walk up and down in front of it , and still more surprised to learn from he that little be inside . I naturally inquire why he be not there too , instead of pace the street by himself ? ' why , you see , ,' he rejoin , in a hesitating manner , ' 'ly , she be talk to some 'un in here . ' 'I should have thought , ' say I , smile , ' that that be a reason for you be in here too , . ' ' well , , in a general way , so ot would be ,' he return ; ' but look 'ee here , , ' lower he voice , and speak very gravely . ' it be a young woman , sir - a young woman , that 'ly know once , and doe not ought to know no more . ' when I hear these word , a light begin to fall upon the figure I have see follow they , some hour ago . ' it be a poor wurem , , ' say , 'a be trod under foot by all the town . up street and down street . the mowld of ' the churchyard do not hold any that the folk shrink away from , more . ' ' do I see she tonight , , on the sand , after we meet you ? ' ' keep we in sight ? ' say . ' it be like you do , . not that I know would then , she be theer , sir , but along of she creep soon arterward under 's little winder , when she see the light come , and whisper " they 'ly , Em'ly , for 's sake , have a woman 's heart towards I . I be once like you ! " those be solemn word , , fur to hear ! ' ' they be indeed , . what do 'ly do ? ' ' say 'ly , " , be it you ? oh , , can it be you ? " - for they have sit at work together , many a day , at 's . ' 'I recollect she now ! ' cry I , recalle one of the two girl I have see when I first go there . 'I recollect she quite well ! ' ' , ' say . ' two or three year older than , but be at the school with she . ' 'I never hear she name , ' say I . 'I do not mean to interrupt you . ' ' for the matter of ' that , , ' reply , ' all told a'most in they word , " Em'ly , Em'ly , for 's sake , have a woman 's heart towards I . I be once like you ! " she want to speak to . they 'ly could not speak to she theer , for she loving uncle be come home , and he would not - no , , ' say , with great earnestness , ' he could not , kind - yonatu ' , tender - hear as he be , see they two together , side by side , for all the treasure that be wreck in the sea . ' I feel how true this be . I know it , on the instant , quite as well as . ' so 'ly write in pencil on a bit of paper ,' he pursue , ' and give it to she out of ' winder to bring here . " show that , " she say , " to my aunt , , and she will set you down by she fire , for the love of I , till uncle be go out , and I can come . " by and by she tell I what I tell you , , and ask I to bring she . what can I do ? she doe not ought to know any such , but I can not deny she , when the tear be on she face . ' he put he hand into the breast of he shaggy jacket , and take out with great care a pretty little purse . ' and if I
I could deny she when the tear be on she face , , ' say , tenderly adjust it on the rough palm of he hand , ' how could I deny she when she give I this to carry for she - know what she bring it for ? such a toy as it be ! ' say , thoughtfully look on it . ' with such a little money in it , 'ly my dear . ' I shook he warmly by the hand when he have put it away again - for that be more satisfactory to I than say anything - and we walk up and down , for a minute or two , in silence . the door open then , and appear , beckon to to come in . I would have keep away , but she come after I , entreat I to come in too . even then , I would have avoid the room where they all be , but for it be be the neat - tile kitchen I have mention more than once . the door open immediately into it , I find myself among they before I consider whither I be go . the girl - the same I have see upon the sand - be near the fire . she be sit on the ground , with she head and one arm lie on a chair . I fancie , from the disposition of she figure , that 'ly have but newly risen from the chair , and that the forlorn head might perhaps have be lie on she lap . I see but little of the girl 's face , over which she hair fall loose and scatter , as if she have be disorder it with she own hand ; but I see that she be young , and of a fair complexion . have be cry . so have little Em'ly . not a word be speak when we first go in ; and the clock by the dresser seem , in the silence , to tick twice as loud as usual . 'ly speak first . ' want , ' she say to , 'to go to . ' ' why to ? ' return . he stand between they , look on the prostrate girl with a mixture of compassion for she , and of jealousy of she hold any companionship with she whom he love so well , which I have always remember distinctly . they both speak as if she be ill ; in a soft , suppress tone that be plainly hear , although it hardly rise above a whisper . 'Better there than here , ' say a third voice aloud - 's , though she do not move . ' no one know I there . everybody know I here . ' ' what will she do there ? ' inquire . she lift up she head , and look darkly round at he for a moment ; then lay it down again , and curve she right arm about she neck , as a woman in a fever , or in a agony of pain from a shot , might twist herself . ' she will try to do well , ' say little Em'ly . ' you do not know what she have say to we . do he - do they - aunt ? ' shook she head compassionately . 'I will try , ' say , ' if you will help I away . I never can do worse than I have do here . I may do better . oh ! ' with a dreadful shiver , ' take I out of these street , where the whole town know I from a child ! ' as 'ly hold out she hand to , I see he put in it a little canva bag . she take it , as if she think it be she purse , and make a step or two forward ; but find she mistake , come back to where he have retire near I , and show it to he . ' it be all yourn , 'ly ,' I could hear he say . 'I have not nowt in all the wureld that be not yourn , my dear . it be not of no delight to I , except for you ! ' the tear rise freshly in she eye , but she turn away and go to . what she give she , I do not know . I see she stooping over she , and put money in she bosom . she whisper something , as she ask be that enough ? ' more than enough , ' the other say , and take she hand and kiss it . then arise , and gather she shawl about she , cover she face with it , and weepe aloud , go slowly to the door . she stop a moment before go out , as if she would have utter something or turn back ; but no word pass she lip . make the same low , dreary , wretch moaning in she shawl , she go away . as the door close , little 'ly look at we three in a hurried manner and then hide she face in she hand , and fall to sobb . ' not , Em'ly ! ' say , tap she gently on the shoulder . ' not , my dear ! you doe not ought to cry so , pretty ! ' 'Oh , ! ' she exclaim , still weep pitifully , 'I be not so good a girl as I ought to be ! I know I have not the thankful heart , sometimes , I ought to have ! ' ' yes , yes , you have , I be sure ,
, ' say . ' no ! no ! no ! ' cry little Em'ly , sobb , and shake she head . 'I be not as good a girl as I ought to be . not near ! not near ! ' and still she cry , as if she heart would break . 'I try you love too much . I know I do ! ' she sob . 'I be often cross to you , and changeable with you , when I ought to be far different . you be never so to I . why be I ever so to you , when I should think of nothing but how to be grateful , and to make you happy ! ' ' you always make I so , ' say , 'my dear ! I be happy in the sight of you . I be happy , all day long , in the thought of you . ' 'Ah ! that be not enough ! ' she cry . ' that be because you be good ; not because I be ! oh , my dear , it might have be a better fortune for you , if you have be fond of someone else - of someone steadier and much worthier than I , who be all bound up in you , and never vain and changeable like I ! ' ' poor little tender - heart , ' say , in a low voice . ' have overset she , altogether . ' ' please , aunt , ' sob Em'ly , ' come here , and let I lay my head upon you . oh , I be very miserable tonight , aunt ! oh , I be not as good a girl as I ought to be . I be not , I know ! ' have hasten to the chair before the fire . Em'ly , with she arm around she neck , knee by she , look up most earnestly into she face . 'Oh , pray , aunt , try to help I ! , dear , try to help I ! , for the sake of old time , do , please , try to help I ! I want to be a better girl than I be . I want to feel a hundred time more thankful than I do . I want to feel more , what a bless thing it be to be the wife of a good man , and to lead a peaceful life . oh I , oh I ! oh my heart , my heart ! ' she drop she face on my old nurse 's breast , and , cease this supplication , which in its agony and grief be half a woman 's , half a child 's , as all she manner be ( be , in that , more natural , and better suit to she beauty , as I think , than any other manner could have be ) , weep silently , while my old nurse hush she like a infant . she get calmer by degree , and then we soothe she ; now talk encouragingly , and now jest a little with she , until she begin to raise she head and speak to we . so we get on , until she be able to smile , and then to laugh , and then to sit up , half asham ; while recal she stray ringlet , dry she eye , and make she neat again , lest she uncle should wonder , when she get home , why he darling have be cry . I see she do , that night , what I have never see she do before . I see she innocently kiss she choose husband on the cheek , and creep close to he bluff form as if it be she best support . when they go away together , in the wane moonlight , and I look after they , compare they departure in my mind with 's , I see that she hold he arm with both she hand , and still keep close to he . chapter 23 I Corroborate , and choose a profession when I awoke in the morning I think very much of little , and she emotion last night , after have leave . I feel as if I have come into the knowledge of those domestic weakness and tenderness in a sacred confidence , and that to disclose they , even to , would be wrong . I have no gentler fee towards anyone than towards the pretty creature who have be my playmate , and whom I have always be persuade , and shall always be persuade , to my dying day , I then devotedly love . the repetition to any ears - even to 's - of what she have be unable to repress when she heart lay open to I by a accident , I feel would be a rough deed , unworthy of myself , unworthy of the light of we pure childhood , which I always see encircle she head . I make a resolution , therefore , to keep it in my own breast ; and there it give she image a new grace . while we be at breakfast , a letter be deliver to I from my aunt . as it contain matter on which I think could advise I as well as anyone , and on which I know I should be delighted to consult he , I resolve to make it a subject of discussion on we journey home . for the present we have enough to do , in take leave of all we friend . be far from be the last among they , in he regret at we departure ; and I believe would even have
have open the box again , and sacrifice another guinea , if it would have keep we eight - and - forty hour in . and all she family be full of grief at we go . the whole house of and turn out to bid we good - bye ; and there be so many seafar volunteer in attendance on , when we portmanteaux go to the coach , that if we have have the baggage of a regiment with we , we should hardly have want porter to carry it . in a word , we depart to the regret and admiration of all concerned , and leave a great many people very sorry behind . do you stay long here , ? ' say I , as he stand wait to see the coach start . 'no , sir , ' he reply ; ' probably not very long , sir . ' ' he can hardly say , just now , ' observe , carelessly . ' he know what he have to do , and he will do it . ' ' that I be sure he will , ' say I . touch he hat in acknowledgement of my good opinion , and I feel about eight year old . he touch it once more , wish we a good journey ; and we leave he stand on the pavement , as respectable a mystery as any pyramid in . for some little time we hold no conversation , Steerforth be unusually silent , and I be sufficiently engage in wondering , within myself , when I should see the old place again , and what new change might happen to I or they in the meanwhile . at length Steerforth , become gay and talkative in a moment , as he could become anything he like at any moment , pull I by the arm : ' find a voice , . what about that letter you be speak of at breakfast ? ' 'Oh ! ' say I , take it out of my pocket . ' it be from my aunt . ' ' and what do she say , require consideration ? ' ' why , she remind I , , ' say I , ' that I come out on this expedition to look about I , and to think a little . ' ' which , of course , you have do ? ' ' indeed I can not say I have , particularly . to tell you the truth , I be afraid I have forget it . ' ' well ! look about you now , and make up for you negligence , ' say . ' look to the right , and you will see a flat country , with a good deal of marsh in it ; look to the left , and you will see the same . look to the front , and you will find no difference ; look to the rear , and there it be still . ' I laugh , and reply that I see no suitable profession in the whole prospect ; which be perhaps to be attribute to its flatness . ' what say we aunt on the subject ? ' inquire , glance at the letter in my hand . ' do she suggest anything ? ' ' why , yes , ' say I . ' she ask I , here , if I think I should like to be a proctor ? what do you think of it ? ' ' well , I do not know , ' reply , coolly . ' you may as well do that as anything else , I suppose ? ' I could not help laugh again , at he balancing all callings and profession so equally ; and I tell he so . ' what be a proctor , ? ' say I . ' why , he be a sort of monkish attorney , ' reply . ' he be , to some fad court hold in 's , - a lazy old nook near 's - what solicitor be to the court of law and equity . he be a functionary whose existence , in the natural course of thing , would have terminate about two hundred year ago . I can tell you best what he be , by tell you what doctor 's Commons be . it be a little out - of - the - way place , where they administer what be call ecclesiastical law , and play all kind of trick with obsolete old monster of act of parliament , which three - fourt of the world know nothing about , and the other fourth suppose to have be dug up , in a fossil state , in the day of the . it be a place that have a ancient monopoly in suits about people 's will and people 's marriage , and dispute among ship and boat . ' ' Nonsense , ! ' I exclaim . ' you do not mean to say that there be any affinity between nautical matter and ecclesiastical matters ? ' 'I do not , indeed , my dear boy ,' he return ; ' but I mean to say that they be manage and decide by the same set of people , down in that same doctor ' Commons . you shall go there one day , and find they blunder through half the nautical term in young 's dictionary , apropo of the " " have run down the " " , or and the boatman have put off in a gale of wind with a anchor and cable to the " " in distress ; and you shall go there another day , and find they deep in the evidence , pro and con , respecte a clergyman
clergyman who have misbehave himself ; and you shall find the judge in the nautical case , the advocate in the clergyman 's case , or contrariwise . they be like actor : now a man be a judge , and now he be not a judge ; now he be one thing , now he be another ; now he be something else , change and change about ; but it be always a very pleasant , profitable little affair of private theatrical , present to a uncommonly select audience . ' ' but advocate and proctor be not one and the same ? ' say I , a little puzzle . ' be they ? ' ' no , ' return , ' the advocate be civilian - man who have take a doctor 's degree at college - which be the first reason of my know anything about it . the proctor employ the advocate . both get very comfortable fee , and altogether they make a mighty snug little party . on the whole , I would recommend you to take to doctors 's Commons kindly , . they plume they - selve on they gentility there , I can tell you , if that be any satisfaction . ' I make allowance for 's light way of treat the subject , and , consider it with reference to the staid air of gravity and antiquity which I associate with that 'lazy old nook near 's ' , do not feel indispose towards my aunt 's suggestion ; which she leave to my free decision , make no scruple of tell I that it have occur to she , on she lately visit she own proctor in 's Commons for the purpose of settling she will in my favour . ' that be a laudable proceeding on the part of we aunt , at all event , ' say , when I mention it ; ' and one deserving of all encouragement . , my advice be that you take kindly to 's Commons . ' I quite make up my mind to do so . I then tell Steerforth that my aunt be in town await I ( as I find from she letter ) , and that she have take lodging for a week at a kind of private hotel at 's , where there be a stone staircase , and a convenient door in the roof ; my aunt be firmly persuade that every house in be go to be bur not down every night . we achieve the rest of we journey pleasantly , sometimes recurr to 's , and anticipate the distant day when I should be a proctor there , which picture in a variety of humorous and whimsical light , that make we both merry . when we come to we journey 's end , he go home , engage to call upon I next day but one ; and I drive to 's , where I find my aunt up , and wait supper . if I have be round the world since we parte , we could hardly have be better pleased to meet again . my aunt cry outright as she embrace I ; and say , pretend to laugh , that if my poor mother have be alive , that silly little creature would have she tear , she have no doubt . ' so you have leave behind , aunt ? ' say I . 'I be sorry for that . ah , , how do you do ? ' as curtsy , hope I be well , I observe my aunt 's visage lengthen very much . 'I be sorry for it , too , ' say my aunt , rub she nose . 'I have have no peace of mind , , since I have be here . ' before I could ask why , she tell I . 'I be convinced , ' say my aunt , lay she hand with melancholy firmness on the table , ' that 's character be not a character to keep the donkey off . I be confident he want strength of purpose . I ought to have leave at home , instead , and then my mind might perhaps have be at ease . if ever there be a donkey trespasse on my green , ' say my aunt , with emphasis , ' there be one this afternoon at four o'clock . a cold feeling come over I from head to foot , and I know it be a donkey ! ' I try to comfort she on this point , but she reject consolation . ' it be a donkey , ' say my aunt ; ' and it be the one with the stumpy tail which that murder sister of a woman rode , when she come to my house . ' this have be , ever since , the only name my aunt know for . ' if there be any Donkey in , whose audacity it be harder to I to bear than another ' , that , ' say my aunt , strike the table , ' be the animal ! ' venture to suggest that my aunt might be disturb herself unnecessarily , and that she believe the donkey in question be then engage in the sand - and - gravel line of business , and be not available for purpose of trespass . but my aunt would not hear of it . be comfortably serve and hot , through my aunt 's room be very high up - whether that she might have more stone stair for she money , or might be nearer to the door in the roof , I do not know - and consiste of a roast fowl , a steak , and some vegetable , to all of which I do ample
ample justice , and which be all excellent . but my aunt have she own idea concern provision , and ate but little . 'I suppose this unfortunate fowl be bear and bring up in a cellar , ' say my aunt , ' and never take the air except on a hackney coach - stand . I hope the steak may be beef , but I do not believe it . nothing be genuine in the place , in my opinion , but the dirt . ' ' do not you think the fowl may have come out of the country , aunt ? ' I hint . ' certainly not , ' return my aunt . ' it would be no pleasure to a tradesman to sell anything which be what he pretend it be . ' I do not venture to controvert this opinion , but I make a good supper , which it greatly satisfi she to see I do . when the table be cleared , assist she to arrange she hair , to put on she nightcap , which be of a smarter construction than usual ( 'in case of fire ' , my aunt say ) , and to fold she gow back over she knee , these be she usual preparation for warming herself before go to bed . I then make she , accord to certain establish regulation from which no deviation , however slight , could ever be permit , a glass of hot wine and water , and a slice of toast cut into long thing strips . with these accompaniment we be leave alone to finish the evening , my aunt sit opposite to I drink she wine and water ; soak she strips of toast in it , one by one , before eat they ; and look benignantly on I , from among the border of she nightcap . ' well , ,' she begin , ' what do you think of the proctor plan ? or have you not begin to think about it yet ? ' 'I have think a good deal about it , my dear aunt , and I have talk a good deal about it with . I like it very much indeed . I like it exceedingly . ' ' come ! ' say my aunt . ' that be cheer ! ' 'I have only one difficulty , aunt . ' ' say what it be , , ' she return . ' why , I want to ask , aunt , as this seem , from what I understand , to be a limited profession , whether my entrance into it would not be very expensive ? ' ' it will cost , ' return my aunt , 'to article you , just a thousand pound . ' ' now , my dear aunt , ' say I , draw my chair nearer , 'I be uneasy in my mind about that . it be a large sum of money . you have expend a great deal on my education , and have always be as liberal to I in all thing as it be possible to be . you have be the soul of generosity . surely there be some way in which i might begin life with hardly any outlay , and yet begin with a good hope of get on by resolution and exertion . be you sure that it would not be better to try that course ? be you certain that you can afford to part with so much money , and that it be right that it should be so expend ? I only ask you , my second mother , to consider . be you certain ? ' my aunt finish eat the piece of toast on which she be then engage , look I full in the face all the while ; and then set she glass on the chimney - piece , and fold she hand upon she fold skirt , reply as follow : ' trot , my child , if I have any object in life , it be to provide for you be a good , a sensible , and a happy man . I be bend upon it - so be . I should like some people that I know to hear 's conversation on the subject . its sagacity be wonderful . but no one know the resource of that man 's intellect , except myself ! ' she stop for a moment to take my hand between hers , and go on : ' it be in vain , , to recall the past , unless it work some influence upon the present . perhaps I might have be better friend with you poor father . perhaps I might have be better friend with that poor child you mother , even after you sister disappoint I . when you come to I , a little runaway boy , all dusty and way - worn , perhaps I think so . from that time until now , , you have ever be a credit to I and a pride and a pleasure . I have no other claim upon my means ; at least ' - here to my surprise she hesitate , and be confused - ' no , I have no other claim upon my means - and you be my adopted child . only be a loving child to I in my age , and bear with my whim and fancie ; and you will do more for a old woman whose prime of life be not so happy or conciliat as it might have be , than ever that old woman do for you . ' it be the first time i have hear my aunt refer to she past history . there be a magnanimity in she quiet way of
of do so , and of dismiss it , which would have exalt she in my respect and affection , if anything could . ' all be agree and understand between we , now , , ' say my aunt , ' and we need talk of this no more . give I a kiss , and we will go to the Commons after breakfast tomorrow . ' we have a long chat by the fire before we go to bed . I sleep in a room on the same floor with my aunt 's , and be a little disturbed in the course of the night by she knocke at my door as often as she be agitate by a distant sound of hackney - coach or market - cart , and inquire , ' if I hear the engines ? ' but towards morning she sleep better , and suffer I to do so too . at about mid-day , we set out for the office of and , in 's . my aunt , who have this other general opinion in reference to , that every man she see be a pickpocket , give I she purse to carry for she , which have ten guinea in it and some silver . we make a pause at the toy shop in , to see the giant of 's strike upon the bell - we have time we go , so as to catch they at it , at twelve o'clock - and then go on towards , and 's . we be cross to the former place , when I find that my aunt greatly accelerate she speed , and look frightened . I observ , at the same time , that a lower ill -dressed man who have stop and star at we in passing , a little before , be come so close after we as to brush against she . ' trot ! my dear trot ! ' cry my aunt , in a terrified whisper , and press my arm . 'I do not know what I be to do . ' ' do not be alarm , ' say I . ' there be nothing to be afraid of . step into a shop , and I will soon get rid of this fellow . ' 'no , no , child ! ' she return . ' do not speak to he for the world . I entreat , I order you ! ' ' , aunt ! ' say I . ' he be nothing but a sturdy beggar . ' ' you do not know what he be ! ' reply my aunt . ' you do not know who he be ! you do not know what you say ! ' we have stop in a empty door - way , while this be pass , and he have stop too . ' do not look at he ! ' say my aunt , as I turn my head indignantly , ' but get I a coach , my dear , and wait for I in 's . ' ' wait for you ? ' I reply . ' yes , ' rejoin my aunt . 'I must go alone . I must go with he . ' ' with he , aunt ? this man ? ' 'I be in my sensis , ' she reply , ' and I tell you I must . get mea coach ! ' however much astonished I might be , I be sensible that I have no right to refuse compliance with such a peremptory command . I hurry away a few pace , and call a hackney - chariot which be pass empty . almost before I could let down the step , my aunt spring in , I do not know how , and the man follow . she wav she hand to I to go away , so earnestly , that , all confound as I be , I turn from they at once . in do so , I hear she say to the coachman , ' drive anywhere ! drive straight on ! ' and presently the chariot pass I , go up the hill . what have tell I , and what I have suppose to be a delusion of he , now come into my mind . I could not doubt that this person be the person of whom he have make such mysterious mention , though what the nature of he hold upon my aunt could possibly be , I be quite unable to imagine . after half a hour 's cool in the churchyard , I see the chariot come back . the driver stop beside I , and my aunt be sit in it alone . she have not yet sufficientely recover from she agitation to be quite prepare for the visit we have to make . she desire I to get into the chariot , and to tell the coachman to drive slowly up and down a little while . she say no more , except , ' my dear child , never ask I what it be , and do not refer to it , ' until she have perfectly regain she composure , when she tell I she be quite herself now , and we might get out . on she give I she purse to pay the driver , I find that all the guinea be gone , and only the loose silver remain . doctor ' Commons be approach by a little low archway . before we have take many pace down the street beyond it , the noise of the city seem to melt , as if by magic , into a softened distance . a few dull court and narrow way bring we to the sky - light office of and ; in the vestibule
vestibule of which temple , accessible to pilgrim without the ceremony of knocking , three or four clerk be at work as copyist . one of these , a little dry man , sit by himself , who wear a stiff brown wig that look as if it be make of gingerbread , rise to receive my aunt , and show we into 's room . ' 's in , , ' say the dry man ; ' it be a day ; but it be close by , and I will send for he directly . ' as we be leave to look about we while be fetch , I avail myself of the opportunity . the furniture of the room be old - fashioned and dusty ; and the green baize on the top of the writing - table have lose all its colour , and be as wither and pale as a old pauper . there be a great many bundle of papers on it , some endorse as allegations , and some ( to my surprise ) as , and some as be in the , and some in the , and some in the , and some in the , and some in the 's Court ; give I occasion to wonder much , how many court there might be in the gross , and how long it would take to understand they all . besides these , there be sundry immense manuscript book of evidence take on affidavit , strongly bound , and tie together in massive set , a set to each cause , as if every cause be a history in ten or twenty volume . all this look tolerably expensive , I think , and give I a agreeable notion of a proctor 's business . I be cast my eye with increase complacency over these and many similar object , when hasty footstep be hear in the room outside , and , in a black gown trim with white fur , come hurrie in , take off he hat as he come . he be a little light - haire gentleman , with undeniable boot , and the stiffest of white cravat and shirt - collar . he be buttone up , mighty trim and tight , and must have take a great deal of pain with he whisker , which be accurately curl . he gold watch - chain be so massive , that a fancy come across I , that he ought to have a sinewy golden arm , to draw it out with , like those which be put up over the goldbeater 's shop . he be get up with such care , and be so stiff , that he could hardly bend himself ; be oblige , when he glance at some papers on he desk , after sit down in he chair , to move he whole body , from the bottom of he spine , like punch . I have previously be present by my aunt , and have be courteously receive . he now say : ' and so , , you think of enter into we profession ? I casually mention to , when I have the pleasure of a interview with she the other day , ' - with another inclination of he body - punch again - ' that there be a vacancy here . be good enough to mention that she have a nephew who be she peculiar care , and for whom she be seek to provide genteelly in life . that nephew , I believe , I have now the pleasure of ' - punch again . I bow my acknowledgement , and say , my aunt have mention to I that there be that open , and that I believe I should like it very much . that I be strongly inclin to like it , and have take immediately to the proposal . that I could not absolutely pledge myself to like it , until I know something more about it . that although it be little else than a matter of form , I presume I should have a opportunity of try how I like it , before I bound myself to it irrevocably . ' oh surely ! surely ! ' say . ' we always , in this house , propose a month - a initiatory month . I should be happy , myself , to propose two month - three - a indefinite period , in fact - but I have a partner . . ' ' and the premium , sir ,' I return , 'is a thousand pound ? ' ' and the premium , include , be a thousand pound , ' say . ' as I have mention to , I be actuate by no mercenary consideration ; few man be less so , I believe ; but have he opinion on these subject , and I be bound to respect 's opinion . think a thousand pound too little , in short . ' 'I suppose , sir , ' say I , still desire to spare my aunt , ' that it be not the custom here , if a article clerk be particularly useful , and make himself a perfect master of he profession ' - I could not help blush , this look so like praise myself - 'I suppose it be not the custom , in the later year of he time , to allow he any - ' , by a great effort , just lift he head far enough out of he cravat to shake it , and answer , anticipat the word ' salary ' : ' no . I will not say what consideration I might give to that point myself , , if I be unfettered . be immovable . ' I be quite dismay by the
the idea of this terrible . but I find out afterwards that he be a mild man of a heavy temperament , whose place in the business be to keep himself in the background , and be constantly exhibit by name as the most obdurate and ruthless of man . if a clerk want he salary raise , would not listen to such a proposition . if a client be slow to settle he bill of cost , be resolve to have it pay ; and however painful these thing might be ( and always be ) to the feeling of , would have he bond . the heart and hand of the good angel Spenlow would have be always open , but for the restraining demon Jorkins . as I have grow older , I think I have have experience of some other house do business on the principle of and ! it be settle that I should begin my month 's probation as soon as I please , and that my aunt need neither remain in town nor return at its expiration , as the article of agreement , of which I be to be the subject , could easily be send to she at home for she signature . when we have get so far , offer to take I into then and there , and show I what sort of place it be . as I be willing enough to know , we go out with this object , leave my aunt behind ; who would trust herself , she say , in no such place , and who , I think , regard all court of law as a sort of powder -mill that might blow up at any time . conduct I through a paved courtyard form of grave brick house , which I infer , from the 's name upon the door , to be the official abiding - place of the learn advocate of whom have tell I ; and into a large dull room , not unlike a chapel to my think , on the left hand . the upper part of this room be fence off from the rest ; and there , on the two side of a raise platform of the horse - shoe form , sit on easy old - fashioned dining - room chair , be sundry gentleman in red gown and grey wig , whom I find to be the aforesaid . Blink over a little desk like a pulpit - desk , in the curve of the horse - shoe , be a old gentleman , whom , if I have see he in a aviary , I should certainly have take for a owl , but who , I learn , be the presiding judge . in the space within the horse - shoe , lower than these , that be to say , on about the level of the floor , be sundry other gentleman , of 's rank , and dress like he in black gown with white fur upon they , sit at a long green table . they cravat be in general stiff , I think , and they look haughty ; but in this last respect I presently conceive I have do they a injustice , for when two or three of they have to rise and answer a question of the presiding dignitary , I never see anything more sheepish . the public , represent by a boy with a comforter , and a shabby - genteel man secretly eat crumb out of he coat pocket , be warm itself at a stove in the centre of the court . the languid stillness of the place be only break by the chirping of this fire and by the voice of one of the doctor , who be wander slowly through a perfect library of evidence , and stop to put up , from time to time , at little roadside inns of argument on the journey . altogether , I have never , on any occasion , make one at such a cosey , dosey , old - fashioned , time - forgotten , sleepy - head little family - party in all my life ; and I feel it would be quite a soothing opiate to belong to it in any character - except perhaps as a suitor . very well satisfied with the dreamy nature of this retreat , I inform Spenlow that I have see enough for that time , and we rejoin my aunt ; in company with whom I presently depart from the , feel very young when I go out of and 's , on account of the clerk pok one another with they pens to point I out . we arrive at 's without any new adventure , except encounter a unlucky donkey in a costermonger 's cart , who suggest painful associations to my aunt . we have another long talk about my plan , when we be safely house ; and as I know she be anxious to get home , and , between fire , food , and pickpocket , could never be consider at she ease for half - a - hour in , I urge she not to be uncomfortable on my account , but to leave I to take care of myself . 'I have not be here a week tomorrow , without consider that too , my dear , ' she return . ' there be a furnished little set of chamber to be let in the , , which ought to suit you to a marvel . ' with this brief introduction , she produce from she pocket a advertisement , carefully cut out of a newspaper , set forth that in in the there be to be let furnish , with a view of the river , a singularly desirable , and
and compact set of chamber , form a genteel residence for a young gentleman , a member of one of the of , or otherwise , with immediate possession . term moderate , and could be take for a month only , if require . ' why , this be the very thing , aunt ! ' say I , flush with the possible dignity of live in chamber . ' then come , ' reply my aunt , immediately resume the bonnet she have a minute before laid aside . ' we will go and look at 'em . ' away we go . the advertisement direct we to apply to on the premise , and we ring the area bell , which we suppose to communicate with . it be not until we have ring three or four time that we could prevail on to communicate with we , but at last she appear , be a stout lady with a flounce of flannel petticoat below a nankeen gown . ' let we see these chamber of yours , if you please , ma 'am , ' say my aunt . ' for this gentleman ? ' say , feel in she pocket for she key . ' yes , for my nephew , ' say my aunt . ' and a sweet set they be for sich ! ' say . so we go upstairs . they be on the top of the house - a great point with my aunt , be near the fire - escape - and consist of a little half - blind entry where you could see hardly anything , a little stone - blind pantry where you could see nothing at all , a sitting - room , and a bedroom . the furniture be rather faded , but quite good enough for I ; and , sure enough , the river be outside the window . as I be delighte with the place , my aunt and withdraw into the pantry to discuss the term , while I remain on the sitting - room sofa , hardly da to think it possible that I could be destin to live in such a noble residence . after a single combat of some duration they return , and I see , to my joy , both in 's countenance and in my aunt 's , that the deed be done . ' be it the last occupant 's furniture ? ' inquire my aunt . ' yes , it be , ma 'am , ' say . ' what be become of he ? ' ask my aunt . be take with a troublesome cough , in the midst of which she articulat with much difficulty . ' he be take ill here , ma 'am , and - ugh ! ugh ! ugh ! dear I ! - and he die ! ' ' hey ! what do he die of ? ' ask my aunt . ' well , ma 'am , he die of drink , ' say , in confidence . ' and smoke . ' ' smoke ? you do not mean chimney ? ' say my aunt . 'no , ma 'am , ' return . ' Cigar and pipe . ' ' that be not catch , , at any rate , ' remark my aunt , turn to I . ' no , indeed , ' say I . in short , my aunt , see how enraptured I be with the premise , take they for a month , with leave to remain for twelve month when that time be out . be to find linen , and to cook ; every other necessary be already provide ; and expressly intimate that she should always yearn towards I as a son . I be to take possession the day after tomorrow , and say , thank she have now find summun she could care for ! on we way back , my aunt inform I how she confidently trust that the life I be now to lead would make I firm and self - reliant , which be all I want . she repeat this several time next day , in the interval of we arrange for the transmission of my clothes and book from 's ; relative to which , and to all my late holiday , I write a long letter to , of which my aunt take charge , as she be to leave on the succeed day . not to lengthen these particular , I need only add , that she make a handsome provision for all my possible want during my month of trial ; that , to my great disappointment and hers too , do not make he appearance before she go away ; that I see she safely seate in the coach , exult in the come discomfiture of the vagrant donkey , with at she side ; and that when the coach be gone , I turn my face to the , ponder on the old day when I use to robe about its subterranean arch , and on the happy change which have bring I to the surface . chapter 24 my first dissipation it be a wonderfully fine thing to have that lofy castle to myself , and to feel , when I shut my outer door , like , when he have get into he fortification , and pull he ladder up after he . it be a wonderfully fine thing to walk about town with the key of my house in my pocket , and to know that I could ask any fellow to come home , and make quite sure of its be inconvenient to nobody , if it be not so to I . it be a wonderfully fine thing to let myself in and out , and to come
come and go without a word to anyone , and to ring Crupp up , gas , from the depth of the earth , when I want she - and when she be dispose to come . all this , I say , be wonderfully fine ; but I must say , too , that there be time when it be very dreary . it be fine in the morning , particularly in the fine morning . it look a very fresh , free life , by daylight : still fresher , and more free , by sunlight . but as the day decline , the life seem to go down too . I do not know how it be ; it seldom look well by candle - light . I want somebody to talk to , then . I miss . I find a tremendous blank , in the place of that smile repository of my confidence . appear to be a long way off . I think about my predecessor , who have die of drink and smoke ; and I could have wish he have be so good as to live , and not bother I with he decease . after two day and night , I feel as if I have liv there for a year , and yet I be not a hour older , but be quite as much torment by my own youthfulness as ever . not yet appear , which induce I to apprehend that he must be ill , I leave the early on the third day , and walk out to . be very glad to see I , and say that he have go away with one of he friend to see another who live near , but that she expect he to return tomorrow . I be so fond of he , that I feel quite jealous of he friend . as she press I to stay to dinner , I remain , and I believe we talk about nothing but he all day . I tell she how much the people like he at , and what a delightful companion he have be . be full of hint and mysterious question , but take a great interest in all we proceedings there , and say , ' be it really though ? ' and so forth , so often , that she get everything out of I she want to know . she appearance be exactly what I have describe it , when I first see she ; but the society of the two lady be so agreeable , and come so natural to I , that I feel myself fall a little in love with she . I could not help think , several time in the course of the evening , and particularly when I walk home at night , what delightful company she would be in . I be take my coffee and roll in the morning , before go to the Commons - and I may observe in this place that it be surprising how much coffee use , and how weak it be , consider - when himself walk in , to my unbounded joy . ' my dear , ' cry I , 'I begin to think I should never see you again ! ' be carry off , by force of arm , ' say , ' the very next morning after I get home . why , , what a rare old bachelor you be here ! ' I show he over the establishment , not omitt the pantry , with no little pride , and he commend it highly . 'I tell you what , old boy ,' he add , 'I shall make quite a town - house of this place , unless you give I notice to quit . ' this be a delightful hearing . I tell he if he wait for that , he would have to wait till doomsday . ' but you shall have some breakfast ! ' say I , with my hand on the bell - rope , ' and . Crupp shall make you some fresh coffee , and I will toast you some bacon in a bachelor 's Dutch - oven , that I have get here . ' ' no , no ! ' say . ' do not ring ! I can not ! I be go to breakfast with one of these fellows who be at the , in . ' ' but you will come back to dinner ? ' say I . 'I can not , upon my life . there be nothing I should like better , but I must remain with these two fellow . we be all three off together tomorrow morning . ' ' then bring they here to dinner ,' I return . ' do you think they would come ? ' 'Oh ! they would come fast enough , ' say ; ' but we should inconvenience you . you have better come and dine with we somewhere . ' I would not by any mean consent to this , for it occur to I that I really ought to have a little house - warming , and that there never could be a better opportunity . I have a new pride in my room after he approval of they , and burn with a desire to develop they utmost resource . I therefore make he promise positively in the name of he two friend , and we appoint six o'clock as the dinner - hour . when he be gone , I ring for , and acquaint she with my desperate design . say , in the first place , of course it be well kny she could not be expect to wait , but she know a handy young man , who she think could be
be prevail upon to do it , and whose term would be five shilling , and what I please . I say , certainly we would have he . next say it be clear she could not be in two place at once ( which I feel to be reasonable ) , and that 'a young gal ' statione in the pantry with a bedroom candle , there never to desist from wash plate , would be indispensable . I say , what would be the expense of this young female ? and say she suppose eighteenpence would neither make I nor break I . I say I suppose not ; and that be settled . then say , now about the dinner . it be a remarkable instance of want of forethotch on the part of the ironmonger who have make 's kitchen fireplace , that it be capable of cook nothing but chop and mash potatoe . as to a fish - kittle , Crupp say , well ! would I only come and look at the range ? she could not say fairer than that . would I come and look at it ? as I should not have be much the wiser if I have look at it , I decline , and say , ' never mind fish . ' but say , do not say that ; oyster be in , why not they ? so that be settled . then say what she would recommend would be this . a pair of hot roast fowl - from the pastry - cake 's ; a dish of stew beef , with vegetable - from the pastry - cook 's ; two little corner thing , as a raise pie and a dish of kidney - from the pastrycook 's ; a tart , and ( if I like ) a shape of jelly - from the pastrycook 's . this , say , would leave she at full liberty to concentrate she mind on the potatoe , and to serve up the cheese and celery as she could wish to see it do . I act on 's opinion , and give the order at the pastry - cook 's myself . walk along the , afterwards , and observe a hard mottled substance in the window of a ham and beef shop , which resemble marble , but be label ' ' , I go in and buy a slab of it , which I have since see reason to believe would have suffice for fifteen people . this preparation , , after some difficulty , consent to warm up ; and it shrink so much in a liquid state , that we find it what call ' rather a tight fit ' for four . these preparations happily complete , I buy a little dessert in , and give a rather extensive order at a retail wine - merchant 's in that vicinity . when I come home in the afternoon , and see the bottle draw up in a square on the pantry floor , they look so numerous ( though there be two missing , which make very uncomfortable ) , that I be absolutely frightened at they . one of 's friend be name , and the other . they be both very gay and lively fellow ; , something older than ; , youthful - look , and I should say not more than twenty . I observ that the latter always spoke of himself indefinitely , as 'a man ' , and seldom or never in the first person singular . 'a man might get on very well here , , ' say - mean himself . ' it be not a bad situation , ' say I , ' and the room be really commodious . ' 'I hope you have both bring appetite with you ? ' say . ' upon my honour , ' return , ' town seem to sharpen a man 's appetite . a man be hungry all day long . a man be perpetually eat . ' be a little embarrassed at first , and feel much too young to preside , I make take the head of the table when dinner be announce , and seate myself opposite to he . everything be very good ; we do not spare the wine ; and he exert himself so brilliantly to make the thing pass off well , that there be no pause in we festivity . I be not quite such good company during dinner as I could have wish to be , for my chair be opposite the door , and my attention be distract by observe that the handy young man go out of the room very often , and that he shadow always present itself , immediately afterwards , on the wall of the entry , with a bottle at its mouth . the ' young gal ' likewise occasion I some uneasiness : not so much by neglect to wash the plate , as by break they . for be of a inquisitive disposition , and unable to confine herself ( as she positive instruction be ) to the pantry , she be constantly pee in at we , and constantly imagine herself detect ; in which belief , she several time retire upon the plate ( with which she have carefully pave the floor ) , and do a great deal of destruction . these , however , be small drawback , and easily forget when the cloth be clear , and the dessert put on the table ; at which period of the entertainment the handy young man be discover to be speechless . give he private direction to seek the society of , and to remove the ' young gal ' to the basement also , I abandon myself to enjoyment . I
I begin , by be singularly cheerful and light - hear ; all sort of half - forget thing to talk about , come rush into my mind , and make I hold forth in a most unwonted manner . I laugh heartily at my own joke , and everybody else 's ; call to order for not pass the wine ; make several engagement to go to ; announce that I mean to have a dinner - party exactly like that , once a week , until further notice ; and madly take so much snuff out of 's box , that I be oblige to go into the pantry , and have a private fit of sneezing ten minute long . I go on , by pass the wine faster and faster yet , and continually start up with a corkscrew to open more wine , long before any be need . I propose 's health . I say he be my dearest friend , the protector of my boyhood , and the companion of my prime . I say I be delighted to propose he health . I say I owed he more obligation than I could ever repay , and hold he in a higher admiration than I could ever express . I finish by say , ' I will give you ! bless he ! Hurrah ! ' we give he three time three , and another , and a good one to finish with . I break my glass in go round the table to shake hand with he , and I say ( in two word ) ' Steerforth - you 'retheguidingstarofmyexistence . ' I go on , by find suddenly that somebody be in the middle of a song . be the singer , and he sang ' when the heart of a man be depresse with care ' . he say , when he have sng it , he would give we ' ! ' I take objection to that , and I could not allow it . I say it be not a respectful way of propose the toast , and I would never permit that toast to be drink in my house otherwise than as ' the lady ! ' I be very high with he , mainly I think because I see and laugh at I - or at he - or at both of we . he say a man be not to be dictate to . I say a man be . he say a man be not to be insult , then . I say he be right there - never under my roof , where the be sacr , and the law of hospitality paramount . he say it be no derogation from a man 's dignity to confess that I be a devilish good fellow . I instantly propose he health . somebody be smoke . we be all smoke . I be smoke , and try to suppress a rise tendency to shudder . have make a speech about I , in the course of which I have be affect almost to tear . I return thanks , and hope the present company would dine with I tomorrow , and the day after - each day at five o'clock , that we might enjoy the pleasure of conversation and society through a long evening . I feel call upon to propose a individual . I would give they my aunt . , the best of she sex ! somebody be lean out of my bedroom window , refresh he forehead against the cool stone of the parapet , and feel the air upon he face . it be myself . I be address myself as ' ' , and say , ' why do you try to smoke ? you might have know you could not do it . ' now , somebody be unsteadily contemplate he feature in the look - glass . that be I too . I be very pale in the look - glass ; my eye have a vacant appearance ; and my hair - only my hair , nothing else - look drunk . somebody say to I , ' let we go to the theatre , ! ' there be no bedroom before I , but again the jingling table cover with glass ; the lamp ; on my right hand , on my left , and opposite - all sit in a mist , and a long way off . the theatre ? to be sure . the very thing . come along ! but they must excuse I if I see everybody out first , and turn the lamp off - in case of fire . Ow to some confusion in the dark , the door be gone . I be feel for it in the window - curtain , when Steerforth , laugh , take I by the arm and lead I out . we go downstairs , one behind another . near the bottom , somebody fall , and roll down . somebody else say it be . I be angry at that false report , until , find myself on my back in the passage , I begin to think there might be some foundation for it . a very foggy night , with great ring round the lamp in the street ! there be a indistinct talk of its be wet . I consider it frosty . duste I under a lamp - post , and put my hat into shape , which somebody produce from somewhere in a most extraordinary manner , for I have not have it on before . then say , ' you be all right , , be you not ? ' and I tell he , ' . ' a man , sit in a pigeon - hole - place , look out of
of the fog , and take money from somebody , inquire if I be one of the gentleman pay for , and appear rather doubtful ( as I remember in the glimpse I have of he ) whether to take the money for I or not . shortly afterwards , we be very high up in a very hot theatre , look down into a large pit , that see to I to smoke ; the people with whom it be cramm be so indistinct . there be a great stage , too , look very clean and smooth after the street ; and there be people upon it , talk about something or other , but not at all intelligibly . there be a abundance of bright light , and there be music , and there be ladie down in the box , and I do not know what more . the whole building look to I as if it be learn to swim ; it conduct itself in such a unaccountable manner , when I try to steady it . on somebody 's motion , we resolve to go downstairs to the dress - box , where the lady be . a gentleman lounge , full dress , on a sofa , with a opera- glass in he hand , pass before my view , and also my own figure at full length in a glass . then I be be usher into one of these box , and find myself say something as I sit down , and people about I cry ' Silence ! ' to somebody , and lady cast indignant glance at I , and - what ! yes ! - Agnes , sit on the seat before I , in the same box , with a lady and gentleman beside she , whom I do not know . I see she face now , better than I do then , I dare say , with its indelible look of regret and wonder turn upon I . 'Agnes ! ' I say , thickly , ' ! Agnes ! ' ' Hush ! pray ! ' she answer , I could not conceive why . ' you disturb the company . look at the stage ! ' I try , on she injunction , to fix it , and to hear something of what be go on there , but quite in vain . I look at she again by and by , and see she shrink into she corner , and put she glove hand to she forehead . ' Agnes ! ' I say . 'I'mafraidyou'renorwell . ' ' yes , yes . do not mind I , Trotwood , ' she return . ' ! be you go away soon ? ' ' Amigoarawaysoo ? ' I repeat . 'yes . ' I have a stupid intention of replying that I be go to wait , to hand she downstair . I suppose I express it , somehow ; for after she have look at I attentively for a little while , she appear to understand , and reply in a low tone : 'I know you will do as I ask you , if I tell you I be very earnest in it . go away now , , for my sake , and ask you friend to take you home . ' she have so far improve I , for the time , that though I be angry with she , I feel asham , and with a short ' ! ' ( which I intend for ' good night ! ' ) get up and go away . they follow , and I step at once out of the box - door into my bedroom , where only be with I , help I to undress , and where I be by turn tell he that be my sister , and adjur he to bring the corkscrew , that I might open another bottle of wine . how somebody , lie in my bed , lay say and do all this over again , at cross purpose , in a feverish dream all night - the bed a rock sea that be never still ! how , as that somebody slowly settle down into myself , do I begin to parch , and feel as if my outer cover of skin be a hard board ; my tongue the bottom of a empty kettle , fur with long service , and burn up over a slow fire ; the palm of my hand , hot plate of metal which no ice could cool ! but the agony of mind , the remorse , and shame I feel when I become conscious next day ! my horror of have commit a thousand offence I have forget , and which nothing could ever expiate - my recollection of that indelible look which Agnes have give I - the torturing impossibility of communicate with she , not know , that I be , how she come to be in , or where she stay - my disgust of the very sight of the room where the revel have be hold - my racking head - the smell of smoke , the sight of glass , the impossibility of go out , or even get up ! oh , what a day it be ! oh , what a evening , when I sit down by my fire to a basin of mutton broth , dimple all over with fat , and think I be go the way of my predecessor , and should succeed to he dismal story as well as to he chamber , and have half a mind to rush express to Dover and reveal all ! what a evening , when , come in to take away the broth - basin , produce one kidney on a cheese -
- plate as the entire remains of yesterday 's feast , and I be really inclin to fall upon she nankeen breast and say , in heartfelt penitence , 'Oh , , , never mind the broken meat ! I be very miserable ! ' - only that I doubt , even at that pass , if Crupp be quite the sort of woman to confide in ! chapter 25 Good and bad angel I be go out at my door on the morning after that deplorable day of headache , sickness , and repentance , with a odd confusion in my mind relative to the date of my dinner - party , as if a body of have take a enormous lever and push the day before yesterday some month back , when I see a ticket - porter come upstairs , with a letter in he hand . he be take he time about he errand , then ; but when he see I on the top of the staircase , look at he over the banister , he swing into a trot , and come up pante as if he have run himself into a state of exhaustion . ot . , , ' say the ticket - porter , touch he hat with he little cane . I could scarcely lay claim to the name : I be so disturb by the conviction that the letter come from . however , I tell he I be , , and he believe it , and give I the letter , which he say require a answer . I shut he out on the landing to wait for the answer , and go into my chamber again , in such a nervous state that I be fain to lay the letter down on my breakfast table , and familiarize myself with the outside of it a little , before I could resolve to break the seal . I find , when I do open it , that it be a very kind note , contain no reference to my condition at the theatre . all it say be , ' my dear Trotwood . I be stay at the house of papa 's agent , , in , . will you come and see I today , at any time you like to appoint ? ever yours affectionately , . ' it take I such a long time to write a answer at all to my satisfaction , that I do not know what the ticket - porter can have think , unless he think I be learn to write . I must have write half - a - dozen answer at least . I begin one , ' how can I ever hope , my dear Agnes , to efface from you remembrance the disgusting impression ' - there I do not like it , and then I tore it up . I begin another , ' have observe , my dear Agne , how strange it be that a man should put a enemy into he mouthg - that remind I of , and it get no farther . I even try poetry . I begin one note , in a six - syllable line , ' oh , do not remember' - but that associate itself with the fifth of , and become a absurdity . after many attempt , I write , ' my dear Agne . you letter be like you , and what could I say of it that would be higher praise than that ? I will come at four o'clock . Affectionately and sorrowfully , ' with this missive ( which I be in twenty minds at once about recall , as soon as it be out of my hand ) , the ticket - porter at last departed . if the day be half as tremendous to any other professional gentleman in doctors 's Commons as it be to I , I sincerely believe he make some expiation for he share in that rotten old ecclesiastical cheese . although I leave the office at half past three , and be prowl about the place of appointment within a few minute afterwards , the appointed time be exceed by a full quarter of a hour , accord to the clock of 's , , before I could muster up sufficient desperation to pull the private bell - handle let into the leave - hand door - post of 's house . the professional business of 's establishment be done on the ground - floor , and the genteel business ( of which there be a good deal ) in the upper part of the building . I be show into a pretty but rather close drawing - room , and there sit Agnes , net a purse . she look so quiet and good , and remind I so strongly of my airy fresh school day at , and the sodden , smoky , stupid wretch I have be the other night , that , nobody be by , I yield to my self - reproach and shame , and - in short , make a fool of myself . I can not deny that I she tear . to this hour I be undecide whether it be upon the whole the wisest thing I could have do , or the most ridiculous . ' if it have be anyone but you , Agnes , ' say I , turn away my head , 'I should not have mind it half so much . but that it should have be you who see I ! I almost wish i have be dead , first . ' she put she hand - its touch be like no other hand - upon my arm for a moment ; and I feel so befriended and comforted , that I could not help move it
it to my lip , and gratefully kiss it . ' sit down , ' say , cheerfully . ' do not be unhappy , . if you can not confidently trust I , whom will you trust ? ' 'Ah , ! ' I return . ' you be my good angel ! ' she smile rather sadly , I think , and shake she head . ' yes , , my good angel ! always my good angel ! ' ' if I be , indeed , , ' she return , ' there be one thing that I should set my heart on very much . ' I look at she inquiringly ; but already with a foreknowledge of she meaning . 'On warn you , ' say , with a steady glance , ' against you bad angel . ' ' my dear Agne ,' I begin , ' if you mean -' 'I do , Trotwood , ' she return . ' then , Agnes , you wrong he very much . he my bad angel , or anyone be ! he , anything but a guide , a support , and a friend to I ! my dear Agne ! now , be it not unjust , and unlike you , to judge he from what you see of I the other night ? ' 'I do not judge he from what I see of you the other night , ' she quietly reply . ' from what , then ? ' ' from many thing - trifle in themselves , but they do not seem to I to be so , when they be put together . I judge he , partly from you account of he , Trotwood , and you character , and the influence he have over you . ' there be always something in she modest voice that seem to touch a chord within I , answer to that sound alone . it be always earnest ; but when it be very earnest , as it be now , there be a thrill in it that quite subdue I . I sit look at she as she cast she eye down on she work ; I sit see still to listen to she ; and , in spite of all my attachment to he , darken in that tone . ' it be very bold in I , ' say , look up again , ' who have live in such seclusion , and can know so little of the world , to give you my advice so confidently , or even to have this strong opinion . but I know in what it be engender , , - in how true a remembrance of we have grow up together , and in how true a interest in all relate to you . it be that which make I bold . I be certain that what I say be right . I be quite sure it be . I feel as if it be someone else speak to you , and not I , when I caution you that you have make a dangerous friend . ' again I look at she , again I listen to she after she be silent , and again he image , though it be still fix in my heart , darken . 'I be not so unreasonable as to expect , ' say , resum she usual tone , after a little while , ' that you will , or that you can , at once , change any sentiment that have become a conviction to you ; least of all a sentiment that be root in you trusting disposition . you ought not hastily to do that . I only ask you , Trotwood , if you ever think of I - I mean , ' with a quiet smile , for I be go to interrupt she , and she know why , 'as often as you think of I - to think of what I have say . do you forgive I for all this ? ' 'I will forgive you , ,' I reply , ' when you come to do justice , and to like he as well as I do . ' ' not until then ? ' say . I see a passing shadow on she face when I make this mention of he , but she return my smile , and we be again as unreserved in we mutual confidence as of old . ' and when , , ' say I , ' will you forgive I the other night ? ' ' when I recall it , ' say . she would have dismiss the subject so , but I be too full of it to allow that , and insist on tell she how it happen that I have disgrac myself , and what chain of accidental circumstance have have the theatre for its final link . it be a great relief to I to do this , and to enlarge on the obligation that I owed to for he care of I when I be unable to take care of myself . ' you must not forget , ' say , calmly change the conversation as soon as I have conclude , ' that you be always to tell I , not only when you fall into trouble , but when you fall in love . who have succeed to , ? ' ' no one , Agnes . ' ' someone , , ' say , laugh , and hold up she finger . ' no , Agnes , upon my word ! there be a lady , certainly , at 's house , who be very clever , and whom I like to talk to - - but I do not adore she . ' Agnes laugh again at
at she own penetration , and tell I that if I be faithful to she in my confidence she think she should keep a little register of my violent attachment , with the date , duration , and termination of each , like the table of the reign of the king and queens , in the History of . then she ask I if I have see . ' ? ' say I . ' no . be he in ? ' ' he come to the office downstairs , every day , ' return Agnes . ' he be in a week before I . I be afraid on disagreeable business , . ' 'On some business that make you uneasy , Agnes , I see , ' say I . ' what can that be ? ' Agnes lay aside she work , and reply , fold she hand upon one another , and look pensively at I out of those beautiful soft eye of hers : 'I believe he be go to enter into partnership with papa . ' ' what ? Uriah ? that mean , fawn fellow , worm himself into such promotion ! ' I cry , indignantly . ' have you make no remonstrance about it , ? consider what a connexion it be likely to be . you must speak out . you must not allow you father to take such a mad step . you must prevent it , Agnes , while there be time . ' still look at I , shook she head while I be speak , with a faint smile at my warmth : and then reply : ' you remember we last conversation about papa ? it be not long after that - not more than two or three day - when he give I the first intimation of what I tell you . it be sad to see he struggle between he desire to represent it to I as a matter of choice on he part , and he inability to conceal that it be force upon he . I feel very sorry . ' ' force upon he , ! who force it upon he ? ' ' Uriah , ' she reply , after a moment 's hesitation , ' have make himself indispensable to papa . he be subtle and watchful . he have master papa 's weakness , foster they , and take advantage of they , until - to say all that I mean in a word , Trotwood , - until papa be afraid of he . ' there be more that she might have say ; more that she know , or that she suspect ; I clearly see . I could not give she pain by ask what it be , for I know that she withheld it from I , to spare she father . it have long be go on to this , I be sensible : yes , I could not but feel , on the least reflection , that it have be go on to this for a long time . I remain silent . ' he ascendancy over papa , ' say Agnes , 'i very great . he profess humility and gratitude - with truth , perhaps : I hope so - but he position be really one of power , and I fear he make a hard use of he power . ' I say he be a hound , which , at the moment , be a great satisfaction to I . ' at the time I speak of , as the time when speak to I , ' pursue Agnes , ' he have tell papa that he be go away ; that he be very sorry , and unwilling to leave , but that he have better prospect . be very much depresse then , and more bow down by care than ever you or I have see he ; but he seem relieve by this expedient of the partnership , though at the same time he seem hurt by it and asham of it . ' ' and how do you receive it , ? ' 'I do , Trotwood , ' she reply , ' what I hope be right . feel sure that it be necessary for papa 's peace that the sacrifice should be make , I entreate he to make it . I say it would lighten the load of he life - I hope it will ! - and that it would give I increase opportunity of be he companion . oh , ! ' cry Agnes , put she hand before she face , as she tear start on it , ' I almost feel as if I have be papa 's enemy , instead of he loving child . for I know how he have alte , in he devotion to I . I know how he have narrow the circle of he sympathy and duty , in the concentration of he whole mind upon I . I know what a multitude of thing he have shut out for my sake , and how he anxious thought of I have shadow he life , and weaken he strength and energy , by turn they always upon one idea . if I could ever set this right ! if I could ever work out he restoration , as I have so innocently be the cause of he decline ! ' I have never before see Agnes cry . I have see tear in she eye when I have bring new honour home from school , and I have see they there when we last spoke about she father , and I have see she turn she gentle head aside when we take leave of one another ; but I have never see she grieve like this . it make I so
so sorry that I could only say , in a foolish , helpless manner , ' pray , Agnes , do not ! do not , my dear sister ! ' but be too superior to I in character and purpose , as I know well now , whatever I might know or not know then , to be long in need of my entreaty . the beautiful , calm manner , which make she so different in my remembrance from everybody else , come back again , as if a cloud have pass from a serene sky . ' we be not likely to remain alone much longer , ' say , ' and while I have a opportunity , let I earnestly entreat you , Trotwood , to be friendly to . do not repel he . do not resent ( as I think you have a general disposition to do ) what may be uncongenial to you in he . he may not deserve it , for we know no certain ill of he . in any case , think first of papa and I ! ' Agnes have no time to say more , for the room door open , and , who be a large lady - or who wear a large dress : I do not exactly know which , for I do not know which be dress and which be lady - come sailing in . I have a dim recollection of have see she at the theatre , as if I have see she in a pale magic lantern ; but she appear to remember I perfectly , and still to suspect I of be in a state of intoxication . find by degree , however , that I be sober , and ( I hope ) that I be a modest young gentleman , soften towards I considerably , and inquire , firstly , if I go much into the park , and secondly , if I go much into society . on my replying to both these question in the negative , it occur to I that I fall again in she good opinion ; but she conceal the fact gracefully , and invite I to dinner next day . I accept the invitation , and take my leave , make a call on in the office as I go out , and leave a card for he in he absence . when I go to dinner next day , and on the street door be open , plunge into a vapour - bath of haunch of mutton , I divine that I be not the only guest , for I immediately identify the ticket - porter in disguise , assist the family servant , and wait at the foot of the stair to carry up my name . he look , to the best of he ability , when he ask I for it confidentially , as if he have never see I before ; but well do I know he , and well do he know I . conscience make coward of we both . I find to be a middle - aged gentleman , with a short throat , and a good deal of shirt - collar , who only want a black nose to be the portrait of a pug-dog . he tell I he be happy to have the honour of make my acquaintance ; and when I have pay my homage to , present I , with much ceremony , to a very awful lady in a black velvet dress , and a great black velvet hat , whom I remember as look like a near relation of 's - say he aunt . be this lady 's name ; and she husband be there too : so cold a man , that he head , instead of be grey , seem to be sprinkle with hoar - frost . immense deference be show to the , male and female ; which tell I be on account of be solicitor to something of to , I forget what or which , remotely connect with the Treasury . I find among the company , in a suit of black , and in deep humility . he tell I , when I shook hand with he , that he be proud to be notice by I , and that he really feel oblige to I for my condescension . I could have wish he have be less obliged to I , for he hover about I in he gratitude all the rest of the evening ; and whenever I say a word to , be sure , with he shadowless eye and cadaverous face , to be look gauntly down upon we from behind . there be other guest - all iced for the occasion , as it strike I , like the wine . but there be one who attract my attention before he come in , on account of my hearing he announce as ! my mind fly back to ; and could it be , I think , who use to draw the skeleton ! I look for with unusual interest . he be a sober , steady - look young man of retiring manners , with a comic head of hair , and eye that be rather wide open ; and he get into a obscure corner so soon , that I have some difficulty in make he out . at length I have a good view of he , and either my vision deceive I , or it be the old unfortunate . I make my way to , and say , that I believe I have the pleasure of see a old schoolfellow there . ' indeed ! ' say , surprised . ' you be too young to have be at school with ? ' ' oh , I do
do not mean he ! ' I return . 'I mean the gentleman name Traddles . ' ' oh ! aye , aye ! indeed ! ' say my host , with much diminish interest . ' possibly . ' ' if it be really the same person , ' say I , glance towards he , ' it be at a place call where we be together , and he be a excellent fellow . ' ' oh yes . Traddle be a good fellow , ' return my host nodd he head with a air of toleration . ' Traddle be quite a good fellow . ' ' it be a curious coincidence , ' say I . ' it be really , ' return my host , ' quite a coincidence , that Traddle should be here at all : as Traddle be only invite this morning , when the place at table , intend to be occupy by 's brother , become vacant , in consequence of he indisposition . a very gentlemanly man , 's brother , . ' I murmure a assent , which be full of feeling , consider that I know nothing at all about he ; and I inquire what be by profession . ' Traddle , ' return , 'is a young man read for the bar . yes . he be quite a good fellow - nobody 's enemy but he own . ' ' be he he own enemy ? ' say I , sorry to hear this . ' well , ' return , purse up he mouth , and play with he watch - chain , in a comfortable , prosperous sort of way . 'I should say he be one of those man who stand in they own light . yes , I should say he would never , for example , be worth five hundred pound . Traddle be recommend to I by a professional friend . oh yes . yes . he have a kind of talent for drawing briefs , and state a case in writing , plainly . I be able to throw something in Traddles 's way , in the course of the year ; something - for he - considerable . oh yes . yes . ' I be much impressed by the extremely comfortable and satisfied manner in which deliver himself of this little word ' yes ' , every now and then . there be wonderful expression in it . it completely convey the idea of a man who have be bear , not to say with a silver spoon , but with a scaling - ladder , and have go on mount all the height of life one after another , until now he look , from the top of the fortification , with the eye of a philosopher and a patron , on the people down in the trench . my reflection on this theme be still in progress when dinner be announce . go down with 's aunt . take . Agnes , whom I should have like to take myself , be give to a simpering fellow with weak leg . Uriah , Traddles , and I , as the junior part of the company , go down last , how we could . I be not so vex at lose Agnes as I might have be , since it give I a opportunity of make myself know to Traddles on the stair , who greet I with great fervour ; while writh with such obtrusive satisfaction and self - abasement , that I could gladly have pitch he over the banister . Traddle and I be separate at table , be billet in two remote corner : he in the glare of a red velvet lady ; I , in the gloom of 's aunt . the dinner be very long , and the conversation be about the Aristocracy - and . repeatedly tell we , that if she have a weakness , it be . it occur to I several time that we should have get on better , if we have not be quite so genteel . we be so exceedingly genteel , that we scope be very limited . a and be of the party , who have something to do at second - hand ( at least , have ) with the law business of the ; and what with the , and what with the Treasury , we be as exclusive as the . to mmend the matter , 's aunt have the family failing of indulging in soliloquy , and hold forth in a desultory manner , by herself , on every topic that be introduce . these be few enough , to be sure ; but as we always fall back upon , she have as wide a field for abstract speculation as she nephew himself . we might have be a party of , the conversation assume such a sanguine complexion . 'i confess I be of 's opinion , ' say , with he wine - glass at he eye . ' other thing be all very well in they way , but give I ! ' 'Oh ! there be nothing , ' observe 's aunt , 'so satisfactory to one ! there be nothing that be so much one 's beau - ideal of - of all that sort of thing , speak generally . there be some low mind ( not many , I be happy to believe , but there be some ) that would prefer to do what I should call bow down before idol . Positively Idols ! before service , intellect , and so on . but these be intangible point . be not so . we see in a nose , and we know it . we meet with it in a ching , and we
we say , " there it be ! that be ! " it be a actual matter of fact . we point it out . it admit of no doubt . ' the simpering fellow with the weak leg , who have take Agnes down , state the question more decisively yet , I think . 'Oh , you know , deuce take it , ' say this gentleman , look round the board with a imbecile smile , 'we can not forego , you know . we must have , you know . some young fellow , you know , may be a little behind they station , perhaps , in point of education and behaviour , and may go a little wrong , you know , and get themselves and other people into a variety of fix - and all that - but deuce take it , it be delightful to reflect that they have get in ! myself , I would rather at any time be knock down by a man who have get in he , than I would be pick up by a man who have not ! ' this sentiment , as compresse the general question into a nutshell , give the utmost satisfaction , and bring the gentleman into great notice until the lady retire . after that , I observ that and , who have hithertoo be very distant , enter into a defensive alliance against we , the common enemy , and exchange a mysterious dialogue across the table for we defeat and overthrow . ' that affair of the first bond for four thousand five hundred pound have not take the course that be expect , , ' say . ' do you mean the D. of a . ? ' say . ' the of B .' ! ' say . raise he eyebrow , and look much concerned . ' when the question be refer to - I need not name he , ' say , check himself - 'i understand , ' say , . ' darkly nod - ' be refer to he , he answer be , " money , or no release . " ' ' bless my soul ! ' cry . " ' money , or no release , " ' repeat , firmly . ' the next in reversion - you understand I ? ' 'K . , ' say , with a ominous look . ' - . then positively refuse to sign . he be attend at Newmarket for that purpose , and he point - blank refuse to do it . ' be so interested , that he become quite stony . ' so the matter rest at this hour , ' say , throw himself back in he chair . ' we friend will excuse I if I forbear to explain myself generally , on account of the magnitude of the interest involve . ' be only too happy , as it appear to I , to have such interest , and such name , even hint at , across he table . he assume a expression of gloomy intelligence ( though I be persuade he know no more about the discussion than I do ) , and highly approve of the discretion that have be observe . , after the receipt of such a confidence , naturally desire to favour he friend with a confidence of he own ; therefore the foregoing dialogue be succeed by another , in which it be 's turn to be surprised , and that by another in which the surprise come round to 's turn again , and so on , turn and turn about . all this time we , the outsider , remain oppress by the tremendous interest involved in the conversation ; and we host regard we with pride , as the victim of a salutary awe and astonishment . I be very glad indeed to get upstairs to , and to talk with she in a corner , and to introduce Traddle to she , who be shy , but agreeable , and the same good - natured creature still . as he be oblige to leave early , on account of go away next morning for a month , I have not nearly so much conversation with he as I could have wish ; but we exchange address , and promise ourselves the pleasure of another meeting when he should come back to town . he be greatly interested to hear that I know , and speak of he with such warmth that I make he tell what he think of he . but only look at I the while , and very slightly shook she head when only I observe she . as she be not among people with whom I believe she could be very much at home , I be almost glad to hear that she be go away within a few day , though I be sorry at the prospect of part from she again so soon . this cause I to remain until all the company be gone . Converse with she , and hear she s , be such a delightful reminder to I of my happy life in the grave old house she have make so beautiful , that I could have remain there half the night ; but , have no excuse for stay any longer , when the light of 's society be all snuff out , I take my leave very much against my inclination . I feel then , more than ever , that she be my better angel ; and if I think of she sweet face and placid smile , as though they have shone on I from some remove being , like a , I hope I think no harm . I have say that the company be all gone ; but
but I ought to have accept , whom I do not include in that denomination , and who have never cease to hover near we . he be close behind I when I go downstairs . he be close beside I , when I walk away from the house , slowly fit he long skeleton finger into the still longer finger of a great guy Fawke pair of glove . it be in no disposition for 's company , but in remembrance of the entreaty Agnes have make to I , that I ask he if he would come home to my room , and have some coffee . 'Oh , really , ,' he rejoin - 'I beg you pardon , , but the other come so natural , I do not like that you should put a constraint upon yourself to ask a numble person like I to you ouse . ' ' there be no constraint in the case , ' say I . ' will you come ? ' 'I should like to , very much , ' reply , with a writhe . ' well , then , come along ! ' say I . I could not help be rather short with he , but he appear not to mind it . we go the nearest way , without converse much upon the road ; and he be so humble in respect of those scarecrow glove , that he be still put they on , and seem to have make no advance in that labour , when we get to my place . I lead he up the dark stair , to prevent he knock he head against anything , and really he damp cold hand felt so like a frog in mine , that I be temp to drop it and run away . Agne and hospitality prevail , however , and I conduct he to my fireside . when I lighte my candle , he fall into meek transport with the room that be reveal to he ; and when I heat the coffee in a unassuming block - tin vessel in which Crupp delighte to prepare it ( chiefly , I believe , because it be not intend for the purpose , be a shaving - pot , and because there be a patent invention of great price mouldering away in the pantry ) , he profess so much emotion , that I could joyfully have scald he . 'Oh , really , , - I mean , ' say , 'to see you wait upon I be what I never could have expect ! but , one way and another , so many thing happen to I which I never could have expect , I be sure , in my umble station , that it seem to rain blessing on my ed . you have hear something , I de - say , of a change in my expectation , master Copperfield , - I should say , ? ' as he sit on my sofa , with he long knee draw up under he coffee - cup , he hat and glove upon the ground close to he , he spoon go softly round and round , he shadowless red eye , which look as if they have scorch they lash off , turn towards I without look at I , the disagreeable dint I have formerly describe in he nostril come and go with he breath , and a snaky undulation pervad he frame from he ching to he boot , I decide in my own mind that I dislike he intensely . it make I very uncomfortable to have he for a guest , for I be young then , and unused to disguise what I so strongly feel . ' you have hear something , I de - say , of a change in my expectation , master Copperfield , - I should say , ? ' observe . 'yes , ' say I , ' something . ' 'Ah ! I think would know of it ! ' he quietly return . 'I be glad to find know of it . oh , thank you , master - ! ' I could have throw my bootjack at he ( it lay ready on the rug ) , for have entrap I into the disclosure of anything concern , however immaterial . but I only drank my coffee . ' what a prophet you have show yourself , ! ' pursue . ' dear I , what a prophet you have prove yourself to be ! do not you remember say to I once , that perhaps I should be a partner in 's business , and perhaps it might be and ? you may not recollect it ; but when a person be umble , master , a person treasure such thing up ! ' 'I recollect talk about it , ' say I , ' though I certainly do not think it very likely then . ' 'Oh ! who would have think it likely , ! ' return , enthusiastically . 'I be sure I do not myself . I recollect say with my own lip that I be much too umble . so I consider myself really and truly . ' he sit , with that carve grin on he face , look at the fire , as I look at he . ' but the umblest person , ,' he presently resume , ' may be the instrument of good . I be glad to think I have be the instrument of good to , and that I may be more so . oh what a worthy man he be , , but how imprudent he have be ! ' 'I be sorry to hear it , ' say I . I could not help add , rather pointedly , 'on all
all account . ' ' Decidedly so , , ' reply . 'On all account . 's above all ! you do not remember you own eloquent expression , master Copperfield ; but I remember how you say one day that everybody must admire she , and how I thank you for it ! you have forget that , I have no doubt , master ? ' ' no , ' say I , drily . ' oh how glad I be you have not ! ' exclaim . 'To think that you should be the first to kindle the spark of ambition in my umble breast , and that you have not forget it ! oh ! - would you excuse I ask for a cup more coffee ? ' something in the emphasis he lay upon the kindling of those spark , and something in the glance he direct at I as he say it , have make I start as if I have see he illuminate by a blaze of light . recall by he request , prefer in quite another tone of voice , I do the honour of the shaving - pot ; but I do they with a unsteadiness of hand , a sudden sense of be no match for he , and a perplexed suspicious anxiety as to what he might be go to say next , which I feel could not escape he observation . he say nothing at all . he stir he coffee round and round , he sip it , he feel he ching softly with he grisly hand , he look at the fire , he look about the room , he gas rather than smile at I , he writh and undulate about , in he deferential servility , he stir and sip again , but he leave the renewal of the conversation to I . 'So , , ' say I , at last , ' who be worth five hundred of you - or I ' ; for my life , I think , I could not have help divide that part of the sentence with a awkward jerk ; ' have be imprudent , have he , ? ' 'Oh , very imprudent indeed , , ' return , sigh modestly . 'Oh , very much so ! but I wish you would call I , if you please . it be like old tim . ' ' well ! Uriah , ' say I , bolt it out with some difficulty . ' thank you ,' he return , with fervour . ' thank you , master Copperfield ! it be like the blowing of old breeze or the ringing of old bellse to hear you say . I beg you pardon . be I make any observation ? ' ' about ,' I suggest . 'Oh ! yes , truly , ' say . 'Ah ! great imprudence , . it be a topic that I would not touch upon , to any soul but you . even to you I can only touch upon it , and no more . if anyone else have be in my place during the last few year , by this time he would have have ( oh , what a worthy man he be , , too ! ) under he thumb . -- der -- he thumb , ' say , very slowly , as he stretch out he cruel - look hand above my table , and press he own thumb upon it , until it shook , and shake the room . if I have be oblige to look at he with he splay foot on 's head , I think I could scarcely have hate he more . 'Oh , dear , yes , ,' he proceed , in a soft voice , most remarkably contrast with the action of he thumb , which do not diminish it be hard pressure in the least degree , ' there be no doubt of it . there would have be loss , disgrace , I do not know what at all . know it . I be the umble instrument of umbly serve he , and he put I on a eminence I hardly could have hope to reach . how thankful should I be ! ' with he face turn towards I , as he finish , but without look at I , he take he crooke thumb off the spot where he have plan it , and slowly and thoughtfully scrape he lank jaw with it , as if he be shave himself . I recollect well how indignantly my heart beat , as I see he crafty face , with the appropriately red light of the fire upon it , prepare for something else . ' master Copperfield ,' he begin - ' but be I keep you up ? ' ' you be not keep I up . I generally go to bed late . ' ' thank you , master Copperfield ! I have risen from my umble station since first you use to address I , it be true ; but I be umble still . I hope I never shall be otherwise than umble . you will not think the worse of my umbleness , if I make a little confidence to you , ? will you ? ' ' oh no , ' say I , with a effort . ' thank you ! ' he take out he pocket - handkerchief , and begin wip the palm of he hand . ' , -' , ? ' 'Oh , how pleasant to be call , spontaneously ! ' he cry ; and give himself a jerk , like a convulsive fish . ' you think she look very beautiful tonight , ? ' 'I think she look as she always do : superior , in
in all respects , to everyone around she ,' I return . 'Oh , thank you ! it be so true ! ' he cry . 'Oh , thank you very much for that ! ' ' not at all ,' I say , loftily . ' there be no reason why you should thank I . ' ' why that , , ' say , , in fact , the confidence that I be go to take the liberty of reposing . Umble as I be ,' he wip he hand harder , and look at they and at the fire by turn , ' umble as my mother be , and lowly as we poor but honest roof have ever be , the image of ( I do not mind trust you with my secret , master , for I have always overflowed towards you since the first moment I have the pleasure of beholde you in a pony -shay ) have be in my breast for year . oh , , with what a pure affection do I love the ground my Agnes walk on ! ' I believe I have a delirious idea of seize the red - hot poker out of the fire , and run he through with it . it go from I with a shock , like a ball fire from a rifle : but the image of Agnes , outrage by so much as a thought of this red - head animal 's , remain in my mind when I look at he , sit all awry as if he mean soul grip he body , and make I giddy . he seem to swell and grow before my eye ; the room seem full of the echoe of he voice ; and the strange feeling ( to which , perhaps , no one be quite a stranger ) that all this have occur before , at some indefinite time , and that I know what he be go to say next , take possession of I . a timely observation of the sense of power that there be in he face , do more to bring back to my remembrance the entreaty of Agnes , in it be full force , than any effort I could have make . I ask he , with a better appearance of composure than I could have think possible a minute before , whether he have make he feeling know to . ' oh no , ! ' he return ; 'oh dear , no ! not to anyone but you . you see I be only just emerge from my lowly station . I rest a good deal of hope on she observe how useful I be to she father ( for I trust to be very useful to he indeed , master Copperfield ) , and how I smooth the way for he , and keep he straight . she be so much attach to she father , master ( oh , what a lovely thing it be in a daughter ! ) , that I think she may come , on he account , to be kind to I . ' I fathom the depth of the rascal 's whole scheme , and understand why he lay it bear . ' if you will have the goodness to keep my secret , master Copperfield ,' he pursue , ' and not , in general , to go against I , I shall take it as a particular favour . you would not wish to make unpleasantness . I know what a friendly heart you have get ; but have only know I on my umble footing ( on my umblest I should say , for I be very umble still ) , you might , unbeknown , go against I rather , with my Agne . I call she mine , you see , . there be a song that say , " I would crown resign , to call she mine ! " I hope to do it , one of these day . ' dear Agne ! so much too loving and too good for anyone that I could think of , be it possible that she be reserve to be the wife of such a wretch as this ! ' there be no hurry at present , you know , , ' proceed , in he slimy way , as I sit gazing at he , with this thought in my mind . ' my be very young still ; and mother and I will have to work we way upwards , and make a good many new arrangement , before it would be quite convenient . so I shall have time gradually to make she familiar with my hope , as opportunity offer . oh , I be so much oblige to you for this confidence ! oh , it be such a relief , you can not think , to know that you understand we situation , and be certain ( as you would not wish to make unpleasantness in the family ) not to go against I ! ' he take the hand which I da not withhold , and have give it a damp squeeze , refer to he pale - face watch . ' dear I ! ' he say , ' it be past one . the moments slip away so , in the confidence of old time , master , that it be almost half past one ! ' I answer that I have think it be later . not that I have really thought so , but because my conversational power be effectually scatter . ' dear I ! ' he say , consider . ' the ouse that I be stop at - a sort of a private hotel and boarding ouse , master , near the ed - will
will have go to be these two hour . ' 'I be sorry ,' I return , ' that there be only one bed here , and that I -' ' oh , do not think of mentio bed , ! ' he rejoin ecstatically , draw up one leg . ' but would you have any objection to my laying down before the fire ? ' ' if it come to that ,' I say , ' pray take my bed , and I will lie down before the fire . ' he repudiation of this offer be almost shrill enough , in the excess of its surprise and humility , to have penetrat to the ear of , then sleep , I suppose , in a distant chamber , situate at about the level of low - water mark , soothe in she slumber by the ticking of a incorrigible clock , to which she always refer I when we have any little difference on the score of punctuality , and which be never less than three - quarter of a hour too slow , and have always be put right in the morning by the best authority . as no argument I could urge , in my bewildered condition , have the least effect upon he modesty in induce he to accept my bedroom , I be obliged to make the best arrangement I could , for he repose before the fire . the mattress of the sofa ( which be a great deal too short for he lank figure ) , the sofa pillow , a blanket , the table - cover , a clean breakfast - cloth , and a great - coat , make he a bed and cover , for which he be more than thankful . have lent he a night - cap , which he put on at once , and in which he make such a awful figure , that I have never wear one since , I leave he to he rest . I never shall forget that night . I never shall forget how I turn and tumble ; how I weary myself with think about Agnes and this creature ; how I consider what could I do , and what ought I to do ; how I could come to no other conclusion than that the best course for she peace be to do nothing , and to keep to myself what I have hear . if I go to sleep for a few moment , the image of Agnes with she tender eye , and of she father look fondly on she , as i have so often see he look , arise before I will appeal face , and fill I with vague terror . when I awoke , the recollection that be lie in the next room , sit heavy on I like a wake nightmare ; and oppress I with a leaden dread , as if I have have some meaner quality of for a lodger . the poker get into my dozing thought beside , and would not come out . I think , between sleeping and wake , that it be still red hot , and I have snatch it out of the fire , and run he through the body . I be so haunt at last by the idea , though I know there be nothing in it , that I steal into the next room to look at he . there I see he , lie on he back , with he leg extend to I do not know where , gurgling take place in he throat , stoppage in he nose , and he mouth open like a post-office . he be so much worse in reality than in my distempered fancy , that afterwards I be attract to he in very repulsion , and could not help wander in and out every half - hour or so , and take another look at he . still , the long , long night seem heavy and hopeless as ever , and no promise of day be in the murky sky . when I see he go downstairs early in the morning ( for , thank ! he would not stay to breakfast ) , it appear to I as if the night be go away in he person . when I go out to the , I charge Crupp with particular direction to leave the window open , that my sitting - room might be air , and purge of he presence . chapter 26 I I see no more of , until the day when leave town . I be at the coach office to take leave of she and see she go ; and there be he , return to by the same conveyance . it be some small satisfaction to I to observe he spare , short - waiste , high - shouldere , mulberry - colour great - coat perch up , in company with a umbrella like a small tent , on the edge of the back seat on the roof , while Agnes be , of course , inside ; but what I undergo in my effort to be friendly with he , while Agnes look on , perhaps deserve that little recompense . at the coach window , as at the dinner - party , he hover about we without a moment 's intermission , like a great vulture : gorge himself on every syllable that I say to , or say to I . in the state of trouble into which he disclosure by my fire have throw I , I have think very much of the word have use in reference to the partnership . 'I do what I hope be right . feel sure that it be necessary for papa 's peace that the sacrifice should be make
make , I entreate he to make it . ' a miserable forebod that she would yield to , and sustain herself by , the same feeling in reference to any sacrifice for he sake , have oppress I ever since . I know how she love he . I know what the devotion of she nature be . I know from she own lip that she regard herself as the innocent cause of he error , and as owe he a great debt she ardently desire to pay . I have no consolation in see how different she be from this detestable with the mulberry - colour great - coat , for I feel that in the very difference between they , in the self - denial of she pure soul and the sordid baseness of he , the greatest danger lay . all this , doubtless , he know thoroughly , and have , in he cunning , consider well . yet I be so certain that the prospect of such a sacrifice afar off , must destroy the happiness of Agnes ; and I be so sure , from she manner , of its be unseen by she then , and have cast no shadow on she yet ; that I could as soon have injure she , as give she any warning of what impend . thus it be that we part without explanation : she wave she hand and smile farewell from the coach window ; she evil genius writh on the roof , as if he have she in he clutch and triumph . I could not get over this farewell glimpse of they for a long time . when write to tell I of she safe arrival , I be as miserable as when I see she go away . whenever I fall into a thoughtful state , this subject be sure to present itself , and all my uneasiness be sure to be redouble . hardly a night pass without my dreaming of it . it become a part of my life , and as inseparable from my life as my own head . I have ample leisure to refine upon my uneasiness : for be at , as he write to I , and when I be not at the , I be very much alone . I believe I have at this time some lurk distrust of . I write to he most affectionately in reply to he , but I think I be glad , upon the whole , that he could not come to just then . I suspect the truth to be , that the influence of be upon I , undistur by the sight of he ; and that it be the more powerful with I , because she have so large a share in my thought and interest . in the meantime , day and week slip away . I be article to and . I have ninety pound a year ( exclusive of my house - rent and sundry collateral matter ) from my aunt . my room be engage for twelve month certain : and though I still find they dreary of a evening , and the evening long , I could settle down into a state of equable low spirit , and resign myself to coffee ; which I seem , on look back , to have take by the gallon at about this period of my existence . at about this time , too , I make three discoveries : first , that be a martyr to a curiious disorder call ' the spazzum ' , which be generally accompany with inflammation of the nose , and require to be constantly treat with peppermint ; secondly , that something peculiar in the temperature of my pantry , make the brandy - bottle burst ; thirdly , that I be alone in the world , and much give to record that circumstance in fragment of English versification . on the day when I be article , no festivity take place , beyond my have sandwiche and sherry into the office for the clerk , and go alone to the theatre at night . I go to see the , as a ' Commons sort of play , and be so dreadfully cut up , that I hardly know myself in my own glass when I get home . remark , on this occasion , when we conclude we business , that he should have be happy to have see I at he house at to celebrate we become connect , but for he domestic arrangement be in some disorder , on account of the expect return of he daughter from finish she education at . but , he intimate that when she come home he should hope to have the pleasure of entertain I . I know that he be a widower with one daughter , and express my acknowledgement . be as good as he word . in a week or two , he refer to this engagement , and say , that if I would do he the favour to come down next , and stay till , he would be extremely happy . of course I say I would do he the favour ; and he be to drive I down in he phaeton , and to bring I back . when the day arrive , my very carpet - bag be a object of veneration to the stipendiary clerk , to whom the house at be a sacred mystery . one of they inform I that he have hear that eat entirely off plate and china ; and another hint at champagne be constantly on dratch , after the usual custom of table - beer . the old clerk with the wig , whose name be , have be down on business several time in the course of he
he career , and have on each occasion penetrate to the breakfast - parlour . he describe it as a apartment of the most sumptuous nature , and say that he have drink brown sherry there , of a quality so precious as to make a man wink . we have a adjourned cause in the Consistory that day - about excommunicat a baker who have be object in a vestry to a paving - rate - and as the evidence be just twice the length of , accord to a calculation I make , it be rather late in the day before we finish . however , we get he excommunicate for six week , and sentence in no end of cost ; and then the baker 's proctor , and the judge , and the advocate on both side ( who be all nearly related ) , go out of town together , and and I drive away in the phaeton . the phaeton be a very handsome affair ; the horse arch they neck and lifte up they leg as if they know they belong to 's . there be a good deal of competition in the Commons on all point of display , and it turn out some very choice equipage then ; though I always have consider , and always shall consider , that in my time the great article of competition there be starch : which I think be wear among the proctor to as great a extent as it be in the nature of man to bear . we be very pleasant , go down , and give I some hint in reference to my profession . he say it be the genteelest profession in the world , and must on no account be confound with the profession of a solicitor : be quite another sort of thing , infinitely more exclusive , less mechanical , and more profitable . we take thing much more easily in the Commons than they could be take anywhere else , he observe , and that set we , as a privileged class , apart . he say it be impossible to conceal the disagreeable fact , that we be chiefly employ by solicitor ; but he give I to understand that they be a inferior race of man , universally look down upon by all proctor of any pretension . I ask what he consider the best sort of professional business ? he reply , that a good case of a dispute will , where there be a neat little estate of thirty or forty thousand pound , be , perhaps , the best of all . in such a case , he say , not only be there very pretty pickings , in the way of argument at every stage of the proceedings , and mountain upon mountain of evidence on interrogatory and counter-interrogatory ( to say nothing of a appeal lying , first to the , and then to the Lord ) , but , the cost be pretty sure to come out of the estate at last , both side go at it in a lively and spirit manner , and expense be no consideration . then , he launch into a general eulogium on the Commons . what be to be particularly admired ( he say ) in the , be its compactness . it be the most conveniently organized place in the world . it be the complete idea of snugness . it lay in a nutshell . for example : you bring a divorce case , or a restitution case , into the Consistory . very good . you try it in the Consistory . you make a quiet little round game of it , among a family group , and you play it out at leisure . suppose you be not satisfy with the Consistory , what do you do then ? why , you go into the . what be the Arch ? the same court , in the same room , with the same bar , and the same practitioner , but another judge , for there the Consistory judge could plead any court - day as a advocate . well , you play you round game out again . still you be not satisfied . very good . what do you do then ? why , you go to the . who be the ? why , the Ecclesiastical Delegates be the advocate without any business , who have look on at the round game when it be play in both court , and have see the card shuffle , and cut , and play , and have talk to all the player about it , and now come fresh , as judge , to settle the matter to the satisfaction of everybody ! Discontented people might talk of corruption in the Commons , closeness in the Commons , and the necessity of reform the Commons , say solemnly , in conclusion ; but when the price of wheat per bushel have be highest , the Commons have be busiest ; and a man might lay he hand upon he heart , and say this to the whole world , - ' touch the Commons , and down come the country ! ' I listen to all this with attention ; and though , I must say , I have my doubt whether the country be quite as much oblige to the as make out , I respectfully defer to he opinion . that about the price of wheat per bushel , I modestly feel be too much for my strength , and quite settle the question . I have never , to this hour , get the better of that bushel of wheat . it have reappear to annihilate I , all through my life , in connexion with all kind of subject . I do
do not know now , exactly , what it have to do with I , or what right it have to crush I , on a infinite variety of occasion ; but whenever I see my old friend the bushel bring in by the head and shoulders ( as he always be , I observe ) , I give up a subject for lost . this be a digression . I be not the man to touch the Commons , and bring down the country . I submissively express , by my silence , my acquiescence in all I have hear from my superior in year and knowledge ; and we talk about the and the drama , and the pair of horse , until we come to 's gate . there be a lovely garden to 's house ; and though that be not the best time of the year for see a garden , it be so beautifully keep , that I be quite enchant . there be a charming lawn , there be cluster of tree , and there be perspective walk that I could just distinguish in the dark , arch over with trellis - work , on which shrub and flower grow in the grow season . ' here walk by herself ,' I think . ' dear I ! ' we go into the house , which be cheerfully light up , and into a hall where there be all sort of hat , cap , great - coat , plaid , glove , whips , and walking - stick . ' where be ? ' say to the servant . ' dora! ' I think . ' what a beautiful name ! ' we turn into a room near at hand ( I think it be the identical breakfast - room , make memorable by the indian sherry ) , and I hear a voice say , ' . , my daughter , and my daughter 's confidential friend ! ' it be , no doubt , 's , but I do not know it , and I do not care whose it be . all be over in a moment . I have fulfil my destiny . I be a captive and a slave . I love to distraction ! she be more than human to I . she be a Fairy , a Sylph , I do not know what she be - anything that no one ever see , and everything that everybody ever want . I be swallow up in a abyss of love in a instant . there be no pausing on the brink ; no look down , or look back ; I be gone , headlong , before I have sense to say a word to she . 'I ,' observ a well - remember voice , when I have bow and murmure something , ' have see before . ' the speaker be not . no ; the confidential friend , ! I do not think I be much astonished . to the best of my judgement , no capacity of astonishment be leave in I . there be nothing worth mention in the material world , but , to be astonished about . I say , ' how do you do , ? I hope you be well . ' she answer , ' very well . ' I say , ' how be ? ' she reply , ' my brother be robust , I be oblige to you . ' , who , I suppose , have be surprised to see we recognize each other , then put in he word . 'I be glad to find ,' he say , ' , that you and be already acquaint . ' ' and myself , ' say , with severe composure , ' be connexion . we be once slightly acquaint . it be in he childish day . circumstance have separate we since . I should not have know he . ' I reply that I should have know she , anywhere . which be true enough . ' have have the goodness , ' say to I , 'to accept the office - if I may so describe it - of my daughter 's confidential friend . my daughter have , unhappily , no mother , be oblige enough to become she companion and protector . ' a passing think occur to I that , like the pocket instrument call a life - preserver , be not so much design for purpose of protection as of assault . but as I have none but pass thought for any subject save , I glance at she , directly afterwards , and be think that I see , in she prettily pettish manner , that she be not very much inclin to be particularly confidential to she companion and protector , when a bell rang , which say be the first dinner - bell , and so carry I off to dress . the idea of dress one 's self , or do anything in the way of action , in that state of love , be a little too ridiculous . I could only sit down before my fire , bite the key of my carpet - bag , and think of the captivating , girlish , bright - eye lovely . what a form she have , what a face she have , what a graceful , variable , enchant manner ! the bell ring again so soon that I make a mere scramble of my dressing , instead of the careful operation I could have wish under the circumstance , and go downstairs . there be some company . be talk to a old gentleman with a grey head . as he be - and a great - grandfather into the bargain , for he say so - I be
be madly jealous of he . what a state of mind I be in ! I be jealous of everybody . I could not bear the idea of anybody know Spenlow better than I do . it be torture to I to hear they talk of occurrence in which i have have no share . when a most amiable person , with a highly polished bald head , ask I across the dinner table , if that be the first occasion of my see the grounds , I could have do anything to he that be savage and revengeful . I do not remember who be there , except . I have not the least idea what we have for dinner , besides . my impression be , that I dine off , entirely , and send away half - a - dozen plate untouched . I sit next to she . I talk to she . she have the most delightful little voice , the gayest little laugh , the pleasantest and most fascinating little way , that ever lead a lost youth into hopeless slavery . she be rather diminutive altogether . so much the more precious , I think . when she go out of the room with ( no other lady be of the party ) , I fall into a reverie , only disturb by the cruel apprehension that would disparage I to she . the amiable creature with the polished head tell I a long story , which I think be about gardening . I think I hear he say , 'my gardener ' , several time . I seem to pay the deepest attention to he , but I be wander in a garden of all the while , with . my apprehension of be disparage to the object of my engrossing affection be revive when we go into the drawing - room , by the grim and distant aspect of . but I be relieved of they in a unexpected manner . ' , ' say , beckon I aside into a window . 'A word . ' I confront alone . ' , ' say , 'I need not enlarge upon family circumstance . they be not a tempting subject . ' ' far from it , ma 'am ,' I return . ' far from it , ' assent . 'I do not wish to revive the memory of past difference , or of past outrage . I have receive outrage from a person - a female I be sorry to say , for the credit of my sex - who be not to be mention without scorn and disgust ; and therefore I would rather not mention she . ' I feel very fiery on my aunt 's account ; but I say it would certainly be better , if please , not to mention she . I could not hear she disrespectfully mention , I add , without express my opinion in a decided tone . shut she eye , and disdainfully inclin she head ; then , slowly open she eye , resum : ' , I shall not attempt to disguise the fact , that I form a unfavourable opinion of you in you childhood . it may have be a mistaken one , or you may have cease to justify it . that be not in question between we now . I belong to a family remarkable , I believe , for some firmness ; and I be not the creature of circumstance or change . I may have my opinion of you . you may have you opinion of I . ' I inclin my head , in my turn . ' but it be not necessary , ' say , ' that these opinion should come into collision here . under exist circumstance , it be as well on all account that they should not . as the chance of life have bring we together again , and may bring we together on other occasion , I would say , let we meet here as distant acquaintance . family circumstance be a sufficient reason for we only meet on that footing , and it be quite unnecessary that either of we should make the other the subject of remark . do you approve of this ? ' ' ,' I return , 'I think you and use I very cruelly , and treat my mother with great unkindness . I shall always think so , as long as I live . but I quite agree in what you propose . ' shut she eye again , and bend she head . then , just touche the back of my hand with the tip of she cold , stiff finger , she walk away , arrange the little fetter on she wrist and round she neck ; which seem to be the same set , in exactly the same state , as when I have see she last . these remind I , in reference to 's nature , of the fetter over a jail door ; suggest on the outside , to all beholder , what be to be expect within . all I know of the rest of the evening be , that I hear the empress of my heart se enchant ballad in the french language , generally to the effect that , whatever be the matter , we ought always to dance , , ra la ! accompany herself on a glorified instrument , resembl a guitar . that I be lose in blissful delirium . that I refuse refreshment . that my soul recoil from punch particularly . that when take she into custody and lead she away , she smile and give I she delicious hand . that I catch a view of myself in a mirror , look perfectly imbecile and idiotic . that I retire to be
be in a most maudlin state of mind , and get up in a crisis of feeble infatuation . it be a fine morning , and early , and I think I would go and take a stroll down one of those wire -arched walk , and indulge my passion by dwell on she image . on my way through the hall , I encounter she little dog , who be call - short for . I approach he tenderly , for I love even he ; but he show he whole set of tooth , get under a chair expressly to , and would not hear of the least familiarity . the garden be cool and solitary . I walk about , wonder what my feeling of happiness would be , if I could ever become engage to this dear wonder . as to marriage , and fortune , and all that , I believe I be almost as innocently undesign then , as when I love little Em'ly . to be allow to call she ' Dora' , to write to she , to dote upon and worship she , to have reason to think that when she be with other people she be yet mindful of I , see to I the summit of human ambition - I be sure it be the summit of mine . there be no doubt whatever that I be a lackadaisical young spooney ; but there be a purity of heart in all this , that prevent my have quite a contemptuous recollection of it , let I laugh as I may . I have not be walk long , when I turn a corner , and meet she . I tingle again from head to foot as my recollection turn that corner , and my pen shakes in my hand . ' you - be - out early , , ' say I . ' it be so stupid at home , ' she reply , ' and be so absurd ! she talk such nonsense about it be be necessary for the day to be air , before I come out . Aired ! ' ( she laugh , here , in the most melodious manner . ) 'On a morning , when I do not practise , I must do something . so I tell papa last night I must come out . besides , it be the brightest time of the whole day . do not you think so ? ' I hazard a bold flight , and say ( not without stammer ) that it be very bright to I then , though it have be very dark to I a minute before . ' do you mean a compliment ? ' say , 'or that the weather have really change ? ' I stammer worse than before , in replying that I mean no compliment , but the plain truth ; though I be not aware of any change have take place in the weather . it be in the state of my own feeling , I add bashfully : to clench the explanation . I never see such curl - how could I , for there never be such curl ! - as those she shake out to hide she blush . as to the straw hat and blue ribbon which be on the top of the curl , if I could only have hang it up in my room in , what a priceless possession it would have be ! ' you have just come home from , ' say I . ' yes , ' say she . ' have you ever be there ? ' ' no . ' 'Oh ! I hope you will go soon ! you would like it so much ! ' trace of deep - seat anguish appear in my countenance . that she should hope I would go , that she should think it possible I could go , be insupportable . I depreciate ; I depreciate . I say I would not leave , under exist circumstance , for any earthly consideration . nothing should induce I . in short , she be shak the curl again , when the little dog come run along the walk to we relief . he be mortally jealous of I , and persist in barking at I . she take he up in she arm - oh my goodness ! - and caress he , but he persist upon barking still . he would not let I touch he , when I try ; and then she beat he . it increase my suffering greatly to see the pat she give he for punishment on the bridge of he blunt nose , while he wink he eye , and lick she hand , and still grow within himself like a little double - bass . at length he be quiet - well he might be with she dimple ching upon he head ! - and we walk away to look at a greenhouse . ' you be not very intimate with , be you ? ' say . -'My pet . ' ( the two last word be to the dog . oh , if they have only be to I ! ) ' no ,' I reply . ' not at all so . ' ' she be a tiresome creature , ' say , pout . 'I can not think what papa can have be about , when he choose such a vexatious thing to be my companion . who want a protector ? I be sure I do not want a protector . Jip can protect I a great deal better than , - can not you , , dear ? ' he only wink lazily , when she kiss he ball of a head . ' call she my confidential friend , but I
I be sure she be no such thing - be she , ? we be not go to confide in any such cross people , and I . we mean to bestow we confidence where we like , and to find out we own friend , instead of have they find out for we - do not we , ? ' make a comfortable noise , in answer , a little like a tea - kettle when it sing . as for I , every word be a new heap of fetter , rivet above the last . ' it be very hard , because we have not a kind Mama , that we be to have , instead , a sulky , gloomy old thing like , always follow we about - be not it , ? never mind , . we will not be confidential , and we will make ourselves as happy as we can in spite of she , and we will tease she , and not please she - will not we , ? ' if it have last any longer , I think I must have go down on my knee on the gravel , with the probability before I of graze they , and of be presently eject from the premise besides . but , by good fortune the greenhouse be not far off , and these word bring we to it . it contain quite a show of beautiful geranium . we loiter along in front of they , and often stop to admire this one or that one , and I stop to admire the same one , and , laugh , hold the dog up childishly , to smell the flower ; and if we be not all three in , certainly I be . the scent of a geranium leaf , at this day , strike I with a half comical half serious wonder as to what change have come over I in a moment ; and then I see a straw hat and blue ribbon , and a quantity of curl , and a little black dog be hold up , in two slender arm , against a bank of blossom and bright leave . have be look for we . she find we here ; and present she uncongenial cheek , the little wrinkle in it fill with hair powder , to to be kiss . then she take 's arm in hers , and march we into breakfast as if it be a soldier 's funeral . how many cup of tea I drank , because make it , I do not know . but , I perfectly remember that I sit swill tea until my whole nervous system , if I have have any in those day , must have go by the board . by and by we go to church . be between and I in the pew ; but I hear she s , and the congregation vanish . a sermon be deliver - about , of course - and I be afraid that be all I know of the service . we have a quiet day . no company , a walk , a family dinner of four , and a evening of look over book and picture ; with a homily before she , and she eye upon we , keep guard vigilantly . ah ! little do imagine , when he sit opposite to I after dinner that day , with he pocket - handkerchief over he head , how fervently I be embrace he , in my fancy , as he son - in - law ! little do he think , when I take leave of he at night , that he have just give he full consent to my be engage to , and that I be invoke blessing on he head ! we depart early in the morning , for we have a salvage case come on in the , require a rather accurate knowledge of the whole science of navigation , in which ( as we could not be expect to know much about those matters in the ) the judge have entreate two old Trinity Masters , for charity 's sake , to come and help he out . be at the breakfast - table to make the tea again , however ; and I have the melancholy pleasure of take off my hat to she in the phaeton , as she stand on the door - step with in she arm . what the be to I that day ; what nonsense i make of we case in my mind , as I listen to it ; how I see ' engrave upon the blade of the silver oar which they lay upon the table , as the emblem of that high jurisdiction ; and how I feel when go home without I ( I have have a insane hope that he might take I back again ) , as if I be a mariner myself , and the ship to which I belong have sai away and leave I on a desert island ; I shall make no fruitless effort to describe . if that sleepy old court could rouse itself , and present in any visible form the daydream I have have in it about , it would reveal my truth . I do not mean the dream that I dream on that day alone , but day after day , from week to week , and term to term . I go there , not to attend to what be go on , but to think about . if ever I bestow a thought upon the case , as they drag they slow length before I , it be only to wonder , in the matrimonial case ( remember ) , how it be that marry people could ever be
be otherwise than happy ; and , in the Prerogative case , to consider , if the money in question have be leave to I , what be the foremost step I should immediately have take in regard to . within the first week of my passion , I buy four sumptuous waistcoat - not for myself ; I have no pride in they ; for - and take to wear straw - coloured kid glove in the street , and lay the foundation of all the corn I have ever have . if the boot I wear at that period could only be produce and compare with the natural size of my foot , they would show what the state of my heart be , in a most affect manner . and yet , wretch cripple as I make myself by this act of homage to , I walk mile upon mile daily in the hope of see she . not only be I soon as well know on the as the postman on that beat , but I pervad likewise . I walk about the street where the best shop for lady were , I haunt the like a unquiet spirit , I fag through the again and again , long after I be quite knock up . sometimes , at long interval and on rare occasion , I see she . perhaps I see she glove wav in a carriage window ; perhaps I meet she , walk with she and a little way , and speak to she . in the latter case I be always very miserable afterwards , to think that I have say nothing to the purpose ; or that she have no idea of the extent of my devotion , or that she car nothing about I . I be always look out , as may be suppose , for another invitation to 's house . I be always be disappoint , for I get none . must have be a woman of penetration ; for when this attachment be but a few week old , and I have not have the courage to write more explicitly even to , than that I have be to 's house , ' whose family ,' I add , ' consists of one daughter ' ; - I say Crupp must have be a woman of penetration , for , even in that early stage , she find it out . she come up to I one evening , when I be very low , to ask ( she be then afflict with the disorder I have mention ) if I could oblige she with a little tincture of cardamum mix with rhubarb , and flavoure with seven drop of the essence of clove , which be the best remedy for she complaint ; - or , if I have not such a thing by I , with a little brandy , which be the next best . it be not , she remark , so palatable to she , but it be the next best . as I have never even hear of the first remedy , and always have the second in the closet , I give Crupp a glass of the second , which ( that I might have no suspicion of its be devoted to any improper use ) she begin to take in my presence . ' cheer up , sir , ' say . 'I can not abear to see you so , sir : I be a mother myself . ' I do not quite perceive the application of this fact to myself , but I smile on , as benignly as be in my power . ' come , sir , ' say . ' excuse I . I know what it be , sir . there be a lady in the case . ' ' ? ' I return , redden . 'Oh , bless you ! keep a good heart , sir ! ' say , nodd encouragement . ' never say die , sir ! if she do not smile upon you , there be a many as will . you be a young gentleman to be smile on , , and you must learn you walue , sir . ' always call I : firstly , no doubt , because it be not my name ; and secondly , I be inclin to think , in some indistinct association with a washing - day . ' what make you suppose there be any young lady in the case , ? ' say I . ' , ' say , with a great deal of feeling , 'I be a mother myself . ' for some time Mr . Crupp could only lay she hand upon she nankeen bosom , and fortify herself against return pain with sip of she medicine . at length she speak again . ' when the present set be take for you by you dear aunt , , ' say , 'my remark were , I have now find summun I could care for . " thank ! " be the expression , " I have now find summun I can care for ! " - you do not eat enough , sir , nor yet drink . ' ' be that what you find you supposition on , ? ' say I . ' , ' say , in a tone approach to severity , 'I have laundress other young gentleman besides yourself . a young gentleman may be over-careful of himself , or he may be under - careful of himself . he may brush he hair too regular , or too un - regular . he may wear he boot much too large for he , or much too small . that be accord as the young gentleman have he original character for . but let he
he go to which extreme he may , sir , there be a young lady in both of th'ey . ' shook she head in such a determined manner , that I have not a inch of vantage - ground left . ' it be but the gentleman which die here before yourself , ' say , ' that fall in love - with a barmaid - and have he waistcoat take in directly , though much swell by drinking . ' ' . , ' say I , ' I must beg you not to connect the young lady in my case with a barmaid , or anything of that sort , if you please . ' ' Copperfull , ' return , 'I be a mother myself , and not likely . I ask you pardon , sir , if I intrude . I should never wish to intrude where I be not welcome . but you be a young gentleman , , and my adwice to you be , to cheer up , sir , to keep a good heart , and to know you own walue . if you be to take to something , sir , ' say , ' if you be to take to skittle , now , which be healthy , you might find it diver you mind , and do you good . ' with these word , , affec to be very careful of the brandy - which be all gone - thanke I with a majestic curtsey , and retire . as she figure disappear into the gloom of the entry , this counsel certainly present itself to my mind in the light of a slight liberty on Crupp's part ; but , at the same time , I be content to receive it , in another point of view , as a word to the wise , and a warning in future to keep my secret better . chapter 27 it may have be in consequence of 's advice , and , perhaps , for no better reason than because there be a certain similarity in the sound of the word skittle and Traddle , that it come into my head , next day , to go and look after Traddles . the time he have mention be more than our , and he live in a little street near the Veterinary College at , which be principally tenant , as one of we clerk who live in that direction inform I , by gentleman student , who buy live donkey , and make experiment on those quadruped in they private apartment . have obtain from this clerk a direction to the academic grove in question , I set out , the same afternoon , to visit my old schoolfellow . I find that the street be not as desirable a one as I could have wish it to be , for the sake of Traddles . the inhabitant appear to have a propensity to throw any little trifle they be not in want of , into the road : which not only make it rank and sloppy , but untidy too , on account of the cabbage - leave . the refuse be not wholly vegetable either , for I myself see a shoe , a double - up saucepan , a black bonnet , and a umbrella , in various stage of decomposition , as I be look out for the number I want . the general air of the place remind I forcibly of the day when I live with and . a indescribable character of fade gentility that attach to the house I seek , and make it unlike all the other house in the street - though they be all build on one monotonous pattern , and look like the early copy of a blundering boy who be learn to make house , and have not yet get out of he cramped brick - and - mortar pothook - remind I still more of and . happen to arrive at the door as it be open to the afternoon milkman , I be remind of and more forcibly yet . ' now , ' say the milkman to a very youthful servant girl . ' have that there little bill of mine be heered on ? ' 'Oh , master say he will attend to it immediate , ' be the reply . ' because , ' say the milkman , go on as if he have receive no answer , and speak , as I judge from he tone , rather for the edification of somebody within the house , than of the youthful servant - a impression which be strengthen by he manner of glaring down the passage - ' because that there little bill have be run so long , that I begin to believe it be run away altogether , and never will not be heerd of . now , I be not a go to stand it , you know ! ' say the milkman , still throw he voice into the house , and glar down the passage . as to he deal in the mild article of milk , by the by , there never be a greater anomally . he deportment would have be fierce in a butcher or a brandy - merchant . the voice of the youthful servant become faint , but she seem to I , from the action of she lip , again to murmur that it would be attend to immediate . 'I tell you what , ' say the milkman , look hard at she for the first time , and take she by the ching , ' be you fond of milk ? ' ' yes , I like it , ' she reply . ' good , ' say the milkman . ' then you will not have
have none tomorrow . D'ye hear ? not a fragment of milk you will not have tomorrow . ' I think she seem , upon the whole , relieve by the prospect of have any today . the milkman , after shak he head at she darkly , release she ching , and with anything rather than good - will open he can , and deposit the usual quantity in the family jug . this do , he go away , mutter , and utter the cry of he trade next door , in a vindictive shriek . ' do live here ? ' I then inquire . a mysterious voice from the end of the passage reply ' yes . ' upon which the youthful servant reply ' yes . ' ' be he at home ? ' say I . again the mysterious voice reply in the affirmative , and again the servant echo it . upon this , I walk in , and in pursuance of the servant 's direction walk upstairs ; conscious , as I pass the back parlour - door , that I be survey by a mysterious eye , probably belong to the mysterious voice . when I get to the top of the stair - the house be only a story high above the ground floor - Traddle be on the landing to meet I . he be delighted to see I , and give I welcome , with great heartiness , to he little room . it be in the front of the house , and extremely neat , though sparely furnish . it be he only room , I see ; for there be a sofa -bedstead in it , and he blacke - brush and black be among he book - on the top shelf , behind a dictionary . he table be cover with papers , and he be hard at work in a old coat . I look at nothing , that I know of , but I see everything , even to the prospect of a church upon he china inkstand , as I sit down - and this , too , be a faculty confirm in I in the old time . various ingenious arrangement he have make , for the disguise of he chest of drawer , and the accommodation of he boot , he shaving - glass , and so forth , particularly impress themselves upon I , as evidence of the same Traddle who use to make model of elephant 's den in writing - paper to put fly in ; and to comfort himself under ill usage , with the memorable work of art I have so often mention . in a corner of the room be something neatly cover up with a large white cloth . I could not make out what that be . ' Traddle , ' say I , shak hand with he again , after I have sit down , 'I be delighted to see you . ' 'I be delighted to see you , , ' he return . 'I be very glad indeed to see you . it be because I be thoroughly glad to see you when we meet in , and be sure you be thoroughly glad to see I , that I give you this address instead of my address at chamber . ' 'Oh ! you have chamber ? ' say I . ' why , I have the fourth of a room and a passage , and the fourth of a clerk , ' return Traddles . ' three other and myself unite to have a set of chamber - to look business - like - and we quarter the clerk too . half - a - cry a week he cost I . ' he old simple character and good temper , and something of he old unlucky fortune also , I think , smile at I in the smile with which he make this explanation . ' it be not because I have the least pride , , you understand , ' say , ' that I do not usually give my address here . it be only on account of those who come to I , who might not like to come here . for myself , I be fight my way on in the world against difficulty , and it would be ridiculous if I make a pretence of do anything else . ' ' you be read for the bar , inform I ? ' say I . ' why , yes , ' say Traddles , rub he hand slowly over one another . 'I be read for the bar . the fact be , I have just begin to keep my term , after rather a long delay . it be some time since I be article , but the payment of that hundred pound be a great pull . a great pull ! ' say Traddles , with a wince , as if he have have a tooth out . ' do you know what I can not help think of , Traddles , as I sit here look at you ? ' I ask he . ' no , ' say he . ' that sky - blue suit you use to wear . ' ' , to be sure ! ' cry Traddles , laugh . ' tight in the arm and leg , you know ? dear I ! well ! those be happy time , be not they ? ' 'I think we schoolmaster might have make they happier , without do any harm to any of we , I acknowledge ,' I return . ' perhaps he might , ' say Traddles . ' but dear I , there be a good deal of fun go on . do you remember the nights in the bedroom ?
? when we use to have the supper ? and when you use to tell the story ? , ha , ha ! and do you remember when I get can for cry about ? ! I should like to see he again , too ! ' ' he be a brute to you , Traddles , ' say I , indignantly ; for he good humour make I feel as if I have see he beat but yesterday . ' do you think so ? ' return Traddles . ' really ? perhaps he be rather . but it be all over , a long while . ! ' ' you be brotch up by a uncle , then ? ' say I . ' of course I be ! ' say Traddles . ' the one I be always go to write to . and always do not , eh! , ha , ha ! yes , I have a uncle then . he die soon after I leave school . ' ' indeed ! ' ' yes . he be a retire - what do you call it ! - draper - cloth -merchant - and have make I he heir . but he do not like I when I grow up . ' ' do you really mean that ? ' say I . he be so compose , that I fancie he must have some other meaning . ' oh dear , yes , ! I mean it , ' reply Traddle . ' it be a unfortunate thing , but he do not like I at all . he say I be not at all what he expect , and so he marry he housekeeper . ' ' and what do you do ? ' I ask . 'I do not do anything in particular , ' say Traddles . 'I live with they , wait to be put out in the world , until he gout unfortunately fly to he stomach - and so he die , and so she marry a young man , and so I be not provide for . ' ' do you get nothing , , after all ? ' ' oh dear , yes ! ' say Traddles . 'I get fifty pound . I have never be bring up to any profession , and at first I be at a loss what to do for myself . however , I begin , with the assistance of the son of a professional man , who have be to - , with he nose on one side . do you recollect he ? ' no . he have not be there with I ; all the nose be straight in my day . ' it do not matter , ' say Traddles . 'I begin , by means of he assistance , to copy law writing . that do not answer very well ; and then I begin to state case for they , and make abstract , and that sort of work . for I be a plodding kind of fellow , , and have lear not the way of do such thing pithily . well ! that put it in my head to enter myself as a law student ; and that run away with all that be leave of the fifty pound . recommend I to one or two other office , however - 's for one - and I get a good many job . I be fortunate enough , too , to become acquainted with a person in the publishing way , who be get up a , and he set I to work ; and , indeed ' ( glance at he table ) , be at work for he at this minute . I be not a bad compiler , , ' say Traddles , preserve the same air of cheerful confidence in all he say , ' but I have no invention at all ; not a particle . I suppose there never be a young man with less originality than I have . ' as Traddle seem to expect that I should assent to this as a matter of course , I nod ; and he go on , with the same sprightly patience - I can find no better expression - as before . 'So , by little and little , and not live high , I manage to scrape up the hundred pound at last , ' say Traddle ; 'and thank that be pay - though it be - though it certainly be , ' say Traddles , wince again as if he have have another tooth out , 'a pull . I be live by the sort of work I have mention , still , and I hope , one of these day , to get connect with some newspaper : which would almost be the making of my fortune . now , , you be so exactly what you use to be , with that agreeable face , and it be so pleasant to see you , that I sha ' not conceal anything . therefore you must know that I be engage . ' engage ! oh , ! ' she be a curate 's daughter , ' say Traddle ; 'one of ten , down in . yes ! ' for he see I glance , involuntarily , at the prospect on the inkstand . ' that be the church ! you come round here to the left , out of this gate , ' trace he finger along the inkstand , ' and exactly where I hold this pen , there stand the house - facing , you understand , towards the church . ' the delight with which he enter into these particular , do not fully present itself to I until afterwards ; for my selfish thought be make a
a ground - plan of 's house and garden at the same moment . ' she be such a dear girl ! ' say Traddle ; 'a little older than I , but the dearest girl ! I tell you I be go out of town ? I have be down there . I walk there , and I walk back , and I have the most delightful time ! I dare say ours be likely to be a rather long engagement , but we motto be " wait and hope ! " we always say that . " wait and hope , " we always say . and she would wait , , till she be sixty - any age you can mention - for I ! ' Traddle rise from he chair , and , with a triumphant smile , put he hand upon the white cloth I have observe . 'However ,' he say , ' it be not that we have not make a begin towards housekeeping . no , no ; we have begin . we must get on by degree , but we have begin . here , ' draw the cloth off with great pride and care , ' be two piece of furniture to commence with . this flower - pot and stand , she buy herself . you put that in a parlour window , ' say Traddles , fal a little back from it to survey it with the greater admiration , ' with a plant in it , and - and there you be ! this little round table with the marble top ( it be two foot ten in circumference ) , I buy . you want to lay a book down , you know , or somebody come to see you or you wife , and want 's a place to stand a cup of tea upon , and - and there you be again ! ' say Traddles . ' it be a admirable piece of workmanship - firm as a rock ! ' I praise they both , highly , and replace the covering as carefully as he have remove it . ' it be not a great deal towards the furnishing , ' say Traddles , ' but it be something . the table - clot , and pillow - case , and article of that kind , be what discourage I most , . so do the ironmongery - candle - box , and gridiron , and that sort of necessaries - because those thing tell , and mount up . however , " wait and hope ! " and I assure you she be the dearest girl ! ' 'I be quite certain of it , ' say I . ' in the meantime , ' say Traddles , come back to he chair ; 'and this be the end of my prosing about myself , I get on as well as I can . I do not make much , but I do not spend much . in general , I board with the people downstairs , who be very agreeable people indeed . both and have see a good deal of life , and be excellent company . ' 'my dear Traddles ! ' I quickly exclaim . ' what be you talk about ? ' Traddle look at I , as if he wonder what I be talk about . ' and ! ' I repeat . ' why , I be intimately acquaint with they ! ' a opportune double knock at the door , which I know well from old experience in , and which nobody but could ever have knock at that door , resolve any doubt in my mind as to they be my old friend . I beg Traddles to ask he landlord to walk up . Traddle accordingly do so , over the banister ; and , not a bit change - he tight , he stick , he shirt - collar , and he eye - glass , all the same as ever - come into the room with a genteel and youthful air . 'I beg you pardon , , ' say , with the old roll in he voice , as he check himself in hum a soft tune . 'I be not aware that there be any individual , alien to this tenement , in you sanctum . ' slightly bow to I , and pull up he shirt - collar . ' how do you do , ? ' say I . ' , ' say , ' you be exceedingly oblige . I be in statu quo . ' ' and ? ' I pursue . ' , ' say , ' she be also , thank , in statu quo . ' ' and the child , ? ' ' , ' say , rejoice to reply that they be , likewise , in the enjoyment of salubrity . ' all this time , have not know I in the least , though he have stand face to face with I . but now , see I smile , he examine my feature with more attention , fall back , cry , ' be it possible ! have I the pleasure of again behold ! ' and shake I by both hand with the utmost fervour . ' , ! ' say , 'too think that I should find you acquaint with the friend of my youth , the companion of earlier day ! my dear ! ' call over the banister to , while Traddles look ( with reason ) not a little amazed at this description of I . ' here be a gentleman in 's apartment , whom he wish to have the pleasure of presenting to you , my love ! ' immediately reappear , and shake hand with I again . '
' and how be we good friend the , ? ' say , ' and all the circle at ? ' 'I have none but good account of they , ' say I . 'I be most delighted to hear it , ' say . ' it be at where we last met . within the shadow , I may figuratively say , of that religious edifice immortalize by , which be anciently the resort of Pilgrims from the remotest corner of - in short , ' say , 'in the immediate neighbourhood of the . ' I reply that it be . continue talk as volubly as he could ; but not , I think , without show , by some mark of concern in he countenance , that he be sensible of sound in the next room , as of wash she hand , and hurriedly open and shutt drawer that be uneasy in they action . ' you find we , , ' say , with one eye on Traddles , ' at present establish , on what may be designate as a small and unassuming scale ; but , you be aware that I have , in the course of my career , surmounted difficulty , and conquer obstacle . you be no stranger to the fact , that there have be period of my life , when it have be requisite that I should pause , until certain expect event should turn up ; when it have be necessary that I should fall back , before make what I trust I shall not be accuse of presumption in terming - a spring . the present be one of those momentous stage in the life of man . you find I , fall back , for a spring ; and I have every reason to believe that a vigorous leap will shortly be the result . ' I be express my satisfaction , when come in ; a little more slatternly than she use to be , or so she seem now , to my unaccustomed eye , but still with some preparation of herself for company , and with a pair of brown glove on . ' my dear , ' say , lead she towards I , ' here be a gentleman of the name of , who wish to renew he acquaintance with you . ' it would have be better , as it turn out , to have lead gently up to this announcement , for , be in a delicate state of health , be overcome by it , and be take so unwell , that be oblige , in great trepidation , to run down to the water - butt in the backyard , and draw a basinful to lave she brow with . she presently revive , however , and be really pleased to see I . we have half - a - hour 's talk , all together ; and I ask she about the twin , who , she say , be ' grow great creature ' ; and after master and , whom she describe as ' absolute giant ' , but they be not produce on that occasion . be very anxious that I should stay to dinner . I should not have be averse to do so , but that I imagine I detect trouble , and calculation relative to the extent of the cold meat , in 's eye . I therefore plead another engagement ; and observe that 's spirit be immediately lighten , I resist all persuasion to forego it . but I tell Traddles , and and , that before I could think of leave , they must appoint a day when they would come and dine with I . the occupation to which stood pledge , render it necessary to fix a somewhat distant one ; but a appointment be make for the purpose , that suit we all , and then I take my leave . , under pretence of show I a nearer way than that by which i have come , accompany I to the corner of the street ; be anxious ( he explain to I ) to say a few word to a old friend , in confidence . ' my dear , ' say , 'I need hardly tell you that to have beneath we roof , under exist circumstance , a mind like that which gleam - if I may be allow the expression - which gleam - in you friend Traddles , be a unspeakable comfort . with a washerwoman , who expose hard - bake for sale in she parlour - window , dwell next door , and a Bow - street officer reside over the way , you may imagine that he society be a source of consolation to myself and to . I be at present , my dear , engage in the sale of corn upon commission . it be not a avocation of a remunerative description - in other word , it do not pay - and some temporary embarrassment of a pecuniary nature have be the consequence . I be , however , delighte to add that I have now a immediate prospect of something turn up ( I be not at liberty to say in what direction ) , which I trust will enable I to provide , permanently , both for myself and for you friend Traddles , in whom I have a unaffected interest . you may , perhaps , be prepared to hear that . be in a state of health which render it not wholly improbable that a addition may be ultimately make to those pledge of affection which - in short , to the infantine group . 's family have be so good as to express they dissatisfaction at this state of thing . I have merely to observe ,
, that I be not aware that it be any business of theirs , and that I repel that exhibition of feeling with scorn , and with defiance ! ' then shook hand with I again , and leave I . chapter 28 's Gauntlet until the day arrive on which I be to entertain my newly - find old friend , I liv principally on and coffee . in my love - lorn condition , my appetite languish ; and I be glad of it , for I feel as though it would have be a act of perfidy towards to have a natural relish for my dinner . the quantity of walk exercise I take , be not in this respect attend with its usual consequence , as the disappointment counteract the fresh air . I have my doubt , too , found on the acute experience acquire at this period of my life , whether a sound enjoyment of animal food can develop itself freely in any human subject who be always in torment from tight boot . I think the extremity require to be at peace before the stomach will conduct itself with vigour . on the occasion of this domestic little party , I do not repeat my former extensive preparation . I merely provide a pair of soles , a small leg of mutton , and a pigeon - pie . break out into rebellion on my first bashful hint in reference to the cooking of the fish and joint , and say , with a dignify sense of injury , ' no ! no , sir ! you will not ask I sich a thing , for you be better acquaint with I than to suppose I capable of do what I can not do with ampial satisfaction to my own feeling ! ' but , in the end , a compromise be effect ; and consent to achieve this feat , on condition that I dine from home for a fortnight afterwards . and here I may remark , that what I undergo from , in consequence of the tyranny she establish over I , be dreadful . I never be so much afraid of anyone . we make a compromise of everything . if I hesitate , she be take with that wonderful disorder which be always lie in ambush in she system , ready , at the shortest notice , to prey upon she vital . if I ring the bell impatiently , after half - a - dozen unavailing modest pull , and she appear at last - which be not by any means to be rely upon - she would appear with a reproachful aspect , sink breathless on a chair near the door , lay she hand upon she nankeen bosom , and become so ill , that I be glad , at any sacrifice of brandy or anything else , to get rid of she . if I object to have my bed make at five o'clock in the afternoon - which I do still think a uncomfortable arrangement - one motion of she hand towards the same nankeen region of wounded sensibility be enough to make I falter a apology . in short , I would have do anything in a honourable way rather than give offence ; and she be the terror of my life . I buy a second - hand dumb - waiter for this dinner - party , in preference to re-engage the handy young man ; against whom I have conceive a prejudice , in consequence of meet he in the , one morning , in a waistcoat remarkably like one of mine , which have be miss since the former occasion . the ' young gal ' be re-engage ; but on the stipulation that she should only bring in the dish , and then withdraw to the landing - place , beyond the outer door ; where a habit of sniffing she have contract would be lose upon the guest , and where she retire on the plate would be a physical impossibility . have lay in the material for a bowl of punch , to be compound by ; have provide a bottle of lavender - water , two wax - candle , a paper of mix pins , and a pincushion , to assist in she toilette at my dressing - table ; have also cause the fire in my bedroom to be light for 's convenience ; and have lay the cloth with my own hand , I await the result with composure . at the appointed time , my three visitor arrive together . with more shirt - collar than usual , and a new ribbon to he eye - glass ; with she cap in a whitey - brown paper parcel ; Traddles carry the parcel , and support on he arm . they be all delighted with my residence . when I conduct . to my dressing - table , and she see the scale on which it be prepare for she , she be in such rapture , that she call to come in and look . ' my dear , ' say , ' this be luxurious . this be a way of life which remind I of the period when I be myself in a state of celibacy , and . have not yet be solicite to plight she faith at the Hymeneal altar . ' ' he mean , solicite by he , , ' say , archly . ' he can not answer for other . ' 'My dear , ' return with sudden seriousness , 'I have no desire to answer for other . I be too well aware that when , in the inscrutable decree of Fate , you be reserve for I , it be possible you may have be reserve for one , destin
destin , after a protract struggle , at length to fall a victim to pecuniary involvement of a complicated nature . I understand you allusion , my love . I regret it , but I can bear it . ' ' ! ' exclaim , in tear . ' have I deserve this ! I , who never have desert you ; who never will desert you , ! ' ' my love , ' say , much affected , ' you will forgive , and we old and try friend , I be sure , forgive , the momentary laceration of a wounded spirit , make sensitive by a recent collision with the of - in other word , with a ribald Turncock attach to the water - work - and will pity , not condemn , its excess . ' then embrace , and press my hand ; leave I to infer from this broken allusion that he domestic supply of water have be cut off that afternoon , in consequence of default in the payment of the company 's rate . to divert he thought from this melancholy subject , I inform that I rely upon he for a bowl of punch , and lead he to the lemon . he recent despondency , not to say despair , be go in a moment . I never see a man so thoroughly enjoy himself amid the fragrance of lemon - peel and sugar , the odour of burn rum , and the steam of boiling water , as do that afternoon . it be wonderful to see he face shine at we out of a thin cloud of these delicate fume , as he stir , and mix , and taste , and look as if he be make , instead of punch , a fortune for he family down to the latest posterity . as to . , I do not know whether it be the effect of the cap , or the lavender - water , or the pins , or the fire , or the wax - candle , but she come out of my room , comparatively speak , lovely . and the lark be never gayer than that excellent woman . I suppose - I never venture to inquire , but I suppose - that , after fry the soles , be take ill . because we break down at that point . the leg of come up very red within , and very pale without : besides have a foreign substance of a gritty nature sprinkle over it , as if if have have a fall into the ash of that remarkable kitchen fireplace . but we be not in condition to judge off this fact from the appearance of the gravy , forasmuch as the ' young gal ' have drop it all upon the stair - where it remain , by the by , in a long train , until it be wear out . the pigeon - pie be not bad , but it be a delusive pie : the crust be like a disappointing head , phrenologically speak : full of lump and bump , with nothing particular underneath . in short , the banquet be such a failure that I should have be quite unhappy - about the failure , I mean , for I be always unhappy about - if I have not be relieve by the great good humour of my company , and by a bright suggestion from . ' my dear friend , ' say , ' accident will occur in the best - regulate family ; and in family not regulate by that pervading influence which sanctify while it enhance the - a - I would say , in short , by the influence of , in the lofy character of wife , they may be expect with confidence , and must be borne with philosophy . if you will allow I to take the liberty of remarking that there be few comestible better , in they way , than a , and that I believe , with a little division of labour , we could accomplish a good one if the young person in attendance could produce a gridiron , I would put it to you , that this little misfortune may be easily repair . ' there be a gridiron in the pantry , on which my morning rasher of bacon be cook . we have it in , in a twinkling , and immediately apply ourselves to carry 's idea into effect . the division of labour to which he have refer be this : - Traddles cut the mutton into slice ; ( who could do anything of this sort to perfection ) cover they with pepper , mustard , salt , and cayenne ; I put they on the gridiron , turn they with a fork , and take they off , under 's direction ; and heat , and continually stir , some mushroom ketchup in a little saucepan . when we have slex enough do to begin upon , we fall - to , with we sleeve still tuck up at the wrist , more slice sputter and blaze on the fire , and we attention divide between the mutton on we plate , and the mutton then prepare . what with the novelty of this cookery , the excellence of it , the bustle of it , the frequent start up to look after it , the frequent sit down to dispose of it as the crisp slice come off the gridiron hot and hot , the be so busy , so flushed with the fire , so amused , and in the midst of such a tempting noise and savour , we reduce the leg of mutton to the bone . my own appetite come back miraculously . I be asham to record
record it , but I really believe I forgot for a little while . I be satisfied that and . could not have enjoy the feast more , if they have sell a bed to provide it . Traddle laugh as heartily , almost the whole time , as he eat and work . indeed we all do , all at once ; and I dare say there be never a greater success . we be at the height of we enjoyment , and be all busily engage , in we several department , endeavour to bring the last batch of slice to a state of perfection that should cry the feast , when I be aware of a strange presence in the room , and my eye encounter those of the staid Littimer , stand hat in hand before I . ' what be the matter ? ' I involuntarily ask . 'I beg you pardon , sir , I be direct to come in . be my master not here , sir ? ' ' no . ' ' have you not see he , sir ? ' ' no ; do not you come from he ? ' ' not immediately so , sir . ' ' do he tell you you would find he here ? ' ' not exactly so , sir . but I should think he might be here tomorrow , as he have not be here today . ' ' be he come up from ? ' 'i beg , sir ,' he return respectfully , ' that you will be seate , and allow I to do this . ' with which he take the fork from my unresisting hand , and bend over the gridiron , as if he whole attention be concentrate on it . we should not have be much discompose , I dare say , by the appearance of himself , but we become in a moment the meekest of the meek before he respectable serving - man . , hum a tune , to show that he be quite at ease , subside into he chair , with the handle of a hastily concealed fork stick out of the bosom of he coat , as if he have stab himself . put on she brown glove , and assume a genteel languor . Traddle run he greasy hand through he hair , and stand it bolt upright , and star in confusion on the table - cloth . as for I , I be a mere infant at the head of my own table ; and hardly venture to glance at the respectable phenomenon , who have come from know where , to put my establishment to rights . meanwhile he take the mutton off the gridiron , and gravely hand it round . we all take some , but we appreciation of it be gone , and we merely make a show of eat it . as we severally push away we plate , he noiselessly remove they , and set on the cheese . he take that off , too , when it be do with ; clear the table ; pile everything on the dumb -waiter ; give we we wine - glass ; and , of he own accord , wheel the dumb -waiter into the pantry . all this be done in a perfect manner , and he never raise he eye from what he be about . yet he very elbows , when he have he back towards I , seem to teem with the expression of he fix opinion that I be extremely young . ' can I do anything more , sir ? ' I thank he and say , no ; but would he take no dinner himself ? ' none , I be oblige to you , sir . ' 'Is come from ? ' 'I beg you pardon , sir ? ' 'Is come from ? ' 'I should imagine that he might be here tomorrow , sir . I rather think he might have be here today , sir . the mistake be mine , no doubt , sir . ' ' if you should see he first -' say I . ' if you will excuse I , sir , I do not think I shall see he first . ' ' in case you do , ' say I , ' pray say that I be sorry he be not here today , as a old schoolfellow of he be here . ' ' indeed , sir ! ' and he divide a bow between I and , with a glance at the latter . he be move softly to the door , when , in a forlorn hope of say something naturally - which I never could , to this man - I say : ' oh ! ! ' ' ! ' ' do you remain long at , that time ? ' ' not particularly so , sir . ' ' you see the boat complete ? ' ' yes , sir . I remain behind on purpose to see the boat complete . ' 'I know ! ' he raise he eye to mine respectfully . ' have not see it yet , I suppose ? ' 'I really can not say , sir . I think - but I really can not say , sir . I wish you good night , sir . ' he comprehend everybody present , in the respectful bow with which he follow these word , and disappear . my visitor seem to breathe more freely when he be go ; but my own relief be very great , for besides the constraint , arise from that extraordinary sense of be at a disadvantage which I always have in this man 's presence , my conscience have embarrass I with whisper that I
I have mistrust he master , and I could not repress a vague uneasy dread that he might find it out . how be it , have so little in reality to conceal , that I always do feel as if this man be find I out ? rouse I from this reflection , which be blend with a certain remorseful apprehension of see himself , by bestow many encomium on the absent Littimer as a most respectable fellow , and a thoroughly admirable servant . , I may remark , have take he full share of the general bow , and have receive it with infinite condescension . ' but punch , my dear , ' say , taste it , ' like time and tide , wait for no man . ah ! it be at the present moment in high flavour . my love , will you give I you opinion ? ' pronounce it excellent . ' then I will drink , ' say , ' if my friend will permit I to take that social liberty , to the day when my friend and myself be younger , and fight we way in the world side by side . I may say , of myself and , in word we have sung together before now , that we twa hae run about the brae and pu would the gowan 's fine - in a figurative point of view - on several occasion . I be not exactly aware , ' say , with the old roll in he voice , and the old indescribable air of say something genteel , ' what gowan may be , but I have no doubt that and myself would frequently have take a pull at they , if it have be feasible . ' , at the then present moment , take a pull at he punch . so we all do : Traddle evidently lose in wonder at what distant time and I could have be comrade in the battle of the world . ' ! ' say , clear he throat , and warm with the punch and with the fire . ' my dear , another glass ? ' say it must be very little ; but we could not allow that , so it be a glassful . ' as we be quite confidential here , , ' say , sipp she punch , ' . Traddle be a part of we domesticity , I should much like to have you opinion on 's prospect . for corn , ' say argumentatively , 'as I have repeatedly say to , may be gentlemanly , but it be not remunerative . commission to the extent of two and ninepence in a fortnight cannot , however limit we idea , be consider remunerative . ' we be all agree upon that . ' then , ' say , who pride herself on take a clear view of thing , and keep straight by she woman 's wisdom , when he might otherwise go a little crooked , ' then I ask myself this question . if corn be not to be rely upon , what be ? be coal to be rely upon ? not at all . we have turn we attention to that experiment , on the suggestion of my family , and we find it fallacious . ' , lean back in he chair with he hand in he pocket , eye we aside , and nod he head , as much as to say that the case be very clearly put . ' the article of corn and coal , ' say , still more argumentatively , ' be equally out of the question , , I naturally look round the world , and say , " what be there in which a person of 's talent be likely to succeed ? " and I exclude the do anything on commission , because commission be not a certainty . what be best suite to a person of 's peculiar temperament be , I be convince , a certainty . ' Traddle and I both express , by a feeling murmur , that this great discovery be no doubt true of , and that it do he much credit . 'I will not conceal from you , my dear , ' say , ' that I have long feel the Brewing business to be particularly adapt to . look at and ! look at , , and ! it be on that extensive footing that , I know from my own knowledge of he , be calculate to shine ; and the profit , I be tell , be - ! but if can not get into those firm - which decline to answer he letter , when he offer he service even in a inferior capacity - what be the use of dwelling upon that idea ? none . I may have a conviction that 's manners -' ' Hem ! really , my dear , ' interpose . ' my love , be silent , ' say , lay she brown glove on he hand . 'I may have a conviction , , that 's manners peculiarly qualify he for the banking business . I may argue within myself , that if I have a deposit at a banking - house , the manners of , as represent that banking - house , would inspire confidence , and must extend the connexion . but if the various banking - house refuse to avail themselves of 's ability , or receive the offer of they with contumely , what be the use of dwelling upon that idea ? none . as to originate a banking - business , I may know that there be member of my family who , if they choose to place they money in 's hand , might find a
a establishment of that description . but if they do not choose to place they money in 's hand - which they do not - what be the use of that ? again I contend that we be no farther advanced than we be before . ' I shook my head , and say , ' not a bit . ' Traddle also shook he head , and say , ' not a bit . ' ' what do I deduce from this ? ' go on to say , still with the same air of put a case lucidly . ' what be the conclusion , my dear , to which I be irresistibly bring ? be I wrong in say , it be clear that we must live ? ' I answer ' not at all ! ' and answer ' not at all ! ' and I find myself afterwards sagely add , alone , that a person must either live or die . ' just so , ' return . , ' it be precisely that . and the fact be , my dear , that we can not live without something widly different from exist circumstance shortly turn up . now I be convince , myself , and this I have point out to several time of late , that thing can not be expect to turn up of themselves . we must , in a measure , assist to turn they up . I may be wrong , but I have form that opinion . ' both Traddle and I applaude it highly . ' very well , ' say . ' then what do I recommend ? here be with a variety of qualification - with great talent -' ' really , my love , ' say . ' pray , my dear , allow I to conclude . here be , with a variety of qualification , with great talent - I should say , with genius , but that may be the partiality of a wife -' Traddle and I both murmure ' no . ' ' and here be without any suitable position or employment . where do that responsibility rest ? clearly on society . then I would make a fact so disgraceful know , and boldly challenge society to set it right . it appear to I , my dear , ' say , forcibly , ' that what have to do , be to throw down the gauntlet to society , and say , in effect , " show I who will take that up . let the party immediately step forward . " ' I venture to ask . Micawber how this be to be do . ' by advertising , ' say - 'in all the papers . it appear to I , that what have to do , in justice to himself , in justice to he family , and I will even go so far as to say in justice to society , by which he have be hithertoo overlook , be to advertise in all the papers ; to describe himself plainly as so - and - so , with such and such qualifications and to put it thus : " now employ I , on remunerative term , and address , post-paid , to , , . " ' ' this idea of 's , my dear , ' say , make he shirt - collar meet in front of he ching , and glance at I sideway , 'is , in fact , the to which I allude , when I last have the pleasure of see you . ' ' advertising be rather expensive ,' I remark , dubiously . ' exactly so ! ' say , preserve the same logical air . ' quite true , my dear ! I have make the identical observation to . it be for that reason especially , that I think ought ( as I have already say , in justice to himself , in justice to he family , and in justice to society ) to raise a certain sum of money - on a bill . ' , lean back in he chair , trifle with he eye - glass and cast he eye up at the ceiling ; but I think he observant of , too , who be look at the fire . ' if no member of my family , ' say , 'is possess of sufficient natural feeling to negotiate that bill - I believe there be a better business - term to express what I mean - ' , with he eye still cast up at the ceiling , suggest ' . ' 'to discount that bill , ' say , ' then my opinion be , that should go into the City , should take that bill into the money market , and should dispose of it for what he can get . if the individual in the money to sustain a great sacrifice , that be between themselves and they conscience . I view it , steadily , as a investment . I recommend , my dear , to do the same ; to regard it as a investment which be sure of return , and to make up he mind to any sacrifice . ' I feel , but I be sure I do not know why , that this be self - deny and devote in , and I utter a murmur to that effect . Traddle , who take he tone from I , do likewise , still look at the fire . 'I will not , ' say , finish she punch , and gather she scarf about she shoulders , preparatory to she withdrawal to my bedroom : 'I will not protract these remark on the subject of 's pecuniary affair . at you fireside , my dear ,
, and in the presence of , who , though not so old a friend , be quite one of ourselves , I could not refrain from make you acquaint with the course I advise to take . I feel that the time be arrive when should exert himself and - I will add - assert himself , and it appear to I that these be the means . I be aware that I be merely a female , and that a masculine judgement be usually consider more competent to the discussion of such question ; still I must not forget that , when I live at home with my papa and mama , my papa be in the habit of say , " 's form be fragile , but she grasp of a subject be inferior to none . " that my papa be too partial , I well know ; but that he be a observer of character in some degree , my duty and my reason equally forbid I to doubt . ' with these word , and resist we entreaty that she would grase the remain circulation of the punch with she presence , retire to my bedroom . and really I feel that she be a noble woman - the sort of woman who might have be a matron , and do all manner of heroic thing , in time of public trouble . in the fervour of this impression , I congratulate on the treasure he possess . so do . extend he hand to each of we in succession , and then cover he face with he pocket - handkerchief , which I think have more snuff upon it than he be aware of . he then return to the punch , in the highest state of exhilaration . he be full of eloquence . he give we to understand that in we child we live again , and that , under the pressure of pecuniary difficulty , any accession to they number be doubly welcome . he say that . have latterly have she doubt on this point , but that he have dispell they , and reassure she . as to she family , they be totally unworthy of she , and they sentiment be utterly indifferent to he , and they might - I quote he own expression - go to the . then deliver a warm eulogy on Traddles . he say 's be a character , to the steady virtue of which he ( ) could lay no claim , but which , he thank , he could admire . he feelingly allude to the young lady , unknown , whom Traddles have honoure with he affection , and who have reciprocate that affection by honouring and bless Traddle with she affection . pledge she . so do I . Traddle thank we both , by say , with a simplicity and honesty I have sense enough to be quite charmed with , be very much obliged to you indeed . and I do assure you , she be the dearest girl ! - ' take a early opportunity , after that , of hinting , with the utmost delicacy and ceremony , at the state of my affections . nothing but the serious assurance of he friend Copperfield to the contrary , he observ , could deprive he of the impression that he friend love and be beloved . after feel very hot and uncomfortable for some time , and after a good deal of blushing , stammer , and deny , I say , have my glass in my hand , ' well ! I would give they ' which so accit and gratify , that he run with a glass of punch into my bedroom , in order that might drink , who drank it with enthusiasm , cry from , in a shrill voice , ' , hear ! my dear , I be delighte . hear ! ' and tap at the wall , by way of applause . we conversation , afterwards , take a more worldly turn ; tell we that he find inconvenient , and that the first thing he contemplate do , when the advertisement should have be the cause of something satisfactory turn up , be to move . he mention a terrace at the western end of , fronte , on which he have always have he eye , but which he do not expect to attain immediately , as it would require a large establishment . there would probably be a interval , he explain , in which he should content himself with the upper part of a house , over some respectable place of business - say in , - which would be a cheerful situation for ; and where , by throw out a bow - window , or carry up the roof another story , or make some little alteration of that sort , they might live , comfortably and reputably , for a few year . whatever be reserve for he , he expressly say , or wherever he abode might be , we might rely on this - there would always be a room for Traddles , and a knife and fork for I . we acknowledge he kindness ; and he beg we to forgive he have launch into these practical and business - like detail , and to excuse it as natural in one who be make entirely new arrangement in life . , tap at the wall again to know if tea be ready , break up this particular phase of we friendly conversation . she make tea for we in a most agreeable manner ; and , whenever I go near she , in handing about the tea - cup and bread - and - butter , ask I , in a whisper , whether be fair ,
, or dark , or whether she be short , or tall : or something of that kind ; which I think I like . after tea , we discuss a variety of topic before the fire ; and be good enough to s we ( in a small , thin , flat voice , which I remember to have consider , when I first know she , the very table - beer of acoustic ) the favourite ballad of ' the ' , and ' ' . for both of these songs have be famous when she live at home with she papa and mama . tell we , that when he hear she s the first one , on the first occasion of he see she beneath the parental roof , she have attract he attention in a extraordinary degree ; but that when it come to , he have resolve to win that woman or perish in the attempt . it be between ten and eleven o'clock when . rise to replace she cap in the whitey - brown paper parcel , and to put on she bonnet . take the opportunity of Traddles put on he great - coat , to slip a letter into my hand , with a whispered request that I would read it at my leisure . I also take the opportunity of my hold a candle over the banister to light they down , when be go first , lead , and be follow with the cap , to detain Traddle for a moment on the top of the stair . ' Traddle , ' say I , ' . do not mean any harm , poor fellow : but , if I be you , I would not lend he anything . ' 'My dear , ' return Traddle , smile , 'I have not get anything to lend . ' ' you have get a name , you know , ' say I . 'Oh ! you call that something to lend ? ' return Traddles , with a thoughtful look . ' certainly . ' 'Oh ! ' say Traddles . ' yes , to be sure ! I be very much oblige to you , ; but - I be afraid I have lent him that already . ' ' for the bill that be to be a certain investment ? ' I inquire . ' no , ' say Traddles . ' not for that one . this be the first I have hear of that one . I have be think that he will most likely propose that one , on the way home . mine be another . ' 'I hope there will be nothing wrong about it , ' say I . 'I hope not , ' say Traddles . 'I should think not , though , because he tell I , only the other day , that it be provide for . that be 's expression , " provide for . " ' look up at this juncture to where we be stand , I have only time to repeat my caution . Traddle thank I , and descende . but I be much afraid , when I observ the good - natured manner in which he go down with the cap in he hand , and give Micawber he arm , that he would be carry into the money market neck and heel . I return to my fireside , and be muse , half gravely and half laugh , on the character of and the old relation between we , when I hear a quick step ascend the stair . at first , I think it be come back for something have leave behind ; but as the step approach , I know it , and feel my heart beat high , and the blood rush to my face , for it be 's . I be never unmindful of , and she never leave that sanctuary in my thought - if I may call it so - where I have place she from the first . but when he enter , and stand before I with he hand out , the darkness that have fall on he change to light , and I feel confound and asham of have doubt one I love so heartily . I love she none the less ; I think of she as the same benignant , gentle angel in my life ; I reproach myself , not she , with have do he a injury ; and I would have make he any atonement if I have know what to make , and how to make it . ' why , daisy , old boy , dumb -founder ! ' laugh , shak my hand heartily , and throw it gaily away . ' have I detect you in another feast , you Sybarite ! these doctor ' Commons fellow be the gayest man in town , I believe , and beat we sober people all to nothing ! ' he bright glance go merrily round the room , as he take the seat on the sofa opposite to I , which have recently vacated , and stir the fire into a blaze . 'I be so surprised at first , ' say I , give he welcome with all the cordiality I feel , ' that I have hardly breath to greet you with , . ' ' well , the sight of I be good for sore eyes , as the say , ' reply , ' and so be the sight of you , , in full bloom . how be you , my Bacchanal ? ' 'I be very well , ' say I ; 'and not at all Bacchanalian tonight , though I confess to another party of three . ' ' all of whom I meet in the
the street , talk loud in you praise , ' return . ' who be we friend in the tight ? ' I give he the best idea I could , in a few word , of . he laugh heartily at my feeble portrait of that gentleman , and say he be a man to know , and he must know he . ' but who do you suppose we other friend be ? ' say I , in my turn . ' heaven know , ' say . ' not a bore , I hope ? I think he look a little like one . ' ' Traddle ! ' I reply , triumphantly . ' who be he ? ' ask , in he careless way . ' do not you remember Traddles ? Traddle in we room at ? ' 'Oh ! that fellow ! ' say , beat a lump of coal on the top of the fire , with the poker . ' be he as soft as ever ? and where the deuce do you pick he up ? ' I extoll Traddles in reply , as highly as I could ; for I feel that rather slighte he . Steerforth , dismiss the subject with a light nod , and a smile , and the remark that he would be glad to see the old fellow too , for he have always be a odd fish , inquire if I could give he anything to eat ? during most of this short dialogue , when he have not be speak in a wild vivacious manner , he have sit idly beat on the lump of coal with the poker . I observ that he do the same thing while I be get out the remains of the pigeon - pie , and so forth . ' why , , here be a supper for a king ! ' he exclaim , start out of he silence with a burst , and take he seat at the table . 'I shall do it justice , for I have come from . ' 'I think you come from ? ' I return . ' not I , ' say . 'I have be seafar - better employ . ' ' be here today , to inquire for you ,' I remark , ' and I understand he that you be at ; though , now I think of it , he certainly do not say so . ' ' be a greater fool than I think he , to have be inquire for I at all , ' say , jovially pour out a glass of wine , and drink to I . ' as to understand he , you be a cleverer fellow than most of we , , if you can do that . ' ' that be true , indeed , ' say I , move my chair to the table . ' so you have be at , ! ' interested to know all about it . ' have you be there long ? ' ' no ,' he return . 'An escapade of a week or so . ' ' and how be they all ? of course , little be not marry yet ? ' ' not yet . go to be , I believe - in so many week , or month , or something or other . I have not see much of th'ey . by the by ' ; he lay down he knife and fork , which he have be use with great diligence , and begin feeling in he pocket ; 'I have a letter for you . ' ' from whom ? ' ' why , from you old nurse ,' he return , take some papers out of he breast pocket . " , , debtor , to the " ; that be not it . patience , and we will find it presently . old what 's - he - name 's in a bad way , and it be about that , I believe . ' ' , do you mean ? ' ' yes ! ' still feel in he pocket , and look over they contents : ' it be all over with poor , I be afraid . I see a little apothecary there - surgeon , or whatever he be - who bring you worship into the world . he be mighty learn about the case , to I ; but the upshot of he opinion be , that the carrier be make he last journey rather fast . - put you hand into the breast pocket of my great - coat on the chair yonder , and I think you will find the letter . be it there ? ' ' here it be ! ' say I . ' that be right ! ' it be from ; something less legible than usual , and brief . it inform I of she husband 's hopeless state , and hint at he be 'a little nearer ' than heretofore , and consequently more difficult to manage for he own comfort . it say nothing of she weariness and watch , and praise he highly . it be write with a plain , unaffected , homely piety that I know to be genuine , and end with 'my duty to my ever darl ' - mean myself . while I decipher it , continue to eat and drink . ' it be a bad job , ' he say , when I have do ; ' but the sun set every day , and people die every minute , and we must not be scare by the common lot . if we fail to hold we own , because that equal foot at all man 's door be hear knock somewhere , every object in this
this world would slip from we . no ! ride on ! Rough - shod if need be , smooth - shod if that will do , but ride on ! ride on over all obstacle , and win the race ! ' ' and win what race ? ' say I . ' the race that one have start in , ' say he . ' ride on ! ' I notice , I remember , as he pause , look at I with he handsome head a little thrown back , and he glass raise in he hand , that , though the freshness of the sea-wind be on he face , and it be ruddy , there be trace in it , make since I last see it , as if he have apply himself to some habitual strain of the fervent energy which , when rouse , be so passionately rouse within he . I have it in my thought to remonstrate with he upon he desperate way of pursue any fancy that he take - such as this buffeting of rough seas , and brave of hard weather , for example - when my mind glance off to the immediate subject of we conversation again , and pursue that instead . 'I tell you what , , ' say I , 'if you high spirit will listen to I -' ' they be potent spirit , and will do whatever you like , ' he answer , move from the table to the fireside again . ' then I tell you what , . I think I will go down and see my old nurse . it be not that I can do she any good , or render she any real service ; but she be so attached to I that my visit will have as much effect on she , as if I could do both . she will take it so kindly that it will be a comfort and support to she . it be no great effort to make , I be sure , for such a friend as she have be to I . would not you go a day 's journey , if you be in my place ? ' he face be thoughtful , and he sit consider a little before he answer , in a low voice , ' well ! go . you can do no harm . ' ' you have just come back , ' say I , ' and it would be in vain to ask you to go with I ? ' ' quite ,' he return . 'I be for Highgate tonight . I have not see my mother this long time , and it lie upon my conscience , for it be something to be love as she love she prodigal son . - ! Nonsense ! - you mean to go tomorrow , I suppose ? ' he say , hold I out at arm 's length , with a hand on each of my shoulders . ' yes , I think so . ' ' well , then , do not go till next day . I want you to come and stay a few day with we . here I be , on purpose to bid you , and you fly off to ! ' ' you be a nice fellow to talk of fly off , , who be always run wild on some unknown expedition or other ! ' he look at I for a moment without speaking , and then rejoin , still hold I as before , and give I a shake : ' come ! say the next day , and pass as much of tomorrow as you can with we ! who know when we may meet again , else ? come ! say the next day ! I want you to stand between and I , and keep we asunder . ' ' would you love each other too much , without I ? ' ' yes ; or hate , ' laugh ; 'no matter which . come ! say the next day ! ' I say the next day ; and he put on he great - coat and light he cigar , and set off to walk home . find he in this intention , I put on my own great - coat ( but do not light my own cigar , have have enough of that for one while ) and walk with he as far as the open road : a dull road , then , at night . he be in great spirit all the way ; and when we parte , and I look after he go so gallantly and airily homeward , I think of he say , ' ride on over all obstacle , and win the race ! ' and wish , for the first time , that he have some worthy race to run . I be undresse in my own room , when 's letter tumble on the floor . thus remind of it , I break the seal and read as follow . it be date a hour and a half before dinner . I be not sure whether I have mention that , when be at any particularly desperate crisis , he use a sort of legal phraseology , which he seem to think equivalent to win up he affair . ' sir - for I dare not say my dear Copperfield , ' it be expedient that I should inform you that the undersigned be crush . some flicker effort to spare you the premature knowledge of he calamitous position , you may observe in he this day ; but hope have sunk beneath the horizon , and the undersigned be crush . ' the present communication be penn within the personal range ( I can
can not call it the society ) of a individual , in a state closely border on intoxication , employ by a broker . that individual be in legal possession of the premise , under a distress for rent . he inventory include , not only the chattel and effect of every description belong to the undersigned , as yearly tenant of this habitation , but also those appertain to , lodger , a member of the of the . ' if any drop of gloom be want in the overflowing cup , which be now " commend " ( in the language of a immortal writer ) to the lip of the undersigned , it would be find in the fact , that a friendly acceptance grant to the undersigned , by the before - mention , for the sum of 23 l 4 9 1 / 2d be over due , and be not provide for . also , in the fact that the live responsibility cling to the undersigned will , in the course of nature , be increase by the sum of one more helpless victim ; whose miserable appearance may be look for - in round number - at the expiration of a period not exceed six lunar month from the present date . 'After premise thus much , it would be a work of supererogation to add , that dust and ash be for ever scatter 'On ' the ' head ' of ' . ' poor Traddle ! I know enough of by this time , to foresee that he might be expect to recover the blow ; but my night 's rest be sorely distress by thought of Traddles , and of the curate 's daughter , who be one of ten , down in , and who be such a dear girl , and who would wait for Traddles ( ominous praise ! ) until she be sixty , or any age that could be mention . chapter 29 I visit at , I mention to in the morning , that I want leave of absence for a short time ; and as I be not in the receipt of any salary , and consequently be not obnoxious to the implacable , there be no difficulty about it . I take that opportunity , with my voice stick in my throat , and my sight fail as I utter the word , to express my hope that be quite well ; to which Spenlow reply , with no more emotion than if he have be speak of a ordinary human being , that he be much oblige to I , and she be very well . we article clerk , as germ of the patrician order of proctor , be treat with so much consideration , that I be almost my own master at all time . as I do not care , however , to get to before one or two o'clock in the day , and as we have another little excommunication case in court that morning , which be call the office of the judge promote by against for he soul 's correction , I pass a hour or two in attendance on it with very agreeably . it arise out of a scuffle between two churchwarden , one of whom be allege to have push the other against a pump ; the handle of which pump project into a school - house , which school - house be under a gable of the church - roof , make the push a ecclesiastical offence . it be a amusing case ; and send I up to , on the box of the stage - coach , think about the Commons , and what have say about touch the Commons and bring down the country . be pleased to see I , and so be . I be agreeably surprised to find that be not there , and that we be attend by a modest little parlour-maid , with blue ribbon in she cap , whose eye it be much more pleasant , and much less disconcerting , to catch by accident , than the eye of that respectable man . but what I particularly observ , before I have be half - a - hour in the house , be the close and attentive watch keep upon I ; and the lurking manner in which she seem to compare my face with 's , and 's with mine , and to lie in wait for something to come out between the two . so surely as I look towards she , do I see that eager visage , with it be gaunt black eye and search brow , intent on mine ; or pass suddenly from mine to 's ; or comprehend both of we at once . in this lynx - like scrutiny she be so far from falter when she see I observe it , that at such a time she only fix she piercing look upon I with a more intent expression still . Blameless as I be , and know that I be , in reference to any wrong she could possibly suspect I of , I shrink before she strange eye , quite unable to endure they hungry lustre . all day , she seem to pervade the whole house . if I talk to in he room , I hear she dress rustle in the little gallery outside . when he and I engage in some of we old exercise on the lawn behind the house , I see she face pass from window to window , like a wandering light , until it fix itself in one , and watch we . when we all four go out walking in the afternoon , she close she thin hand on my arm like a spring , to keep I back , while and
and he mother go on out of hearing : and then speak to I . ' you have be a long time , ' she say , ' without come here . be you profession really so engage and interesting as to absorb you whole attention ? I ask because I always want to be inform , when I be ignorant . be it really , though ? ' I reply that I like it well enough , but that I certainly could not claim so much for it . 'Oh ! I be glad to know that , because I always like to be put right when I be wrong , ' say . ' you mean it be a little dry , perhaps ? ' ' well ,' I reply ; ' perhaps it be a little dry . ' 'Oh ! and that be a reason why you want relief and change - excitement and all that ? ' say she . ' ah ! very true ! but be not it a little - ? - for he ; I do not mean you ? ' a quick glance of she eye towards the spot where be walk , with he mother lean on he arm , show I whom she mean ; but beyond that , I be quite lost . and I look so , I have no doubt . ' do not it - I do not say that it do , mind I want to know - do not it rather engross he ? do not it make he , perhaps , a little more remiss than usual in he visit to he blindly - do - eh ? ' with another quick glance at they , and such a glance at I have seem to look into my innermost thought . ' ,' I return , ' pray do not think -' 'I do not ! ' she say . ' oh dear I , do not suppose that I think anything ! I be not suspicious . I only ask a question . I do not state any opinion . I want to find a opinion on what you tell I . then , it be not so ? well ! I be very glad to know it . ' ' it certainly be not the fact , ' say I , perplex , 'that I be accountable for 's have be away from home longer than usual - if he have be : which I really do not know at this moment , unless I understand it from you . I have not see he this long while , until last night . ' ' no ? ' ' indeed , , no ! ' as she look full at I , I see she face grow sharper and paler , and the mark of the old wound lengthen out until it cut through the disfigured lip , and deep into the nether lip , and slant down the face . there be something positively awful to I in this , and in the brightness of she eye , as she say , look fixedly at I : ' what be he do ? ' I repeat the word , more to myself than she , be so amazed . ' what be he do ? ' she say , with a eagerness that seem enough to consume she like a fire . ' in what be that man assist he , who never look at I without a inscrutable falsehood in he eye ? if you be honourable and faithful , I do not ask you to betray you friend . I ask you only to tell I , be it anger , be it hatred , be it pride , be it restlessness , be it some wild fancy , be it love , what be it , that be lead he ? ' ' ,' I return , ' how shall I tell you , so that you will believe I , that I know of nothing in different from what there be when I first come here ? I can think of nothing . I firmly believe there be nothing . I hardly understand even what you mean . ' as she still stand look fixedly at I , a twitching or throbbing , from which i could not dissociate the idea of pain , come into that cruel mark ; and lift up the corner of she lip as if with scorn , or with a pity that despise its object . she put she hand upon it hurriedly - a hand so thin and delicate , that when I have see she hold it up before the fire to shade she face , I have compare it in my thought to fine porcelain - and say , in a quick , fierce , passionate way , 'I swear you to secrecy about this ! ' say not a word more . be particularly happy in she son 's society , and be , on this occasion , particularly attentive and respectful to she . it be very interesting to I to see they together , not only on account of they mutual affection , but because of the strong personal resemblance between they , and the manner in which what be haughty or impetuous in he be soften by age and sex , in she , to a gracious dignity . I think , more than once , that it be well no serious cause of division have ever come between they ; or two such nature - I ought rather to express it , two such shade of the same nature - might have be harder to reconcile than the two extremest opposite in creation . the idea do not originate in my own discernment , I be bound to confess , but
but in a speech of 's . she say at dinner : 'Oh , but do tell I , though , somebody , because I have be think about it all day , and I want to know . ' ' you want to know what , ? ' return . ' pray , pray , , do not be mysterious . ' ' mysterious ! ' she cry . 'Oh ! really ? do you consider I so ? ' ' do I constantly entreat you , ' say , 'to speak plainly , in you own natural manner ? ' 'Oh ! then this be not my natural manner ? ' she rejoin . ' now you must really bear with I , because I ask for information . we never know ourselves . ' ' it have become a second nature , ' say , without any displeasure ; ' but I remember , - and so must you , I think , - when you manner be different , ; when it be not so guard , and be more trustful . ' 'I be sure you be right , ' she return ; ' and so it be that bad habit grow upon one ! really ? guard and more trustful ? how can I , imperceptibly , have change , I wonder ! well , that be very odd ! I must study to regain my former self . ' 'I wish you would , ' say , with a smile . 'Oh ! I really will , you know ! ' she answer . 'I will learn frankness from - let I see - from . ' ' you can not learn frankness , , ' say quickly - for there be always some effect of sarcasm in what say , though it be say , as this be , in the most unconscious manner in the world - 'in a better school . ' ' that I be sure of , ' she answer , with uncommon fervour . ' if I be sure of anything , of course , you know , I be sure of that . ' appear to I to regret have be a little nettle ; for she presently say , in a kind tone : ' well , my dear , we have not hear what it be that you want to be satisfied about ? ' ' that I want to be satisfied about ? ' she reply , with provoking coldness . 'Oh ! it be only whether people , who be like each other in they moral constitution - be that the phrase ? ' ' it be as good a phrase as another , ' say . ' thank you : - whether people , who be like each other in they moral constitution , be in greater danger than people not so circumstanced , suppose any serious cause of variance to arise between they , of be divide angrily and deeply ? ' 'I should say yes , ' say . ' should you ? ' she retort . ' dear I ! Suppose then , for instance - any unlikely thing will do for a supposition - that you and you mother be to have a serious quarrel . ' 'My dear , ' interpose Steerforth , laugh good - naturedly , ' suggest some other supposition ! and I know we duty to each other better , I pray Heaven ! ' 'Oh ! ' say , nodd she head thoughtfully . 'To be sure . that would prevent it ? why , of course it would . exactly . now , I be glad I have be so foolish as to put the case , for it be so very good to know that you duty to each other would prevent it ! thank you very much . ' one other little circumstance connect with I must not omit ; for I have reason to remember it thereafter , when all the irremediable past be render plain . during the whole of this day , but especially from this period of it , exert himself with he utmost skill , and that be with he utmost ease , to charm this singular creature into a pleasant and pleased companion . that he should succeed , be no matter of surprise to I . that she should struggle against the fascinating influence of he delightful art - delightful nature I think it then - do not surprise I either ; for I know that she be sometimes jaundiced and perverse . I see she feature and she manner slowly change ; I see she look at he with grow admiration ; I see she try , more and more faintly , but always angrily , as if she condemn a weakness in herself , to resist the captivating power that he possess ; and finally , I see she sharp glance soften , and she smile become quite gentle , and I cease to be afraid of she as I have really be all day , and we all sit about the fire , talk and laugh together , with as little reserve as if we have be child . whether it be because we have sit there so long , or because be resolve not to lose the advantage he have gain , I do not know ; but we do not remain in the dining - room more than five minute after she departure . ' she be play she harp , ' say , softly , at the drawing - room door , ' and nobody but my mother have hear she do that , I believe , these three year . ' he say it with a curiious smile , which be go directly ; and we go into the room and find she alone .
. ' do not get up , ' say ( which she have already do ) ' my dear , do not ! be kind for once , and se we a irish song . ' ' what do you care for a irish song ? ' she return . ' Much ! ' say . ' much more than for any other . here be daisy , too , love music from he soul . S we a irish song , ! and let I sit and listen as I use to do . ' he do not touch she , or the chair from which she have risen , but sit himself near the harp . she stand beside it for some little while , in a curiious way , go through the motion of play it with she right hand , but not sound it . at length she sit down , and draw it to she with one sudden action , and play and sang . I do not know what it be , in she touch or voice , that make that song the most unearthly I have ever hear in my life , or can imagine . there be something fearful in the reality of it . it be as if it have never be write , or set to music , but spring out of passion within she ; which find imperfect utterance in the low sound of she voice , and crouch again when all be still . I be dumb when she lean beside the harp again , play it , but not sound it , with she right hand . a minute more , and this have rouse I from my trance : - have leave he seat , and go to she , and have put he arm laughingly about she , and have say , ' come , , for the future we will love each other very much ! ' and she have struck he , and have throw he off with the fury of a wild cat , and have burst out of the room . ' what be the matter with ? ' say , come in . ' she have be a angel , mother , ' return , ' for a little while ; and have run into the opposite extreme , since , by way of compensation . ' ' you should be careful not to irritate she , . she temper have be sour , remember , and ought not to be try . ' do not come back ; and no other mention be make of she , until I go with into he room to say good night . then he laugh about she , and ask I if I have ever see such a fierce little piece of incomprehensibility . I express as much of my astonishment as be then capable of expression , and ask if he could guess what it be that she have take so much amiss , so suddenly . 'Oh , know , ' say . ' anything you like - or nothing ! I tell you she take everything , herself include , to a grindstone , and sharpen it . she be a edge - tool , and require great care in deal with . she be always dangerous . good night ! ' ' good night ! ' say I , 'my dear ! I shall be go before you wake in the morning . good night ! ' he be unwilling to let I go ; and stood , hold I out , with a hand on each of my shoulders , as he have do in my own room . ' ,' he say , with a smile - ' for though that be not the name you godfather and godmother give you , it be the name I like best to call you by - and I wish , I wish , I wish , you could give it to I ! ' ' why so I can , if I choose , ' say I . ' daisy , if anything should ever separate we , you must think of I at my best , old boy . come ! let we make that bargain . think of I at my best , if circumstance should ever part we ! ' ' you have no best to I , , ' say I , ' and no worst . you be always equally love , and cherish in my heart . ' so much compunction for have ever wronge he , even by a shapeless thought , do I feel within I , that the confession of have do so be rise to my lip . but for the reluctance I have to betray the confidence of Agnes , but for my uncertainty how to approach the subject with no risk of do so , it would have reach they before he say , ' God bless you , , and good night ! ' in my doubt , it do not reach they ; and we shook hand , and we part . I be up with the dull dawn , and , have dress as quietly as I could , look into he room . he be fast asleep ; lie , easily , with he head upon he arm , as I have often see he lie at school . the time come in its season , and that be very soon , when I almost wonder that nothing trouble he repose , as I look at he . but he sleep - let I think of he so again - as I have often see he sleep at school ; and thus , in this silent hour , I leave he . - never more , oh forgive you , ! to touch
touch that passive hand in love and friendship . never , never more ! chapter 30 a loss I get down to in the evening , and go to the inn . I know that 's spare room - my room - be likely to have occupation enough in a little while , if that great visitor , before whose presence all the living must give place , be not already in the house ; so I betake myself to the inn , and dine there , and engage my bed . it be ten o'clock when I go out . many of the shop be shut , and the town be dull . when I come to and 's , I find the shutter up , but the shop door stand open . as I could obtain a perspective view of inside , smoke he pipe by the parlour door , I enter , and ask he how he be . ' why , bless my life and soul ! ' say , ' how do you find yourself ? take a seat . - not disagreeable , I hope ? ' ' by no means , ' say I . 'I like it - in somebody else 's pipe . ' ' what , not in you own , eh ? ' return , laugh . ' all the better , sir . bad habit for a young man . take a seat . I smoke , myself , for the asthma . ' have make room for I , and place a chair . he now sit down again very much out of breath , gas at he pipe as if it contain a supply of that necessary , without which he must perish . 'I be sorry to have hear bad news of , ' say I . look at I , with a steady countenance , and shake he head . ' do you know how he be tonight ? ' I ask . ' the very question I should have put to you , sir , ' return , ' but on account of delicacy . it be one of the drawback of we line of business . when a party 's ill , we can not ask how the party be . ' the difficulty have not occur to I ; though I have have my apprehension too , when I go in , of hear the old tune . on it be be mention , I recognize it , however , and say as much . ' yes , yes , you understand , ' say , nodd he head . ' we dur not do it . bless you , it would be a shock that the generality of party might not recover , to say " and 's compliment , and how do you find yourself this morning ? " - or this afternoon - as it may be . ' and I nod at each other , and recruite he wind by the aid of he pipe . ' it be one of the thing that cut the trade off from attention they could often wish to show , ' say . ' take myself . if I have know a year , to move to as he go by , I have know he forty year . but I can not go and say , " how be he ? "' I feel it be rather hard on , and I tell he so . 'I be not more self - interested , I hope , than another man , ' say . ' look at I ! my wind may fail I at any moment , and it be not likely that , to my own knowledge , I would be self - interested under such circumstance . I say it be not likely , in a man who know he wind will go , when it do go , as if a pair of bellow be cut open ; and that man a grandfather , ' say . I say , ' not at all . ' ' it be not that I complain of my line of business , ' say . ' it be not that . some good and some bad go , no doubt , to all calling . what I wish be , that party be bring up stronger - minded . ' , with a very complacent and amiable face , take several puffs in silence ; and then say , resume he first point : ' accordingly we be obleege , in ascertain how go on , to limit ourselves to . she know what we real object be , and she do not have any more alarms or suspicion about we , than if we be so many lamb . and have just step down to the house , in fact ( she be there , after hour , help she aunt a bit ) , to ask she how he be tonight ; and if you be to please to wait till they come back , they would give you full partic'ler . will you take something ? a glass of srub and water , now ? I smoke on srub and water , myself , ' say , take up he glass , ' because it be consider softening to the passage , by which this troublesome breath of mine get into action . but , bless you , ' say , huskily , ' it be not the passage that be out of order ! " give I breath enough , " say I to my daughter , " and I will find passage , my dear . " ' he really have no breath to spare , and it be very alarming to see he laugh . when he be again in a condition to
to be talk to , I thank he for the proffer refreshment , which I decline , as I have just have dinner ; and , observe that I would wait , since he be so good as to invite I , until he daughter and he son - in - law come back , I inquire how little be ? ' well , sir , ' say , remove he pipe , that he might rub he ching : 'I tell you truly , I shall be glad when she marriage have take place . ' ' why so ? ' I inquire . ' well , she be unsettled at present , ' say . ' it be not that she be not as pretty as ever , for she be prettier - I do assure you , she be prettier . it be not that she do not work as well as ever , for she do . she be worth any six , and she be worth any six . but somehow she want heart . if you understand , ' say , after rub he ching again , and smoke a little , ' what I mean in a general way by the expression , " a long pull , and a strong pull , and a pull altogether , my hearty , hurrah ! " I should say to you , that that be - in a general way - what I miss in . ' 's face and manner go for so much , that I could conscientiously nod my head , as divine he meaning . my quickness of apprehension seem to please he , and he go on : ' now I consider this be principally on account of she be in a unsettled state , you see . we have talk it over a good deal , she uncle and myself , and she sweetheart and myself , after business ; and I consider it be principally on account of she be unsettled . you must always recollect of 'ly , ' say , shak he head gently , ' that she be a most extraordinary affectionate little thing . the proverb say , " you can not make a silk purse out of a sow 's ear . " well , I do not know about that . I rather think you may , if you begin early in life . she have make a home out of that old boat , sir , that stone and marble could not beat . ' 'I be sure she have ! ' say I . ' to see the clinging of that pretty little thing to she uncle , ' say ; 'too see the way she hold on to he , tighter and tighter , and closer and closer , every day , be to see a sight . now , you know , there be a struggle go on when that be the case . why should it be make a longer one than be needful ? ' I listen attentively to the good old fellow , and acquiesce , with all my heart , in what he say . ' therefore , I mention to they , ' say , in a comfortable , easy - go tone , ' this . I say , " now , do not consider em 'ly nail down in point of time , at all . make it you own time . she service have be more valuable than be suppose ; she learn have be quicker than be suppose ; and can run they pen through what remain ; and she be free when you wish . if she like to make any little arrangement , afterwards , in the way of do any little thing for we at home , very well . if she do not , very well still . we be no loser , anyhow . " for - do not you see , ' say , touch I with he pipe , ' it be not likely that a man so short of breath as myself , and a grandfather too , would go and strain point with a little bit of a blue - eyed blossom , like she ? ' ' not at all , I be certain , ' say I . ' not at all ! you be right ! ' say . 'Well , sir , she cousin - you know it be a cousin she be go to be marry to ? ' 'Oh yes ,' I reply . 'I know he well . ' ' of course you do , ' say . ' well , sir ! she cousin be , as it appear , in good work , and well to do , thanke I in a very manly sort of manner for this ( conduct himself altogether , I must say , in a way that give I a high opinion of he ) , and go and take as comfortable a little house as you or I could wish to clap eye on . that little house be now furnish right through , as neat and complete as a doll 's parlour ; and but for 's illness have take this bad turn , poor fellow , they would have be man and wife - I dare say , by this time . as it be , there be a postponement . ' ' and , ? ' I inquire . ' have she become more settled ? ' ' why that , you know ,' he return , rub he double ching again , ' can not naturally be expect . the prospect of the change and separation , and all that , be , as one may say , close to she and far away from she , both at once . 's
's death need not put it off much , but he linger might . anyway , it be a uncertain state of matter , you see . ' 'I see , ' say I . ' consequently , ' pursue , ' be still a little down , and a little fluttered ; perhaps , upon the whole , she be more so than she be . every day she seem to get fonder and fonder of she uncle , and more loth to part from all of we . a kind word from I bring the tear into she eye ; and if you be to see she with my daughter 's little girl , you would never forget it . bless my heart alive ! ' say , ponder , ' how she love that child ! ' have so favourable a opportunity , it occur to I to ask , before we conversation should be interrupt by the return of he daughter and she husband , whether he know anything of . ' ah ! ' he rejoin , shak he head , and look very much deject . ' no good . a sad story , sir , however you come to know it . I never think there be harm in the girl . I would not wish to mention it before my daughter - for she would take I up directly - but I never do . none of we ever do . ' , hear he daughter 's footstep before I hear it , touch I with he pipe , and shut up one eye , as a caution . she and she husband come in immediately afterwards . they report be , that be 'as bad as bad could be ' ; that he be quite unconscious ; and that have mournfully say in the kitchen , on go away just now , that the College of , the College of surgeons , and ' Hall , if they be all call in together , could not help he . he be past both , say , and the Hall could only poison he . hear this , and learn that be there , I determine to go to the house at once . I bade good night to , and to and ; and direct my step thither , with a solemn feeling , which make quite a new and different creature . my low tap at the door be answer by . he be not so much surprised to see I as I have expect . I remarke this in , too , when she come down ; and I have see it since ; and I think , in the expectation of that dread surprise , all other change and surprise dwindle into nothing . I shook hands with , and pass into the kitchen , while he softly close the door . be sit by the fire , with she hand before she face . be stand near she . we speak in whisper ; listen , between whiles , for any sound in the room above . I have not think of it on the occasion of my last visit , but how strange it be to I , now , to miss out of the kitchen ! ' this be very kind of you , , ' say . ' it be oncommon kind , ' say . ' 'ly , my dear , ' cry . ' see here ! here be come ! what , cheer up , pretty ! not a wured to ? ' there be a trembling upon she , that I can see now . the coldness of she hand when I touche it , I can feel yet . it be only sign of animation be to shrink from mine ; and then she glide from the chair , and creepe to the other side of she uncle , bow herself , silently and trembl still , upon he breast . ' it be such a loving art , ' say , smoothe she rich hair with he great hard hand , ' that it can not abear the sorrer of this . it be nat'ral in young folk , , when they be new to these here trials , and timid , like my little bird , - it be nat'ral . ' she cling the closer to he , but neither lift up she face , nor speak a word . ' it be get late , my dear , ' say , 'and here 's come yofu to take you home . ! go along with t'other loving art ! what ' 'ly ? Eh , my pretty ? ' the sound of she voice have not reach I , but he bend he head as if he listen to she , and then say : ' let you stay with you uncle ? why , you doe not mean to ask I that ! stay with you uncle , ? when you husband that will be so soon , be here fur to take you home ? now a person would not think it , fur to see this little thing alongside a rough - weather chap like I , ' say , look round at both of we , with infinite pride ; ' but the sea be not more salt in it than she have fondness in she for she uncle - a foolish little Em'ly ! ' ' be in the right in that , ! ' say . ' Lookee here ! as 'ly wish of it , and as she be hurry and frightene , like , besides , I will leave she till morning . let I stay too ! ' 'no , no , ' say . ' you doe not ought - a marry man like you -
- or what be as good - to take and hull away a day 's work . and you doe not ought to watch and work both . that will not do . you go home and turn in . you be not afeerd of 'ly not be take good care on , I know . ' yield to this persuasion , and take he hat to go . even when he kiss she - and I never see he approach she , but I feel that nature have give he the soul of a gentleman - she seem to cling closer to she uncle , even to the avoidance of she chosen husband . I shut the door after he , that it might cause no disturbance of the quiet that prevail ; and when I turn back , I find still talk to she . ' now , I be a go upstairs to tell you aunt as 's here , and that will cheer she up a bit , ' he say . ' sit ye down by the fire , the while , my dear , and warm those mortal cold hand . you doe not need to be so fearsome , and take on so much . what ? you will go along with I ? - well ! come along with I - come ! if she uncle be turn out of house and home , and force to lay down in a dyke , , ' say , with no less pride than before , ' it be my belief she would go along with he , now ! but there will be someone else , soon , - someone else , soon , Em'ly ! ' afterwards , when I go upstairs , as I pass the door of my little chamber , which be dark , I have a indistinct impression of she be within it , cast down upon the floor . but , whether it be really she , or whether it be a confusion of the shadows in the room , I do not know now . I have leisure to think , before the kitchen fire , of pretty little 's dread of death - which , add to what have tell I , I take to be the cause of she be so unlike herself - and I have leisure , before come down , even to think more leniently of the weakness of it : as i sit count the ticking of the clock , and deepen my sense of the solemn hush around I . take I in she arm , and bless and thanke I over and over again for be such a comfort to she ( that be what she say ) in she distress . she then entreate I to come upstairs , sobb that have always like I and admire I ; that he have often talk of I , before he fall into a stupor ; and that she believe , in case of he come to himself again , he would brighten up at sight of I , if he could brighten up at any earthly thing . the probability of he ever do so , appear to I , when I see he , to be very small . he be lie with he head and shoulders out of bed , in a uncomfortable attitude , half rest on the box which have cost he so much pain and trouble . I learn , that , when he be past creepe out of bed to open it , and past assure himself of its safety by means of the divining rod I have see he use , he have require to have it place on the chair at the bed - side , where he have ever since embrace it , night and day . he arm lay on it now . time and the world be slip from beneath he , but the box be there ; and the last word he have utter were ( in a explanatory tone ) ' old clothes ! ' ' , my dear ! ' say , almost cheerfully : bend over he , while she brother and I stand at the bed 's foot . ' here be my dear boy - my dear boy , master , who bring we together , ! that you send message by , you know ! will not you speak to ? ' he be as mute and senseless as the box , from which he form derive the only expression it have . 'he be a go out with the tide , ' say to I , behind he hand . my eye be dim and so be 's ; but I repeat in a whisper , 'With the tide ? ' ' people can not die , along the coast , ' say , ' except when the tide 's pretty nigh out . they can not be bear , unless it be pretty nigh in - not properly bear , till flood . he be a go out with the tide . it be ebb at half - arter three , slack water half a hour . if he live till it turn , he will hold he own till past the flood , and go out with the next tide . ' we remain there , watch he , a long time - hour . what mysterious influence my presence have upon he in that state of he sense , I shall not pretend to say ; but when he at last began to wander feebly , it be certain he be mutter about drive I to school . 'he be come to himself , ' say . touch I , and whisper with much awe and reverence . ' they be both a - go out fast
fast . ' ' , my dear ! ' say . ,' he cry faintly . ' no better woman anywhere ! ' ' look ! here be ! ' say . for he now open he eye . I be on the point of ask he if he know I , when he try to stretch out he arm , and say to I , distinctly , with a pleasant smile : ' be willin ' ! ' and , it be low water , he go out with the tide . 31 it be not difficult for I , on 's solicitation , to resolve to stay where I be , until after the remains of the poor carrier should have make they last journey to . she have long ago buy , out of she own savings , a little piece of ground in we old churchyard near the grave of ' she sweet girl ' , as she always call my mother ; and there they be to rest . in keeping company , and do all I could for she ( little enough at the utmost ) , I be as grateful , I rejoice to think , as even now I could wish myself to have been . but I be afraid I have a supreme satisfaction , of a personal and professional nature , in take charge of 's , and expound its contents . I may claim the merit of have originate the suggestion that the will should be look for in the box . after some search , it be find in the box , at the bottom of a horse 's nose - bag ; wherein ( besides hay ) there be discover a old gold watch , with chain and seal , which have wear on he wedding - day , and which have never be see before or since ; a silver tobacco - stopper , in the form of a leg ; a imitation lemon , full of minute cup and saucer , which I have some idea must have purchase to present to I when I be a child , and afterwards find himself unable to part with ; eighty - seven guinea and a half , in guinea and half - guinea ; two hundred and ten pound , in perfectly clean note ; certain receipt for of stock ; a old horseshoe , a bad shilling , a piece of camphor , and a oyster- shell . from the circumstance of the latter article have be much polish , and display prismatic colour on the inside , I conclude that have some general idea about pearl , which never resolve themselves into anything definite . for year and year , have carry this box , on all he journey , every day . that it might the better escape notice , he have invent a fiction that it belong to ' . ' , and be 'too be leave with till call for ' ; a fable he have elaborately write on the lid , in character now scarcely legible . he have hoard , all these year , I find , to good purpose . he property in money amount to nearly three thousand pound . of this he bequeath the interest of one thousand to for he life ; on he decease , the principal to be equally divide between , little Emily , and I , or the survivor or survivor of we , share and share alike . all the rest he die possess of , he bequeath to ; whom he leave residuary legatee , and sole executrix of that he last will and testament . I feel myself quite a proctor when I read this document aloud with all possible ceremony , and set forth its provision , any number of time , to those whom they concern . I begin to think there be more in the Commons than I have suppose . I examine the will with the deepest attention , pronounce it perfectly formal in all respects , make a pencil - mark or so in the margin , and think it rather extraordinary that I know so much . in this abstruse pursuit ; in make a account for , of all the property into which she have come ; in arrange all the affair in a orderly manner ; and in be she referee and adviser on every point , to we jous not delight ; I pass the week before the funeral . I do not see little Emily in that interval , but they tell I she be to be quietly marry in a fortnight . I do not attend the funeral in character , if I may venture to say so . I mean I be not dress up in a black coat and a streamer , to frighten the bird ; but I walk over to early in the morning , and be in the churchyard when it come , attend only by and she brother . the mad gentleman look on , out of my little window ; 's baby wag its heavy head , and roll it be goggle eye , at the clergyman , over its nurse 's shoulder ; breathe short in the background ; no one else be there ; and it be very quiet . we walk about the churchyard for a hour , after all be over ; and pull some young leave from the tree above my mother 's grave . a dread fall on I here . a cloud be lowere on the distant town , towards which I retrace my solitary step . I fear to approach it . I can not bear to think of what do come , upon that memorable night ; of what must come again , if I go on . it be no worse
worse , because I write of it . it would be no better , if I stop my most unwilling hand . it be done . nothing can undo it ; nothing can make it otherwise than as it be . my old nurse be to go to with I next day , on the business of the will . be pass that day at 's . we be all to meet in the old boathouse that night . would bring Emily at the usual hour . I would walk back at my leisure . the brother and sister would return as they have come , and be expect we , when the day close in , at the fireside . I part from they at the wicket - gate , where visionary have rest with 's knapsack in the day of yore ; and , instead of go straight back , walk a little distance on the road to . then I turn , and walk back towards . I stay to dine at a decent alehouse , some mile or two from the I have mention before ; and thus the day wore away , and it be evening when I reach it . be fall heavily by that time , and it be a wild night ; but there be a moon behind the cloud , and it be not dark . I be soon within sight of 's house , and of the light within it shin through the window . a little flounder across the sand , which be heavy , bring I to the door , and I go in . it look very comfortable indeed . have smok he evening pipe and there be preparation for some supper by and by . the fire be bright , the ash be throw up , the locker be ready for little Emily in she old place . in she own old place sit , once more , look ( but for she dress ) as if she have never leave it . she have fall back , already , on the society of the work - box with 's upon the lid , the yard - measure in the cottage , and the bit of wax - candle ; and there they all be , just as if they have never be disturb . appear to be frett a little , in she old corner ; and consequently look quite natural , too . ' you be first of the lot , ! ' say with a happy face . ' not keep in that coat , sir , if it be wet . ' ' thank you , , ' say I , give he my outer coat to hang up . ' it be quite dry . ' 'So ' tis ! ' say , feel my shoulders . 'A a chip ! sit ye down , sir . it be not o ' no use say welcome to you , but you be welcome , kind and hearty . ' ' thank you , , I be sure of that . well , ! ' say I , give she a kiss . ' and how be you , old woman ? ' 'Ha , ha ! ' laugh , sit down beside we , and rub he hand in he sense of relief from recent trouble , and in the genuine heartiness of he nature ; ' there be not a woman in the wureld , sir - as I tell she - that need to feel more easy in she mind than she ! she do she dooty by the departed , and the depart know have it ; and the depart do what be right by she , as she do what be right by the depart ; - and - and - and it be all right ! ' groane . ' cheer up , my pritty mawther ! ' say . ( but he shook he head aside at we , evidently sensible of the tendency of the late occurrence to recall the memory of the old one . ) ' not be down ! Cheer up , for you own self , on 'y a little bit , and see if a good deal more doe not come nat'ral ! ' ' not to I , , ' return . ' 's nat'ral to I but to be lone and lorn . ' ' no , no , ' say , soothe she sorrow . ' yes , yes , ! ' say . 'I be not a person to live with they as have have money leave . think go too contrary with I . I have better be a riddance . ' ' why , how should I ever spend it without you ? ' say , with a air of serious remonstrance . ' what be you a talk on ? not I want you more now , than ever I do ? ' 'I know would I be never want before ! ' cry , with a pitiable whimper , ' and now I be tell so ! how could I expect to be want , be so lone and lorn , and so contrary ! ' seem very much shocked at himself for have make a speech capable of this unfeeling construction , but be prevent from reply , by 's pull he sleeve , and shake she head . after look at . for some moment , in sore distress of mind , he glance at the clock , rise , snuff the candle , and put it in the window . ' Theer !'said , cheerily . ' Theer we be , ! ' slightly groane . ' Lighte up , accordin ' to custom ! you be a wonderin ' what that be fur , sir ! well ,
, it be fur we little Em'ly . you see , the path be not over light or cheerful arter dark ; and when I be here at the hour as she be a comin ' home , I put the light in the winder . that , you see , ' say , bend over I with great glee , ' meet two object . she say , say Em'ly , " 's home ! " she say . and likewise , say 'ly , " my uncle 's theer ! " fur if I be not theer , I never have no light show . ' ' you be a baby ! ' say ; very fond of he for it , if she think so . ' well , ' return , stand with he leg pretty wide apart , and rub he hand up and down they in he comfortable satisfaction , as he look alternately at we and at the fire . 'I doe not know but I be . not , you see , to look at . ' ' not azackly , ' observ . ' no ,' laugh , ' not to look at , but to - to consider on , you know . I doe not care , bless you ! now I tell you . when I go a look and look about that theer pritty house of we 's , I be - I be Gorm , ' say , with sudden emphasis - ' theer ! I can not say more - if I doe not feel as if the littlest thing be she , a'most . I take th'ey up and I put th'ey down , and I touch of th'ey as delicate as if they be we Em'ly . so ' ti with she little bonnet and that . I could not see one on th'ey rough use a purpose - not fur the whole wureld . there be a babby yofu you , in the form of a great ! ' say , relieive he earnestness with a roar of laughter . and I both laugh , but not so loud . ' it be my opinion , you see , ' say , with a delighted face , after some further rubbing of he leg , 'as this be along of my havin ' play with she so much , and make believe as we be Turks , and french , and shark , and every wariety of forinner - bless you , yes ; and lions and whale , and I doe not know what all ! - when she war not no higher than my knee . I have get into the way on it , you know . why , this here candle , now ! ' say , gleefully hold out he hand towards it , 'I know wery well that arter she be marry and go , I shall put that candle theer , just the same as now . I know wery well that when I be here of ' night ( and where else should I live , bless you arts , whatever fortung I come intoo ! ) and she be not here or I be not theer , I shall put the candle in the winder , and sit afore the fire , pretend I be expect of she , like I be a do now . there be a babby for you , ' say , with another roar , 'in the form of a ! why , at the present minute , when I see the candle sparkle up , I say to myself , " she be a look at it ! 'ly be a come ! " there be a babby for you , in the form of a ! right for all that , ' say , stop in he roar , and smit he hand together ; ' yofu here she be ! ' it be only . the night should have turn more wet since I come in , for he have a large sou'wester hat on , slouch over he face . ' 's ? ' say . make a motion with he head , as if she be outside . take the light from the window , trim it , put it on the table , and be busily stirr the fire , when , who have not move , say : ' , will you come out a minute , and see what em 'ly and I have get to show you ? ' we go out . as I pass he at the door , I see , to my astonishment and fright , that he be deadly pale . he push I hastily into the open air , and close the door upon we . only upon we two . 'Ham ! what be the matter ? ' ' ! -' oh , for he broken heart , how dreadfully he weep ! I be paralyse by the sight of such grief . I do not know what I think , or what I dread . I could only look at he . 'Ham ! poor good fellow ! for 's sake , tell I what be the matter ! ' 'my love , - the pride and hope of my art - she that I would have die for , and would die for now - she be gone ! ' ' gone ! ' ' have run away ! oh , , think how she be run away , when I pray my good and gracious to kill she ( she that be so dear above all thing ) sooner than let she come to ruin and disgrace ! ' the face he turn up to the trouble sky , the quivering of he clasped hand , the agony of he
he figure , remain associate with the lonely waste , in my remembrance , to this hour . it be always night there , and he be the only object in the scene . ' you be a scholar ,' he say , hurriedly , ' and know what be right and best . what be I to say , indoors ? how be I ever to break it to he , ? ' I see the door move , and instinctively try to hold the latch on the outside , to gain a moment 's time . it be too late . thrust forth he face ; and never could I forget the change that come upon it when he see we , if I be to live five hundred year . I remember a great wail and cry , and the woman hang about he , and we all stand in the room ; I with a paper in my hand , which have give I ; , with he vest tear open , he hair wild , he face and lip quite white , and blood trickl down he bosom ( it have sprung from he mouth , I think ) , look fixedly at I . ' read it , sir ,' he say , in a low shivering voice . ' slow , please . I doe not know as I can understand . ' in the midst of the silence of death , I read thus , from a blot letter : ' " when you , who love I so much better than I ever have deserve , even when my mind be innocent , see this , I shall be far away . "' 'I shall be fur away , ' he repeat slowly . ' ! 'ly fur away . well ! ' ' " when I leave my dear home - my dear home - oh , my dear home ! - in the morning , " ' the letter bore date on the previous night : ' " - it will be never to come back , unless he bring I back a lady . this will be find at night , many hour after , instead of I . oh , if you know how my heart be tear . if even you , that I have wrong so much , that never can forgive I , could only know what I suffer ! I be too wick to write about myself ! oh , take comfort in think that I be so bad . oh , for mercy 's sake , tell uncle that I never love he half so dear as now . oh , do not remember how affectionate and kind you have all been to I - do not remember we be ever to be marry - but try to think as if I die when I be little , and be bury somewhere . that I be go away from , have compassion on my uncle ! tell he that I never love he half so dear . be he comfort . love some good girl that will be what I be once to uncle , and be true to you , and worthy of you , and know no shame but I . bless all ! I will pray for all , often , on my knee . if he do not bring I back a lady , and I do not pray for my own self , I will pray for all . my parting love to uncle . my last tear , and my last thanks , for uncle ! " ' that be all . he stand , long after I have cease to read , still look at I . at length I venture to take he hand , and to entreat he , as well as I could , to endeaavor to get some command of himself . he reply , thankee , sir , I thankee ! ' without move . speak to he . be so far sensible of this affliction , that he wring he hand ; but , otherwise , he remaine in the same state , and no one da to disturb he . slowly , at last , he move he eye from my face , as if he be wake from a vision , and cast they round the room . then he say , in a low voice : ' who be the man ? I want to know he name . ' glance at I , and suddenly I feel a shock that strike I back . ' there be a man suspect , ' say . ' who be it ? ' ' ! ' implor . ' go out a bit , and let I tell he what I must . you doe not ought to hear it , sir . ' I feel the shock again . I sank down in a chair , and try to utter some reply ; but my tongue be fetter , and my sight be weak . 'I want to know he name ! ' I hear say once more . ' for some time past ,' falter , ' there be be a servant about here , at odd time . there be be a gen 'lm 'n too . both of th'ey belong to one another . ' stand fix as before , but now look at he . ' the servant , ' pursue , ' be see along with - we poor girl - last night . he be be in hide about here , this week or over . he be think to have go , but he be hide . not stay , , doe not ! ' I feel 's arm round my neck , but I could not have move if the
the house have be about to fall upon I . 'a strange chay and hoss be outside town , this morning , on the road , a'most afore the day break , ' go on . ' the servant go to it , and come from it , and go to it again . when he go to it again , be nigh he . the t'other be inside . he be the man . ' ' for the 's love , ' say , fall back , and put out he hand , as if to keep off what he dread . ' not tell I he name 's ! ' ' , ' exclaim , in a broken voice , ' it be not no fault of - and I be far from laying of it to you - but he name be , and he be a damned villain ! ' utter no cry , and she no tear , and move no more , until he seem to wake again , all at once , and pull down he rough coat from its peg in a corner . ' bear a hand with this ! I be struck of a heap , and can not do it ,' he say , impatiently . ' bear a hand and help I . well ! ' when somebody have do so . ' now give I that theer hat ! ' ask he whither he be go . 'I be a go to seek my niece . I be a go to seek my Em'ly . I be a go , first , to stave in that theer boat , and sink it where I would have drownd he , as I be a living soul , if I have have one thought of what be in he ! as he sit afore I ,' he say , wildly , hold out he clench right hand , 'as he sit afore I , face to face , strike I down dead , but I would have drownd he , and think it right ! - I be a go to seek my niece . ' ' where ? ' cry , interpose himself before the door . ' anywhere ! I be a go to seek my niece through the wureld . I be a go to find my poor niece in she shame , and bring she back . no one stop I ! I tell you I be a go to seek my niece ! ' ' no , no ! ' cry , come between they , in a fit of crying . 'no , no , n'l , not as you be now . seek she in a little while , my lone lorn n'l , and that will be but right ! but not as you be now . sit ye down , and give I you forgiveness for have ever be a worrit to you , - what have my contrary ever be to this ! - and let we speak a word about they time when she be first a orphan , and when be too , and when I be a poor widder woman , and you take I in . it will soften you poor heart , n'l , ' lay she head upon he shoulder , ' and you will bear you sorrow better ; for you know the promise , , " as you have do it unto one of the least of these , you have do it unto I " ,- and that can never fail under this roof , that be be we shelter for so many , many year ! ' he be quite passive now ; and when I hear he cry , the impulse that have be upon I to go down upon my knee , and ask they pardon for the desolation I have cause , and curse steer - forth , yield to a better feeling , my overcharged heart find the same relief , and I cry too . chapter 32 the beginning of a what be natural in I , be natural in many other man , I infer , and so I be not afraid to write that I never have love Steerforth better than when the tie that bound I to he be break . in the keen distress of the discovery of he unworthiness , I think more of all that be brilliant in he , I soften more towards all that be good in he , I do more justice to the quality that might have make he a man of a noble nature and a great name , than ever I have do in the height of my devotion to he . deeply as I feel my own unconscious part in he pollution of a honest home , I believe that if I have be bring face to face with he , I could not have utter one reproach . I should have love he so well still - though he fascinate I no longer - I should have hold in so much tenderness the memory of my affection for he , that I think I should have be as weak as a spirit-wounded child , in all but the entertainment of a thought that we could ever be re-unit . that think I never have . I feel , as he have felt , that all be at a end between we . what he remembrance of I be , I have never know - they be light enough , perhaps , and easily dismiss - but mine of he be as the remembrance of a cherish friend , who be dead . yes , , long remove from the scene of this poor history ! my sorrow may bear involuntary witness against you at the judgement ; but my angry thought
thought or my reproach never will , I know ! the news of what have happen soon spread through the town ; insomuch that as I pass along the street next morning , I overhear the people speak of it at they door . many be hard upon she , some few be hard upon he , but towards she second father and she lover there be but one sentiment . among all kind of people a respect for they in they distress prevail , which be full of gentleness and delicacy . the seafar man keep apart , when those two be see early , walk with slow step on the beach ; and stand in knot , talk compassionately among themselves . it be on the beach , close down by the sea , that I find they . it would have be easy to perceive that they have not sleep all last night , even if have fail to tell I of they still sit just as I leave they , when it be broad day . they look worn ; and I think 's head be bow in one night more than in all the year I have know he . but they be both as grave and steady as the sea itself , then lie beneath a dark sky , waveless - yet with a heavy roll upon it , as if it breathe in its rest - and touch , on the horizon , with a strip of silvery light from the unseen sun . ' we have have a mort of talk , sir , ' say to I , when we have all three walk a little while in silence , 'or what we ought and doe not ought to do . but we see we course now . ' I happen to glance at , then look out to sea upon the distant light , and a frightful thought come into my mind - not that he face be angry , for it be not ; I recall nothing but a expression of stern determination in it - that if ever he encounter , he would kill he . ' my dooty here , sir , ' say , 'is do . I be a go to seek my -' he stop , and go on in a firmer voice : 'I be a go to seek she . that be my dooty evermore . ' he shook he head when I ask he where he would seek she , and inquire if I be go to tomorrow ? I tell he I have not go today , fear to lose the chance of be of any service to he ; but that I be ready to go when he would . 'I will go along with you , sir ,' he rejoin , ' if you be agreeable , tomorrow . ' we walk again , for a while , in silence . ' , 'he presently resume , 'he will hold to he present work , and go and live along with my sister . the old boat yonder -' ' will you desert the old boat , ? ' I gently interpose . ' my station , , ' he return , 'be not there no longer ; and if ever a boat foundere , since there be darkness on the face of the deep , that one be go down . but no , sir , no ; I doe not mean as it should be desert . fur from that . ' we walk again for a while , as before , until he explain : ' my wish be , sir , as it shall look , day and night , winter and summer , as it have always look , since she fust know have it . if ever she should come a wander back , I would not have the old place seem to cast she off , you understand , but seem to tempt she to draw nigher to 't , and to peep in , maybe , like a ghost , out of the wind and rain , through the old winder , at the old seat by the fire . then , maybe , , seein ' none but there , she might take heart to creep in , trembl ; and might come to be lay down in she old bed , and rest she weary head where it be once so gay . ' I could not speak to he in reply , though I try . ' every night , ' say , 'as reg'lar as the night come , the candle must be stand in its old pane of glass , that if ever she should see it , it may seem to say " come back , my child , come back ! " if ever there be a knock , ( partic'ler a soft knock ) , arter dark , at you aunt 's door , doe not you go nigh it . let it be she - not you - that see my fallen child ! ' he walk a little in front of we , and keep before we for some minute . during this interval , I glance at again , and observe the same expression on he face , and he eye still direct to the distant light , I touch he arm . twice I call he by he name , in the tone in which I might have try to rouse a sleeper , before he heed I . when I at last inquire on what he thought be so bent , he reply : 'On what be afore I , ; and over yon . ' 'On the life before you , do you mean ? ' he have point confusedly out to sea . 'Ay , .
. I doe not rightly know how ' tis , but from over there see to I to come - the end of it like , ' look at I as if he be wake , but with the same determined face . ' what end ? ' I ask , possess by my former fear . 'I doe not know , 'he say , thoughtfully ; be call to mind that the beginning of it all do take place here - and then the end come . but it be gone ! , ' he add ; answer , as I think , my look ; ' you ha not no call to be afeerd of I : but I be kiender muddle ; I do not fare to feel no matters , ' - which be as much as to say that he be not himself , and quite confound . stop for we to join he : we do so , and say no more . the remembrance of this , in connexion with my former thought , however , haunt I at interval , even until the inexorable end come at its appointed time . we insensibly approach the old boat , and enter . , no longer mo in she especial corner , be busy prepare breakfast . she take 's hat , and place he seat for he , and speak so comfortably and softly , that I hardly know she . ' , my good man , ' say she , ' you must eat and drink , and keep up you strength , for without it you will do nowt . try , that be a dear soul ! and if I disturb you with my clicketten , ' she mean she chattering , ' tell I so , n'l , and I will not . ' when she have serve we all , she withdraw to the window , where she sedulously employ herself in repair some shirt and other clothes belong to , and neatly fold and pack they in a old oilskin bag , such as sailor carry . meanwhile , she continue talk , in the same quiet manner : ' all time and season , you know , , ' say , 'I shall be allus here , and everythink will look accordin ' to you wish . I be a poor scholar , but I shall write to you , odd time , when you be away , and send my letter to . maybe you will write to I too , n'l , odd time , and tell I how you fare to feel upon you lone lorn journy . ' ' you will be a solitary woman heer , I be afeerd ! ' say . 'no , no , , ' she return , not be that . not you mind I . I shall have enough to do to keep a for you ' ( . mean a home ) , ' again you come back - to keep a here for any that may hap to come back , n'l . in the fine time , I shall set outside the door as I use to do . if any should come nigh , they shall see the old widder woman true to th'ey , a long way off . ' what a change in Gummidge in a little time ! she be another woman . she be so devote , she have such a quick perception of what it would be well to say , and what it would be well to leave unsaid ; she be so forgetful of herself , and so regardful of the sorrow about she , that I hold she in a sort of veneration . the work she do that day ! there be many thing to be bring up from the beach and store in the outhouse - as oar , net , sails , cordage , spar , lobster - pots , bag of ballast , and the like ; and though there be abundance of assistance render , there be not a pair of work hand on all that shore but would have laboure hard for , and be well pay in be ask to do it , yet she persist , all day long , in toiling under weight that she be quite unequal to , and fagge to and for on all sort of unnecessary errand . as to deplor she misfortune , she appear to have entirely lose the recollection of ever have have any . she preserve a equable cheerfulness in the midst of she sympathy , which be not the least astonish part of the change that have come over she . Querulousness be out of the question . I do not even observe she voice to falter , or a tear to escape from she eye , the whole day through , until twilight ; when she and I and be alone together , and he have fall asleep in perfect exhaustion , she break into a half - suppress fit of sobbing and cry , and take I to the door , say , ' ever bless you , , be a friend to he , poor dear ! ' then , she immediately run out of the house to wash she face , in order that she might sit quietly beside he , and be find at work there , when he should awake . in short I leave she , when I go away at night , the prop and staff of 's affliction ; and I could not meditate enough upon the lesson that I read in , and the new experience she unfold to I . it be between nine and ten o'clock when , stroll in a melancholy manner through the town , I stop at 's door . have
have take it so much to heart , he daughter tell I , that he have be very low and poorly all day , and have go to bed without he pipe . 'a deceitful , bad - hear girl , ' say . ' there be no good in she , ever ! ' ' do not say so ,' I return . ' you do not think so . ' ' yes , I do ! ' cry , angrily . ' no , no ,' say I . toss she head , endeavour to be very stern and cross ; but she could not command she softer self , and begin to cry . I be young , to be sure ; but I think much the better of she for this sympathy , and fancie it become she , as a virtuous wife and mother , very well indeed . ' what will she ever do ! ' sob . ' where will she go ! what will become of she ! oh , how could she be so cruel , to herself and he ! ' I remember the time when be a young and pretty girl ; and I be glad she remember it too , so feelingly . ' my little , ' say , ' have only just now be get to sleep . even in she sleep she be sobb for . all day long , little have cry for she , and ask I , over and over again , whether 'ly be wick ? what can I say to she , when 'ly tie a ribbon off she own neck round little 's the last night she be here , and lay she head down on the pillow beside she till she be fast asleep ! the ribbon 's round my little 's neck now . it ought not to be , perhaps , but what can I do ? 'ly be very bad , but they be fond of one another . and the child know nothing ! ' be so unhappy that she husband come out to take care of she . leave they together , I go home to 's ; more melancholy myself , if possible , than I have be yet . that good creature - I mean Peggotty - all untired by she late anxiety and sleepless night , be at she brother 's , where she mean to stay till morning . a old woman , who have be employ about the house for some week past , while have be unable to attend to it , be the house 's only other occupant besides myself . as I have no occasion for she service , I send she to bed , by no means against she will , and sit down before the kitchen fire a little while , to think about all this . I be blend it with the deathbed of the late , and be drive out with the tide towards the distance at which have look so singularly in the morning , when I be recall from my wandering by a knock at the door . there be a knocker upon the door , but it be not that which make the sound . the tap be from a hand , and low down upon the door , as if it be give by a child . it make I start as much as if it have be the knock of a footman to a person of distinction . I open the door ; and at first look down , to my amazement , on nothing but a great umbrella that appear to be walk about of itself . but presently I discover underneath it , . I might not have be prepare to give the little creature a very kind reception , if , on she remove the umbrella , which she utmost effort be unable to shut up , she have show I the ' volatile ' expression of face which have make so great a impression on I at we first and last meeting . but she face , as she turn it up to mine , be so earnest ; and when I relieve she of the umbrella ( which would have be a inconvenient one for the irish giant ) , she wring she little hand in such a afflict manner ; that I rather inclin towards she . ' ! ' say I , after glance up and down the empty street , without distinctly know what I expect to see besides ; ' how do you come here ? what be the matter ? ' she motion to I with she short right arm , to shut the umbrella for she ; and pass I hurriedly , go into the kitchen . when I have close the door , and follow , with the umbrella in my hand , I find she sit on the corner of the fender - it be a low iron one , with two flat bar at top to stand plate upon - in the shadow of the boiler , sway herself backward and forward , and chaf she hand upon she knee like a person in pain . alarmed at be the only recipient of this untimely visit , and the only spectator of this portentous behaviour , I exclaim again , ' pray tell I , , what be the matter ! be you ill ? ' ' my dear young soul , ' return , squeeze she hand upon she heart one over the other . 'I be ill here , I be very ill . to think that it should come to this , when I might have know it and perhaps prevent it , if I have not be a thoughtless fool ! ' again she large bonnet ( very disproportionate
disproportionate to the figure ) go backwards and forwards , in she swaying of she little body to and fro ; while a most gigantic bonnet rock , in unison with it , upon the wall . 'I be surprised ,' I begin , 'to see you so distressed and serious '- when she interrupt I . ' yes , it be always so ! ' she say . ' they be all surprised , these inconsiderate young people , fairly and full grow , to see any natural feeling in a little thing like I ! they make a plaything of I , use I for they amusement , throw I away when they be tired , and wonder that I feel more than a toy horse or a wooden soldier ! yes , yes , that be the way . the old way ! ' ' it may be , with other ,' I return , ' but I do assure you it be not with I . perhaps I ought not to be at all surprised to see you as you be now : I know so little of you . I say , without consideration , what I think . ' ' what can I do ? ' return the little woman , stand up , and hold out she arm to show herself . ' see ! what I be , my father be ; and my sister be ; and my brother be . I have work for sister and brother these many year - hard , - all day . I must live . I do no harm . if there be people so unreflecting or so cruel , as to make a jest of I , what be leave for I to do but to make a jest of myself , they , and everything ? if I do so , for the time , whose fault be that ? ? ' no . not 's , I perceive . ' if I have show myself a sensitive dwarf to you false friend , ' pursue the little woman , shak she head at I , with reproachful earnestness , ' how much of he help or good will do you think I should ever have have ? if little ( who have no hand , young gentleman , in the making of herself ) address herself to he , or the like of he , because of she misfortune , when do you suppose she small voice would have be hear ? would have as much need to live , if she be the bitterest and dullest of pigmy ; but she could not do it . no . she might whistle for she bread and butter till she die of . ' sit down on the fender again , and take out she handkerchief , and wip she eye . ' be thankful for I , if you have a kind heart , as I think you have , ' she say , ' that while I know well what I be , I can be cheerful and endure it all . I be thankful for myself , at any rate , that I can find my tiny way through the world , without be beholden to anyone ; and that in return for all that be throw at I , in folly or vanity , as I go along , I can throw bubble back . if I do not brand over all I want , it be the better for I , and not the worse for anyone . if I be a plaything for you giant , be gentle with I . ' replace she handkerchief in she pocket , look at I with very intent expression all the while , and pursue : 'I see you in the street just now . you may suppose I be not able to walk as fast as you , with my short leg and short breath , and I could not overtake you ; but I guess where you come , and come after you . I have be here before , today , but the good woman be not at home . ' ' do you know she ? ' I demand . 'I know of she , and about she , ' she reply , ' from and . I be there at seven o'clock this morning . do you remember what say to I about this unfortunate girl , that time when I see you both at the inn ? ' the great bonnet on 's head , and the greater bonnet on the wall , begin to go backwards and forwards again when she ask this question . I remember very well what she refer to , have have it in my thought many time that day . I tell she so . ' may the Father of all confound he , ' say the little woman , hold up she forefinger between I and she sparkl eye , 'and ten time more confound that wick servant ; but I believe it be you who have a boyish passion for she ! ' 'I ? ' I repeat . ' child , child ! in the name of blind ill - fortune , ' cry , wringe she hand impatiently , as she go to and for again upon the fender , ' why do you praise she so , and blush , and look disturbed ? ' I could not conceal from myself that I have do this , though for a reason very different from she supposition . ' what do I know ? ' say , take out she handkerchief again , and give one little stamp on the ground whenever , at short interval , she apply it to she eye with both hand at once . ' he be cross you
you and wheedl you , I see ; and you be soft wax in he hand , I see . have I leave the room a minute , when he man tell I that " young Innocence " ( so he call you , and you may call he " " all the day of you life ) have set he heart upon she , and she be giddy and like he , but he master be resolve that no harm should come of it - more for you sake than for hers - and that that be they business here ? how could I but believe he ? I see sooto and please you by he praise of she ! you be the first to mention she name . you own to a old admiration of she . you be hot and cold , and red and white , all at once when I speak to you of she . what could I think - what I think - but that you be a young libertine in everything but experience , and have fall into hand that have experience enough , and could manage you ( have the fancy ) for you own good ? oh ! oh ! oh ! they be afraid of my find out the truth , ' exclaim , get off the fender , and trot up and down the kitchen with she two short arm distressfully lifte up , ' because I be a sharp little thing - I need be , to get through the world at all ! - and they deceive I altogether , and I give the poor unfortunate girl a letter , which I fully believe be the beginning of she ever speak to , who be leave behind on purpose ! ' I stand amaze at the revelation of all this perfidy , look at as she walk up and down the kitchen until she be out of breath : when she sit upon the fender again , and , dry she face with she handkerchief , shook she head for a long time , without otherwise move , and without breaking silence . ' my country round , ' she add at length , ' bring I to , , the night before last . what I happen to find there , about they secret way of come and go , without you - which be strange - lead to my suspect something wrong . I get into the coach from last night , as it come through , and be here this morning . oh , oh , oh ! too late ! ' poor little turn so chilly after all she cry and frett , that she turn round on the fender , put she poor little wet foot in among the ash to warm they , and sit look at the fire , like a large doll . I sit in a chair on the other side of the hearth , lose in unhappy reflection , and look at the fire too , and sometimes at she . ' I must go , ' she say at last , rise as she speak . ' it be late . you do not mistrust I ? ' meet she sharp glance , which be as sharp as ever when she ask I , I could not on that short challenge answer no , quite frankly . ' come ! ' say she , accept the offer of my hand to help she over the fender , and look wistfully up into my face , ' you know you would not mistrust I , if I be a full - size woman ! ' I feel that there be much truth in this ; and I feel rather asham of myself . ' you be a young man , ' she say , nodding . ' take a word of advice , even from three foot nothing . try not to associate bodily defects with mental , my good friend , except for a solid reason . ' she have get over the fender now , and I have get over my suspicion . I tell she that I believe she have give I a faithful account of herself , and that we have both be hapless instrument in designing hand . she thank I , and say I be a good fellow . ' now , mind ! ' she exclaim , turn back on she way to the door , and look shrewdly at I , with she forefinger up again.- 'I have some reason to suspect , from what I have hear - my ear be always open ; I can not afford to spare what power I have - that they be go abroad . but if ever they return , if ever any one of they return , while I be alive , I be more likely than another , go about as I do , to find it out soon . whatever I know , you shall know . if ever I can do anything to serve the poor betrayed girl , I will do it faithfully , please Heaven ! and have better have a bloodhound at he back , than little ! ' I place implicit faith in this last statement , when I mark the look with which it be accompany . ' trust I no more , but trust I no less , than you would trust a full - size woman , ' say the little creature , touch I appealingly on the wrist . ' if ever you see I again , unlike what I be now , and like what I be when you first see I , observe what company I be in . call to mind that I be a very helpless and defenceless little thing . think of I at
at home with my brother like myself and sister like myself , when my day 's work be done . perhaps you will not , then , be very hard upon I , or surprise if I can be distress and serious . good night ! ' I give my hand , with a very different opinion of she from that which I have hithertoo entertained , and open the door to let she out . it be not a trifl business to get the great umbrella up , and properly balance in she grasp ; but at last I successfully accomplish this , and see it go bobb down the street through the rain , without the least appearance of have anybody underneath it , except when a heavier fall than usual from some over -charged water - spout send it toppl over , on one side , and discover Mowcher struggle violently to get it right . after make one or two sally to she relief , which be render futile by the umbrella 's hopping on again , like a immense bird , before I could reach it , I come in , go to bed , and sleep till morning . in the morning I be join by and by my old nurse , and we go at a early hour to the coach office , where and be wait to take leave of we . ' , ' whisper , draw I aside , while be stow he bag among the luggage , ' he life be quite break up . he doe not know wheer he be go ; he doe not know - what be afore he ; he be bound upon a voyage that will last , on and off , all the rest of he day , take my wured for 't , unless he find what he be a seeking of . I be sure you will be a friend to he , ? ' ' trust I , I will indeed , ' say I , shak hand with earnestly . ' Thankee . , very kind , sir . one thing furder . I be in good employ , you know , , and I ha not no way now of spend what I get . Money' of no use to I no more , except to live . if you can lay it out for he , I shall do my work with a better art . though as to that , sir , ' and he speak very steadily and mildly , ' you be not to think but I shall work at all time , like a man , and act the best that lay in my power ! ' I tell he I be well convince of it ; and I hint that I hope the time might even come , when he would cease to lead the lonely life he naturally contemplate now . 'no , sir ,' he say , shak he head , ' all that be past and over with I , sir . no one can never fill the place that be empty . but you will bear in mind about the money , as theer 's at all time some lay by for he ? ' remind he of the fact , that derive a steady , though certainly a very moderate income from the bequest of he late brother - in - law , I promise to do so . we then take leave of each other . I can not leave he even now , without remember with a pang , at once he modest fortitude and he great sorrow . as to , if I be to endeaavor to describe how she run down the street by the side of the coach , see nothing but on the roof , through the tear she try to repress , and dash herself against the people who be come in the opposite direction , I should enter on a task of some difficulty . therefore I have better leave she sit on a baker 's door - step , out of breath , with no shape at all remain in she bonnet , and one of she shoe off , lie on the pavement at a considerable distance . when we get to we journey 's end , we first pursuit be to look about for a little lodging for , where she brother could have a bed . we be so fortunate as to find one , of a very clean and cheap description , over a chandler 's shop , only two street remove from I . when we have engage this domicile , I buy some cold meat at a eating - house , and take my fellow - traveller home to tea ; a proceeding , I regret to state , which do not meet with 's approval , but quite the contrary . I ink to observe , however , in explanation of that lady 's state of mind , that she be much offende by 's tuck up she widow 's gown before she have be ten minute in the place , and set to work to dust my bedroom . this regard in the light of a liberty , and a liberty , she say , be a thing she never allow . have make a communication to I on the way to for which I be not unprepared . it be , that he purpose first see . as I feel bound to assist he in this , and also to mediate between they ; with the view of spare the mother 's feeling as much as possible , I write to she that night . I tell she as mildly as I could what he wrong be , and what my own share in he injury . I say
say he be a man in very common life , but of a most gentle and upright character ; and that I venture to express a hope that she would not refuse to see he in he heavy trouble . I mention two o'clock in the afternoon as the hour of we come , and I send the letter myself by the first coach in the morning . at the appointed time , we stand at the door - the door of that house where I have be , a few day since , so happy : where my youthful confidence and warmth of heart have be yield up so freely : which be close against I henceforth : which be now a waste , a ruin . no Littimer appear . the pleasanter face which have replace he , on the occasion of my last visit , answer to we summon , and go before we to the drawing - room . be sit there . glide , as we go in , from another part of the room and stand behind she chair . I see , directly , in he mother 's face , that she know from himself what he have do . it be very pale ; and bear the trace of deeper emotion than my letter alone , weaken by the doubts she fondness would have raise upon it , would have be likely to create . I think she more like he than ever I have think she ; and I feel , rather than saw , that the resemblance be not lose on my companion . she sit upright in she arm - chair , with a stately , immovable , passionless air , that it see as if nothing could disturb . she look very steadfastly at when he stand before she ; and he look quite as steadfastly at she . 's keen glance comprehend all of we . for some moment be not a word be speak . she motion to to be seat . he say , in a low voice , 'I should not feel it nat'ral , ma 'am , to sit down in this house . I would sooner stand . ' and this be succeed by another silence , which she break thus : 'I know , with deep regret , what have bring you here . what do you want of I ? what do you ask I to do ? ' he put he hat under he arm , and feel in he breast for 's letter , take it out , unfold it , and give it to she . ' please to read that , ma 'am . that be my niece 's hand ! ' she read it , in the same stately and impassive way , - untouched by its contents , as far as I could see , - and return it to he . ' " unless he bring I back a lady , " ' say , trace out that part with he finger . 'I come to know , ma 'am , whether he will keep he wured ? ' ' no , ' she return . ' why not ? ' say . ' it be impossible . he would disgrace himself . you can not fail to know that she be far below he . ' ' raise she up ! ' say . ' she be uneducated and ignorant . ' ' maybe she be not ; maybe she be , ' say . 'I think not , ma 'am ; but I be no judge of they thing . teach she better ! ' ' since you oblige I to speak more plainly , which I be very unwilling to do , she humble connexion would render such a thing impossible , if nothing else do . ' 'Hark to this , ma 'am ,' he return , slowly and quietly . ' you know what it be to love you child . so do I . if she be a hundred time my child , I could not love she more . you doe not know what it be to lose you child . I do . all the heap of rich in the wureld would be nowt to I ( if they be mine ) to buy she back ! but , save she from this disgrace , and she shall never be disgrac by we . not one of we that she have grow up among , not one of we that be liv along with she and have she for they all in all , these many year , will ever look upon she pritty face again . we will be content to let she be ; we will be content to think of she , far off , as if she be underneath another sun and sky ; we will be content to trust she to she husband , - to she little child , p'raps , - and bide the time when all of we shall be alike in quality afore we ! ' the rug eloquence with which he speak , be not devoid of all effect . she still preserve she proud manner , but there be a touch of softness in she voice , as she answer : 'I justify nothing . I make no counter-accusation . but I be sorry to repeat , it be impossible . such a marriage would irretrievably blight my son 's career , and ruin he prospect . nothing be more certain than that it never can take place , and never will . if there be any other compensation -' 'I be look at the likeness of the face , ' interrupt , with a steady but a kindling eye , ' that have look at I , in my home , at my fireside
fireside , in my boat - wheer not ? - smile and friendly , when it be so treacherous , that I go half wild when I think of it . if the likeness of that face do not turn to burn fire , at the thought of offer money to I for my child 's blight and ruin , it be as bad . I doe not know , be a lady 's , but what it be worse . ' she change now , in a moment . a angry flush overspread she feature ; and she say , in a intolerant manner , grasp the arm -chair tightly with she hand : ' what compensation can you make to I for open such a pit between I and my son ? what be you love to mine ? what be you separation to ours ? ' softly touche she , and bend down she head to whisper , but she would not hear a word . ' no , , not a word ! let the man listen to what I say ! my son , who have be the object of my life , to whom it be every thought have be devote , whom I have gratify from a child in every wish , from whom I have have no separate existence since he birth , - to take up in a moment with a miserable girl , and avoid I ! to repay my confidence with systematic deception , for she sake , and quit I for she ! to set this wretched fancy , against he mother 's claim upon he duty , love , respect , gratitude - claim that every day and hour of he life should have strengthen into tie that nothing could be proof against ! be this no injury ? ' again try to soothe she ; again ineffectually . 'I say , , not a word ! if he can stake he all upon the lightest object , I can stake my all upon a greater purpose . let he go where he will , with the means that my love have secure to he ! do he think to reduce I by long absence ? he know he mother very little if he do . let he put away he whim now , and he be welcome back . let he not put she away now , and he never shall come near I , liive or die , while I can raise my hand to make a sign against it , unless , be rid of she for ever , he come humbly to I and begs for my forgiveness . this be my right . this be the acknowledgement I will have . this be the separation that there be between we ! and be this , ' she add , look at she visitor with the proud intolerant air with which she have begun , 'no injury ? ' while I hear and see the mother as she say these word , I seem to hear and see the son , defy they . all that I have ever see in he of a unyielding , wilful spirit , I see in she . all the understanding that I have now of he misdirected energy , become a understanding of she character too , and a perception that it be , in its strongest spring , the same . she now observ to I , aloud , resum she former restraint , that it be useless to hear more , or to say more , and that she beg to put a end to the interview . she rise with a air of dignity to leave the room , when signify that it be needless . ' not fear I be any hindrance to you , I have no more to say , ma 'am ,' he remark , as he move towards the door . 'I come beer with no hope , and I take away no hope . I have do what I thowt should be do , but I never look yofu any good to come of my stang ne where I do . this have be too evil a house yofu I and mine , fur I to be in my right sense and expect it . ' with this , we depart ; leave she stand by she elbow - chair , a picture of a noble presence and a handsome face . we have , on we way out , to cross a pave hall , with glass side and roof , over which a vine be train . it be leave and shoot be green then , and the day be sunny , a pair of glass door lead to the garden be thrown open . , enter this way with a noiseless step , when we be close to they , address herself to I : ' you do well , ' she say , ' indeed , to bring this fellow here ! ' such a concentration of rage and scorn as darken she face , and flash in she jet - black eye , I could not have think compressible even into that face . the scar make by the hammer be , as usual in this excited state of she feature , strongly mark . when the throbbing I have see before , come into it as I look at she , she absolutely lift up she hand , and strike it . ' this be a fellow , ' she say , 'to champion and bring here , be he not ? you be a true man ! ' ' ,' I return , ' you be surely not so unjust as to condemn I ! ' ' why do you bring division between these two mad creature ? ' she return
return . ' do not you know that they be both mad with they own self - will and pride ? ' ' be it my do ? ' I return . ' be it you do ! ' she retort . ' why do you bring this man here ? ' ' he be a deeply - injured man , ,' I reply . ' you may not know it . ' 'I know that , ' she say , with she hand on she bosom , as if to prevent the storm that be rage there , from be loud , ' have a false , corrupt heart , and be a traitor . but what need I know or care about this fellow , and he common niece ? ' ' ,' I return , ' you deepen the injury . it be sufficient already . I will only say , at parting , that you do he a great wrong . ' 'I do he no wrong , ' she return . ' they be a depraved , worthless set . I would have she whipped ! ' pass on , without a word , and go out at the door . 'Oh , shame , ! shame ! ' I say indignantly . ' how can you bear to trample on he undeserved affliction ! ' 'I would trample on they all , ' she answer . 'I would have he house pull down . I would have she brande on the face , dress in rag , and cast out in the street to starve . if I have the power to sit in judgement on she , I would see it do . see it do ? I would do it ! I detest she . if I ever could reproach she with she infamous condition , I would go anywhere to do so . if I could hunt she to she grave , I would . if there be any word of comfort that would be a solace to she in she die hour , and only I possess it , I would not part with it for life itself . ' the mere vehemence of she word can convey , I be sensible , but a weak impression of the passion by which she be possess , and which make itself articulate in she whole figure , though she voice , instead of be raise , be lower than usual . no description I could give of she would do justice to my recollection of she , or to she entire deliverance of herself to she anger . I have see passion in many form , but I have never see it in such a form as that . when I join , he be walk slowly and thoughtfully down the hill . he tell I , as soon as I come up with he , that have now discharge he mind of what he have purpose do in , he mean 'to set out on he travels ' , that night . I ask he where he mean to go ? he only answer , 'I be a go , sir , to seek my niece . ' we go back to the little lodging over the chandler 's shop , and there I find a opportunity of repea to what he have say to I . she inform I , in return , that he have say the same to she that morning . she know no more than I do , where he be go , but she think he have some project shape out in he mind . I do not like to leave he , under such circumstance , and we all three dine together off a beefsteak pie - which be one of the many good thing for which be famous - and which be curiously flavoure on this occasion , I recollect well , by a miscellaneous taste of tea , coffee , butter , bacon , cheese , new loave , firewood , candle , and walnut ketchup , continually ascend from the shop . after dinner we sit for a hour or so near the window , without talk much ; and then get up , and bring he oilskin bag and he stout stick , and lay they on the table . he accept , from he sister 's stock of ready money , a small sum on account of he legacy ; barely enough , I should have think , to keep he for a month . he promise to communicate with I , when anything befell he ; and he sling he bag about he , take he hat and stick , and bade we both ' good - bye ! ' ' all good attend you , dear old woman , ' he say , embrace , ' and you too , ! ' shak hand with I . 'I be a - go to seek she , fur and wide . if she should come home while I be away - but ah , that be not like to be ! - or if I should bring she back , my meaning be , that she and I shall live and die where no one can not reproach she . if any hurt should come to I , remember that the last word I leave for she be , " my unchanged love be with my darling child , and I forgive she ! " ' he say this solemnly , bare - head ; then , put on he hat , he go down the stair , and away . we follow to the door . it be a warm , dusty evening , just the time when , in the great main thoroughfare out of which that by - way turn , there be a temporary
temporary lull in the eternal tread of foot upon the pavement , and a strong red sunshine . he turn , alone , at the corner of we shady street , into a glow of light , in which we lose he . rarely do that hour of the evening come , rarely do I wake at night , rarely do I look up at the moon , or star , or watch the falling rain , or hear the wind , but I think of he solitary figure toil on , poor pilgrim , and recal the word : 'I be a go to seek she , fur and wide . if any hurt should come to I , remember that the last word I leave for she be , " my unchanged love be with my darling child , and I forgive she ! " ' chapter 33 all this time , I have go on loving , harder than ever . she idea be my refuge in disappointment and distress , and make some amend to I , even for the loss of my friend . the more I pitie myself , or pitie other , the more I seek for consolation in the image of . the greater the accumulation of deceit and trouble in the world , the brighter and the purer shine the star of high above the world . I do not think I have any definite idea where come from , or in what degree she be related to a higher order of being ; but I be quite sure I should have scoute the notion of she be simply human , like any other young lady , with indignation and contempt . if I may so express it , I be steep in . I be not merely over head and ears in love with she , but I be saturate through and through . enough love might have be wring out of I , metaphorically speak , to dry anybody in ; and yet there would have remain enough within I , and all over I , to pervade my entire existence . the first thing I do , on my own account , when I come back , be to take a night - walk to , and , like the subject of a venerable riddle of my childhood , to go ' round and round the house , without ever touch the house ' , think about . I believe the theme of this incomprehensible conundrum be the moon . no matter what it be , I , the moon - struck slave of , perambulate round and round the house and garden for two hour , look through crevice in the paling , get my ching by dint of violent exertion above the rusty nail on the top , blowing kiss at the light in the window , and romantically call on the night , at interval , to shield my Dora - I do not exactly know what from , I suppose from fire . perhaps from mouse , to which she have a great objection . my love be so much in my mind and it be so natural to I to confide in , when I find she again by my side of a evening with the old set of industrial implement , busily make the tour of my wardrobe , that I impart to she , in a sufficiently roundabout way , my great secret . be strongly interested , but I could not get she into my view of the case at all . she be audaciously prejudice in my favour , and quite unable to understand why I should have any misgiving , or be low - spirite about it . ' the young lady might think herself well off , ' she observe , 'to have such a beau . and as to she ,' she say , ' what do the gentleman expect , for gracious sake ! ' I observ , however , that 's proctorial gown and stiff cravat take down a little , and inspire she with a greater reverence for the man who be gradually become more and more etherealized in my eye every day , and about whom a reflecte radiance seem to I to beam when he sit erect in among he papers , like a little lighthouse in a sea of stationery . and by the by , it use to be uncommonly strange to I to consider , I remember , as I sit in too , how those dim old judge and doctor would not have care for , if they have know she ; how they would not have go out of they sense with rapture , if marriage with have be propose to they ; how might have sung , and play upon that glorify guitar , until she lead I to the verge of madness , yet not have temp one of those slow - goer a inch out of he road ! I despise they , to a man . - out old gardener in the flower - bed of the heart , I take a personal offence against they all . the be nothing to I but a insensible blunderer . the have no more tenderness or poetry in it , than the bar of a public - house . take the management of 's affair into my own hand , with no little pride , I prove the will , and come to a settlement with the - office , and take she to the , and soon get everything into a orderly train . we vari the legal character of these proceedings by go to see some perspiring - work , in ( melte , I should hope , these twenty year ) ; and by visit 's , which I remember as a
a Mausoleum of needlework , favourable to self -examination and repentance ; and by inspect the of ; and go to the top of 's . all these wonder afford as much pleasure as she be able to enjoy , under exist circumstance : except , I think , . 's , which , from she long attachment to she work - box , become a rival of the picture on the lid , and be , in some particular , vanquish , she consider , by that work of art . 's business , which be what we use to call ' common - form business ' in the Commons ( and very light and lucrative the common - form business be ) , be settle , I take she down to the office one morning to pay she bill . have step out , old say , to get a gentleman sworn for a marriage licence ; but as I know he would be back directly , we place lie close to the 's , and to the Vicar- 's office too , I tell to wait . we be a little like undertaker , in the , as regard Probate transaction ; generally make it a rule to look more or less cut up , when we have to deal with client in mourning . in a similar feeling of delicacy , we be always blithe and light - hear with the licence client . therefore I hint to that she would find much recover from the shock of 's decease ; and indeed he come in like a bridegroom . but neither nor I have eye for he , when we see , in company with he , . he be very little change . he hair look as thick , and be certainly as black , as ever ; and he glance be as little to be trust as of old . 'Ah , ? ' say . ' you know this gentleman , I believe ? ' I make my gentleman a distant bow , and barely recognize he . he be , at first , somewhat disconcert to meet we two together ; but quickly decide what to do , and come up to I . 'i hope ,' he say , ' that you be do well ? ' ' it can hardly be interesting to you , ' say I . ' yes , if you wish to know . ' we look at each other , and he address himself to . ' and you , ' say he . 'I be sorry to observe that you have lose you husband . ' ' it be not the first loss I have have in my life , , ' reply , trembl from head to foot . 'I be glad to hope that there be nobody to blame for this one , - nobody to answer for it . ' ! ' say he ; ' that be a comfortable reflection . you have do you duty ? ' 'I have not wear anybody 's life away , ' say , 'I be thankful to think ! no , , I have not worrit and frighten any sweet creetur to a early grave ! ' he ey she gloomily - remorsefully I think - for a instant ; and say , turn he head towards I , but look at my foot instead of my face : ' we be not likely to encounter soon again ; - a source of satisfaction to we both , no doubt , for such meeting as this can never be agreeable . I do not expect that you , who always rebel against my just authority , exert for you benefit and reformation , should owe I any good - will now . there be a antipathy between we -' ' a old one , I believe ? ' say I , interrupt he . he smile , and shot as evil a glance at I as could come from he dark eye . ' it rank in you baby breast , ' he say . ' it embitter the life of you poor mother . you be right . I hope you may do better , yet ; I hope you may correct yourself . ' here he end the dialogue , which have be carry on in a low voice , in a corner of the outer office , by pass into 's room , and say aloud , in he smoothest manner : ' gentleman of 's profession be accustom to family difference , and know how complicated and difficul they always be ! ' with that , he pay the money for he licence ; and , receive it neatly fold from , together with a shake of the hand , and a polite wish for he happiness and the lady 's , go out of the office . I might have have more difficulty in constrain myself to be silent under he word , if I have have less difficulty in impressing upon ( who be only angry on my account , good creature ! ) that we be not in a place for recrimination , and that I besotch she to hold she peace . she be so unusually rouse , that I be glad to compound for a affectionate hug , elicit by this revival in she mind of we old injury , and to make the best I could of it , before and the clerk . do not appear to know what the connexion between and myself be ; which I be glad of , for I could not bear to acknowledge he , even in my own breast , remember what I do of the history of my poor mother . seem to think , if he think anything about the matter , that
that my aunt be the leader of the state party in we family , and that there be a rebel party command by somebody else - so I gather at least from what he say , while we be wait for to make out 's bill of cost . ' ,' he remark , 'is very firm , no doubt , and not likely to give way to opposition . I have a admiration for she character , and I may congratulate you , , on be on the right side . difference between relation be much to be deplor - but they be extremely general - and the great thing be , to be on the right side ' : mean , I take it , on the side of the moneyed interest . ' rather a good marriage this , I believe ? ' say . I explain that I know nothing about it . ' indeed ! ' he say . ' speak from the few word drop - as a man frequently do on these occasion - and from what let fall , I should say it be rather a good marriage . ' ' do you mean that there be money , sir ? ' I ask . ' yes , ' say , 'I understand there 's money . beauty too , I be tell . ' ' indeed ! be he new wife young ? ' ' just of age , ' say . ' so lately , that I should think they have be wait for that . ' ' deliver she ! ' say . so very emphatically and unexpectedly , that we be all three discompose ; until come in with the bill . soon appear , however , and hand it to , to look over . , settle he ching in he cravat and rub it softly , go over the item with a deprecatory air - as if it be all 's do - and hand it back to with a bland sigh . ' yes , ' he say . ' that be right . quite right . I should have be extremely happy , , to have limit these charge to the actual expenditure out of pocket , but it be a irksome incident in my professional life , that I be not at liberty to consult my own wish . I have a partner - . ' as he say this with a gentle melancholy , which be the next thing to make no charge at all , I express my acknowledgement on 's behalf , and pay in banknote . then retir to she lodging , and and I go into , where we have a divorce - suit come on , under a ingenious little statute ( repeal now , I believe , but in virtue of which I have see several marriage annull ) , of which the merit be these . the husband , whose name be , have take out he marriage licence as only ; suppresse the , in case he should not find himself as comfortable as he expect . not find himself as comfortable as he expect , or be a little fatigue with he wife , poor fellow , he now come forward , by a friend , after be marry a year or two , and declare that he name be , and therefore he be not marry at all . which the confirm , to he great satisfaction . I must say that I have my doubt about the strict justice of this , and be not even frightene out of they by the bushel of wheat which reconcile all anomaly . but argue the matter with I . he say , look at the world , there be good and evil in that ; look at the ecclesiastical law , there be good and evil in that . it be all part of a system . very good . there you be ! I have not the hardihood to suggest to 's father that possibly we might even improve the world a little , if we get up early in the morning , and take off we coat to the work ; but I confess that I think we might improve the Commons . reply that he would particularly advise I to dismiss that idea from my mind , as not be worthy of my gentlemanly character ; but that he would be glad to hear from I of what improvement I think the Commons susceptible ? take that part of the Commons which happen to be nearest to we - for we man be unmarry by this time , and we be out of , and stroll past the - I submit that I think the rather a queerly managed institution . inquire in what respect ? I reply , with all due deference to he experience ( but with more deference , I be afraid , to he be 's father ) , that perhaps it be a little nonsensical that the Registry of that court , contain the original wills of all persons leave effect within the immense province of , for three whole century , should be a accidental building , never design for the purpose , lease by the registrar for they own private emolument , unsafe , not even ascertain to be fire - proof , chok with the important document it hold , and positively , from the roof to the basement , a mercenary speculation of the registrar , who take great fee from the public , and cramm the public 's will away anyhow and anywhere , have no other object than to get rid of they cheaply . that , perhaps , it be a little unreasonable that these registrar in the receipt of profit amount to eight or nine thousand pound a
a year ( to say nothing of the profit of the deputy registrar , and clerk of seat ) , should not be obliged to spend a little of that money , in find a reasonably safe place for the important document which all class of people be compelle to hand over to they , whether they would or no . that , perhaps , it be a little unjust , that all the great office in this great office should be magnificent sinecure , while the unfortunate work - clerk in the cold dark room upstairs be the worst reward , and the least consider man , do important service , in . that perhaps it be a little indecent that the principal registrar of all , whose duty it be to find the public , constantly resort to this place , all needful accommodation , should be a enormous sinecurist in virtue of that post ( and might be , besides , a clergyman , a pluralist , the holder of a staff in a cathedral , and what not ) , - while the public be put to the inconvenience of which we have a specimen every afternoon when the office be busy , and which we know to be quite monstrous . that , perhaps , in short , this Prerogative of the diocese of be altogether such a pestilent job , and such a pernicious absurdity , that but for its be squeeze away in a corner of 's , which few people know , it must have be turn completely inside out , and upside down , long ago . smile as I become modestly warm on the subject , and then argue this question with I as he have argue the other . he say , what be it after all ? it be a question of feeling . if the public feel that they will be in safe keeping , and take it for grant that the office be not to be make better , who be the worse for it ? nobody . who be the better for it ? all the Sinecurist . very well . then the good predominate . it might not be a perfect system ; nothing be perfect ; but what he object to , be , the insertion of the wedge . under the , the country have be glorious . insert the wedge into the , and the country would cease to be glorious . he consider it the principle of a gentleman to take thing as he find they ; and he have no doubt the would last we time . I defer to he opinion , though I have great doubt of it myself . I find he be right , however ; for it have not only last to the present moment , but have do so in the tooth of a great parliamentary report make ( not too willingly ) eighteen year ago , when all these objection of mine be set forth in detail , and when the exist stowage for will be describe as equal to the accumulation of only two year and a half more . what they have do with they since ; whether they have lose many , or whether they sell any , now and then , to the butter shop ; I do not know . I be glad mine be not there , and I hope it may not go there , yet awhile . I have set all this down , in my present blissful chapter , because here it come into its natural place . and I fall into this conversation , prolonge it and we saunter to and fro , until we diverge into general topics . and so it come about , in the end , that tell I this day week be 's birthday , and he would be glad if I would come down and join a little picnic on the occasion . I go out of my sense immediately ; become a mere driveller next day , on receipt of a little lace - ed sheet of note - paper , ' favour by papa . to remind ' ; and pass the intervene period in a state of dotage . I think I commit every possible absurdity in the way of preparation for this bless event . I turn hot when I remember the cravat I buy . my boot might be place in any collection of instrument of torture . I provide , and send down by the coach the night before , a delicate little hamper , amount in itself , I think , almost to a declaration . there be cracker in it with the tenderest mottoe that could be get for money . at six in the morning , I be in , buy a bouquet for . at ten I be on horseback ( I hire a gallant grey , for the occasion ) , with the bouquet in my hat , to keep it fresh , trot down to . I suppose that when I see in the garden and pretend not to see she , and ride past the house pretend to be anxiously look for it , I commit two small foolery which other young gentleman in my circumstance might have commit - because they come so very natural to I . but oh ! when I do find the house , and do dismount at the garden - gate , and drag those stony - hear boot across the lawn to sit on a garden - seat under a lilac tree , what a spectacle she be , upon that beautiful morning , among the butterfly , in a white chip bonnet and a dress of celestial blue ! there be a young lady with she - comparatively stricken in year - almost twenty , I
I should say . she name be . and call she . she be the bosom friend of . happy ! be there , and would bark at I again . when I present my bouquet , he gnash he tooth with jealousy . well he might . if he have the least idea how I adore he mistress , well he might ! 'Oh , thank you , ! what dear flower ! ' say . I have have a intention of say ( and have be study the best form of word for three mile ) that I think they beautiful before I see they so near she . but I could not manage it . she be too bewildering . to see she lay the flower against she little dimple ching , be to lose all presence of mind and power of language in a feeble ecstasy . I wonder I do not say , ' kill I , if you have a heart , . let I die here ! ' then hold my flower to to smell . then grow , and would not smell they . then laugh , and hold they a little closer to , to make he . then Jip laid hold of a bit of geranium with he tooth , and worried imaginary cat in it . then beat he , and poute , and say , ' my poor beautiful flower ! ' as compassionately , I think , as if have laid hold of I . I wish he have ! ' you will be so glad to hear , , ' say , ' that that cross be not here . she have go to she brother 's marriage , and will be away at least three week . be not that delightful ? ' I say I be sure it must be delightful to she , and all that be delightful to she be delightful to I . , with a air of superior wisdom and benevolence , smile upon we . ' she be the most disagreeable thing I ever see , ' say . ' you can not believe how ill - tempere and shock she be , . ' ' yes , I can , my dear ! ' say . ' you can , perhaps , love , ' return , with she hand on 's . ' forgive my not except you , my dear , at first . ' I learn , from this , that have have she trial in the course of a cheque existence ; and that to these , perhaps , I might refer that wise benignity of manner which I have already notice . I find , in the course of the day , that this be the case : have be unhappy in a misplaced affection , and be understand to have retire from the world on she awful stock of experience , but still to take a calm interest in the unblighted hope and love of youth . but now come out of the house , and go to he , say , ' look , papa , what beautiful flower ! ' and smile thoughtfully , as who should say , , enjoy you brief existence in the bright morning of life ! ' and we all walk from the lawn towards the carriage , which be get ready . I shall never have such a ride again . I have never have such another . there be only those three , they hamper , my hamper , and the guitar - case , in the phaeton ; and , of course , the phaeton be open ; and I ride behind it , and sit with she back to the horse , look towards I . she keep the bouquet close to she on the cushion , and would not allow to sit on that side of she at all , for fear he should crush it . she often carry it in she hand , often refresh herself with its fragrance . we eye at those time often meet ; and my great astonishment be that I do not go over the head of my gallant grey into the carriage . there be dust , I believe . there be a good deal of dust , I believe . I have a faint impression that remonstrate with I for riding in it ; but I know of none . I be sensible of a mist of love and beauty about , but of nothing else . he stand up sometimes , and ask I what I think of the prospect . I say it be delightful , and I dare say it be ; but it be all to I . the sun shone , and the bird sang . the south wind blow , and the wild flower in the hedge be all Doras , to a bud . my comfort be , understand I . alone could enter into my feeling thoroughly . I do not know how long we be go , and to this hour I know as little where we go . perhaps it be near . perhaps some arabian - night magician , open up the place for the day , and shut it up for ever when we come away . it be a green spot , on a hill , carpet with soft turf . there be shady tree , and heather , and , as far as the eye could see , a rich landscape . it be a try thing to find people here , wait for we ; and my jealousy , even of the ladie , kknow no bounds . but all of my own sex - especially one impostor , three or four year my elder , with a red whisker , on which he establish a amount
amount of presumption not to be endure - be my mortal foe . we all unpack we basket , and employ ourselves in get dinner ready . re pretend he could make a salad ( which I do not believe ) , and obtrude himself on public notice . some of the young lady washed the lettuce for he , and slice they under he direction . be among these . I feel that fate have pit I against this man , and one of we must fall . re make he salad ( I wonder how they could eat it . nothing should have induce I to touch it ! ) and vote himself into the charge of the wine - cellar , which he construct , be a ingenious beast , in the hollow trunk of a tree . by and by , I see he , with the majority of a lobster on he plate , eat he dinner at the foot of ! I have but a indistinct idea of what happen for some time after this baleful object present itself to my view . I be very merry , I know ; but it be hollow merriment . I attach myself to a young creature in pink , with little eye , and flirt with she desperately . she receive my attention with favour ; but whether on my account solely , or because she have any design on , I can not say . 's health be drink . when I drank it , I affect to interrupt my conversation for that purpose , and to resume it immediately afterwards . I catch 's eye as I bow to she , and I think it look appeal . but it look at I over the head of , and I be adamant . the young creature in pink have a mother in green ; and I rather think the latter separate we from motives of policy . Howbein , there be a general break up of the party , while the remnant of the dinner be be put away ; and I stroll off by myself among the tree , in a raging and remorseful state . I be debat whether I should pretend that I be not well , and fly - I do not know where - upon my gallant grey , when and meet I . ' , ' say , ' you be dull . ' I beg she pardon . not at all . ' and , ' say , ' you be dull . ' oh dear no ! not in the least . ' and , ' say , with a almost venerable air . ' enough of this . do not allow a trivial misunderstanding to wither the blossom of spring , which , once put forth and blight , can not be renew . I speak , ' say , ' from experience of the past - the remote , irrevocable past . the gushing fountain which sparkle in the sun , must not be stop in mere caprice ; the oasis in the desert of must not be pluck up idly . ' I hardly know what I do , I be burn all over to that extraordinary extent ; but I take 's little hand and kiss it - and she let I ! I kiss 's hand ; and we all seem , to my thinking , to go straight up to the seventh heaven . we do not come down again . we stay up there all the evening . at first we stray to and for among the tree : I with 's shy arm draw through mine : and know , folly as it all be , it would have be a happy fate to have be strike immortal with those foolish feeling , and have stay among the tree for ever ! but , much too soon , we hear the other laugh and talk , and call ' where 's ? ' so we go back , and they want to s . re would have get the guitar - case out of the carriage , but tell he nobody know where it be , but I . so be do for in a moment ; and I get it , and I unlock it , and I take the guitar out , and I sit by she , and I hold she handkerchief and glove , and I drank in every note of she dear voice , and she sang to I who love she , and all the other might applaud as much as they like , but they have nothing to do with it ! I be intoxicate with joy . I be afraid it be too happy to be real , and that I should wake in presently , and hear clink the teacup in get breakfast ready . but sang , and other sang , and sang - about the slumbering echoe in the cavern of ; as if she be a hundred year old - and the evening come on ; and we have tea , with the ketle boiling gipsy - fashion ; and I be still as happy as ever . I be happier than ever when the party break up , and the other people , defeat and all , go they several way , and we go ours through the still evening and the die light , with sweet scent rise up around we . Spenlow be a little drowsy after the champagne - honour to the soil that grow the grape , to the grape that make the wine , to the sun that ripen it , and to the merchant who adulterate it ! - and be fast asleep in a corner of the carriage , I ride by the side and talk to . she
she admire my horse and pat he - oh , what a dear little hand it look upon a horse ! - and she shawl would not keep right , and now and then I draw it round she with my arm ; and I even fancie that begin to see how it be , and to understand that he must make up he mind to be friend with I . that sagacious , too ; that amiable , though quite use up , recluse ; that little patriarch of something less than twenty , who have do with the world , and must not on any account have the slumber echoe in the cavern of awaken ; what a kind thing she do ! ' , ' say , ' come to this side of the carriage a moment - if you can spare a moment . I want to speak to you . ' behold I , on my gallant grey , bend at the side of , with my hand upon the carriage door ! ' be come to stay with I . she be come home with I the day after tomorrow . if you would like to call , I be sure papa would be happy to see you . ' what could I do but invoke a silent blessing on 's head , and store 's address in the securest corner of my memory ! what could I do but tell , with grateful look and fervent word , how much I appreciate she good office , and what a inestimable value I set upon she friendship ! then benignantly dismiss I , say , back to ! ' and I go ; and lean out of the carriage to talk to I , and we talk all the rest of the way ; and I ride my gallant grey so close to the wheel that I graze he near fore leg against it , and ' take the bark off ' , as he owner tell I , 'to the tune of three pun ' siving - which I pay , and think extremely cheap for so much joy . what time sit look at the moon , murmur verse - and recalle , I suppose , the ancient day when she and have anything in common . be many mile too near , and we reach it many hour too soon ; but come to himself a little short of it , and say , ' you must come in , , and rest ! ' and I consent , we have sandwiche and wine - and - water . in the light room , blush look so lovely , that I could not tear myself away , but sit there sta , in a dream , until the snoring of inspire I with sufficient consciousness to take my leave . so we parte ; I ride all the way to with the farewell touch of 's hand still light on mine , recalle every incident and word ten thousand time ; lie down in my own bed at last , as enrapture a young noodle as ever be carry out of he five wit by love . when I awoke next morning , I be resolute to declare my passion to , and know my fate . happiness or misery be now the question . there be no other question that I know of in the world , and only could give the answer to it . I pass three day in a luxury of wretchedness , torture myself by put every conceivable variety of discouraging construction on all that ever have take place between and I . at last , array for the purpose at a vast expense , I go to 's , fraught with a declaration . how many time I go up and down the street , and round the square - painfully aware of be a much better answer to the old riddle than the original one - before I could persuade myself to go up the step and knock , be no matter now . even when , at last , I have knock , and be wait at the door , I have some flurried thought of asking if that be 's ( in imitation of poor Barkis ) , begge pardon , and retreat . but I keep my ground . be not at home . I do not expect he would be . nobody want he . be at home . would do . I be show into a room upstairs , where and be . be there . be copy music ( I recollect , it be a new song , call ' 's ' ) , and be paint flower . what be my feeling , when I recognize my own flower ; the identical purchase ! I can not say that they be very like , or that they particularly resemble any flower that have ever come under my observation ; but I know from the paper round they which be accurately copy , what the composition be . be very glad to see I , and very sorry she papa be not at home : though I think we all bear that with fortitude . be conversational for a few minute , and then , lay down she pen upon ' 's ' , get up , and leave the room . I begin to think I would put it off till tomorrow . 'I hope you poor horse be not tire , when he get home at night , ' say , lift up she beautiful eye . ' it be a long way for he . ' I begin to think I would do it today . ' it be a long way for he , ' say I , ' for he have nothing to uphold
uphold he on the journey . ' ' be not he feed , poor thing ? ' ask . I begin to think I would put it off till tomorrow . 'ye - yes ,' I say , ' he be well take care of . I mean he have not the unutterable happiness that I have in be so near you . ' bend she head over she draw and say , after a little while - I have sit , in the interval , in a burn fever , and with my leg in a very rigid state - ' you do not seem to be sensible of that happiness yourself , at one time of the day . ' I see now that I be in for it , and it must be do on the spot . ' you do not care for that happiness in the least , ' say , slightly raise she eyebrow , and shake she head , ' when you be sit by . ' , I should observe , be the name of the creature in pink , with the little eye . ' though certainly I do not know why you should , ' say , or why you should call it a happiness at all . but of course you do not mean what you say . and I be sure no one doubt you be at liberty to do whatever you like . , you naughty boy , come here ! ' I do not know how I do it . I do it in a moment . I intercept . I have in my arm . I be full of eloquence . I never stop for a word . I tell she how I love she . I tell she I should die without she . I tell she that I idolize and worship she . bark madly all the time . when hang she head and cry , and tremble , my eloquence increase so much the more . if she would like I to die for she , she have but to say the word , and I be ready . Life without 's love be not a thing to have on any term . I could not bear it , and I would not . I have love she every minute , day and night , since I first see she . I love she at that minute to distraction . I should always love she , every minute , to distraction . lover have love before , and lover would love again ; but no lover have loved , might , could , would , or should ever love , as I love . the more I rav , the more bark . each of we , in he own way , get more mad every moment . well , well ! and I be sit on the sofa by and by , quiet enough , and be lie in she lap , wink peacefully at I . it be off my mind . I be in a state of perfect rapture . and I be engage . I suppose we have some notion that this be to end in marriage . we must have have some , because stipulate that we be never to be marry without she papa 's consent . but , in we youthful ecstasy , I do not think that we really look before we or behind we ; or have any aspiration beyond the ignorant present . we be to keep we secret from ; but I be sure the idea never enter my head , then , that there be anything dishonourable in that . be more than usually pensive when , go to find she , bring she back ; - I apprehend , because there be a tendency in what have pass to awake the slumbering echoe in the cavern of . but she give we she bless , and the assurance of she last friendship , and speak to we , generally , as become a voice from the Cloister . what a idle time it be ! what a insubstantial , happy , foolish time it be ! when I measure 's finger for a ring that be to be make of forget -me - not , and when the jeweller , to whom I take the measure , find I out , and laugh over he order - book , and charge I anything he like for the pretty little toy , with its blue stone - so associate in my remembrance with 's hand , that yesterday , when I see such another , by chance , on the finger of my own daughter , there be a momentary stirring in my heart , like pain ! when I walk about , exalt with my secret , and full of my own interest , and feel the dignity of loving , and of be beloved , so much , that if I have walk the air , I could not have be more above the people not so situate , who be creepe on the earth ! when we have those meeting in the garden of the square , and sit within the dingy summer - house , so happy , that I love the sparrow to this hour , for nothing else , and see the plumage of the tropic in they smoky feather ! when we have we first great quarrel ( within a week of we betrothal ) , and when send I back the ring , enclose in a despairing cock - hat note , wherein she use the terrible expression that 'ou love have begun in folly , and end in madness ! ' which dreadful word occasion I to tear my hair , and cry that all be over ! when , under cover
cover of the night , I flow to , whom I see by stealth in a back kitchen where there be a mangle , and implor to interpose between we and avert insanity . when Mills undertake the office and return with , exhort we , from the pulpit of she own bitter youth , to mutual concession , and the avoidance of the of ! when we cry , and make it up , and be so blest again , that the back kitchen , mangle and all , change to 's own temple , where we arrange a plan of correspondence through , always to comprehend at least one letter on each side every day ! what a idle time ! what a insubstantial , happy , foolish time ! of all the time of mine that time have in he grip , there be none that in one retrospect I can smile at half so much , and think of half so tenderly . chapter 34 my aunt ASTONISHES ME I write to as soon as and I be engage . I write she a long letter , in which i try to make she comprehend how blest I be , and what a darling Dora be . I entreate not to regard this as a thoughtless passion which could ever yield to any other , or have the least resemblance to the boyish fancie that we use to joke about . I assure she that its profundity be quite unfathomable , and express my belief that nothing like it have ever be know . somehow , as I write to Agnes on a fine evening by my open window , and the remembrance of she clear calm eye and gentle face come steal over I , it she such a peaceful influence upon the hurry and agitation in which i have be live lately , and of which my very happiness partook in some degree , that it soothe I into tear . I remember that I sit rest my head upon my hand , when the letter be half do , cherish a general fancy as if Agnes be one of the element of my natural home . as if , in the retirement of the house make almost sacred to I by she presence , and I must be happier than anywhere . as if , in love , joy , sorrow , hope , or disappointment ; in all emotion ; my heart turn naturally there , and find its refuge and best friend . of I say nothing . I only tell she there have be sad grief at , on account of 's flight ; and that on I it make a double wound , by reason of the circumstance attend it . I know how quick she always be to divine the truth , and that she would never be the first to breathe he name . to this letter , I receive a answer by return of post . as I read it , I seem to hear Agnes speak to I . it be like she cordial voice in my ear . what can I say more ! while I have be away from home lately , Traddles have call twice or thrice . find within , and be inform by ( who always volunteer that information to whomsoever would receive it ) , that she be my old nurse , he have establish a good - humoured acquaintance with she , and have stay to have a little chat with she about I . so say ; but I be afraid the chat be all on she own side , and of immoderate length , as she be very difficult indeed to stop , bless she ! when she have I for she theme . this remind I , not only that I expect Traddles on a certain afternoon of he own appointing , which be now come , but that Mrs . have resign everything appertain to she office ( the salary accept ) until should cease to present herself . , after hold diver conversation respect , in a very high - pitch voice , on the staircase - with some invisible familiar it would appear , for corporeally speak she be quite alone at those time - address a letter to I , develop she view . begin it with that statement of universal application , which fit every occurrence of she life , namely , that she be a mother herself , she go on to inform I that she have once see very different day , but that at all period of she existence she have have a constitutional objection to spy , intruder , and informer . she name no name , she say ; let they the cap fit , wear it ; but spy , intruder , and informer , especially in widder ' weed ( this clause be underlined ) , she have ever accustom herself to look down upon . if a gentleman be the victim of spy , intruder , and informer ( but still name no name ) , that be he own pleasure . he have a right to please himself ; so let he do . all that she , Crupp , stipulate for , be , that she should not be 's bring in contract ' with such persons . therefore she beg to be excuse from any further attendance on the top set , until thing be as they formerly be , and as they could be wish to be ; and further mention that she little book would be find upon the breakfast - table every morning , when she request a immediate settlement of the same , with the benevolent view of save trouble ' and a ill - conwenience ' to all party . after this , confin herself
herself to make pitfall on the stair , principally with pitcher , and endeavour to delude into break she leg . I find it rather harasse to live in this state of siege , but be too much of to see any way out of it . ' my dear Copperfield , ' cry Traddles , punctually appear at my door , in spite of all these obstacle , ' how do you do ? ' 'my dear Traddle , ' say I , 'I be delighted to see you at last , and very sorry I have not be at home before . but I have be so much engage -' ' yes , yes , I know , ' say Traddles , 'or course . yours live in , I think . ' ' what do you say ? ' ' she - excuse I - , you know , ' say Traddles , colour in he great delicacy , ' live in , I believe ? ' ' oh yes . . ' ' mine , perhaps you recollect , ' say Traddles , with a serious look , ' live down in - one of ten . consequently , I be not so much engage as you - in that sense . ' 'I wonder you can bear ,' I return , 'too see she so seldom . ' 'Hah ! ' say Traddles , thoughtfully . ' it do seem a wonder . I suppose it be , , because there be no help for it ? ' 'I suppose so ,' I reply with a smile , and not without a blush . ' and because you have so much constancy and patience , Traddles . ' ' dear I ! ' say Traddles , consider about it , 'do I strike you in that way , ? really I do not know that I have . but she be such a extraordinarily dear girl herself , that it be possible she may have impart something of those virtue to I . now you mention it , , I should not wonder at all . I assure you she be always forget herself , and take care of the other nine . ' ' be she the eldest ? ' I inquire . ' oh dear , no , ' say Traddles . ' the eldest be a beauty . ' he see , I suppose , that I could not help smile at the simplicity of this reply ; and add , with a smile upon he own ingenuous face : ' not , of course , but that my Sophy - pretty name , , I always think ? ' ' very pretty ! ' say I . ' not , of course , but that be beautiful too in my eyes , and would be one of the dearest girl that ever be , in anybody 's eye ( I should think ) . but when I say the eldest be a beauty , I mean she really be a -' he seem to be describe clouds about himself , with both hand : ' Splendid , you know , ' say Traddles , energetically . ' indeed ! ' say I . ' oh , I assure you , ' say , ' something very uncommon , indeed ! then , you know , be form for society and admiration , and not be able to enjoy much of it in consequence of they limited means , she naturally get 's a little irritable and exacting , sometimes . put she in good humour ! ' 'is the youngest ? ' I hazard . ' oh dear , no ! ' say Traddles , strok he ching . ' the two youngest be only nine and ten . educate th'ey . ' ' the second daughter , perhaps ? ' I hazard . ' no , ' say Traddles . ' be the second . have something the matter with she spine , poor girl . the malady will wear out by and by , the doctor say , but in the meantime she have to lie down for a twelvemonth . nurse she . Sophy be the fourth . ' ' be the mother live ? ' I inquire . ' oh yes , ' say , ' she be alive . she be a very superior woman indeed , but the damp country be not adapt to she constitution , and - in fact , she have lose the use of she limb . ' ' dear I ! ' say I . ' very sad , be it not ? ' return Traddles . ' but in a merely domestic view it be not so bad as it might be , because take she place . she be quite as much a mother to she mother , as she be to the other nine . ' I feel the greatest admiration for the virtue of this young lady ; and , honestly with the view of do my best to prevent the good - nature of Traddle from be impos upon , to the detriment of they joint prospects in life , inquire how be ? ' he be quite well , , thank you , ' say Traddles . 'I be not live with he at present . ' ' no ? ' ' no . you see the truth be , ' say Traddles , in a whisper , ' he have change he name to , in consequence of he temporary embarrassment ; and he do not come out till after dark - and then in spectacle . there be a execution put into we house , for rent . be in such a dreadful state that I really could not resist give my name to that second bill we speak of here . you
you may imagine how delightful it be to my feeling , , to see the matter settle with it , and recover she spirits . ' ! ' say I . ' not that she happiness be of long duration , ' pursue Traddles , ' for , unfortunately , within a week another execution come in . it break up the establishment . I have be live in a furnished apartment since then , and the Mortimer have be very private indeed . I hope you will not think it selfish , , if I mention that the broker carry off my little round table with the marble top , and 's flower - pot and stand ? ' ' what a hard thing ! ' I exclaim indignantly . ' it be a - it be a pull , ' say Traddles , with he usual wince at that expression . 'I do not mention it reproachfully , however , but with a motive . the fact be , , I be unable to repurchase they at the time of they seizure ; in the first place , because the broker , have a idea that I want they , run the price up to a extravagant extent ; and , in the second place , because I - have not any money . now , I have keep my eye since , upon the broker 's shop , ' say Traddles , with a great enjoyment of he mystery , ' which be up at the top of , and , at last , today I find they put out for sale . I have only notice they from over the way , because if the broker see I , bless you , he would ask any price for they ! what have occur to I , have now the money , be , that perhaps you would not object to ask that good nurse of yours to come with I to the shop - I can show it she from round the corner of the next street - and make the best bargain for they , as if they be for herself , that she can ! ' the delight with which Traddles propound this plan to I , and the sense he have of its uncommon artfulness , be among the freshest thing in my remembrance . I tell he that my old nurse would be delighted to assist he , and that we would all three take the field together , but on one condition . that condition be , that he should make a solemn resolution to grant no more loans of he name , or anything else , to . 'My dear , ' say Traddles , 'I have already do so , because I begin to feel that I have not only be inconsiderate , but that I have be positively unjust to . my word be pass to myself , there be no longer any apprehension ; but I pledge it to you , too , with the greatest readiness . that first unlucky obligation , I have pay . I have no doubt would have pay it if he could , but he could not . one thing I ink to mention , which I like very much in , . it refer to the second obligation , which be not yet due . he do not tell I that it be provide for , but he say it will be . now , I think there be something very fair and honest about that ! ' I be unwilling to damp my good friend 's confidence , and therefore assent . after a little further conversation , we go round to the chandler 's shop , to enlist Peggotty ; Traddles decline to pass the evening with I , both because he endure the liveliest apprehension that he property would be buy by somebody else before he could re-purchase it , and because it be the evening he always devote to write to the dearest girl in the world . I never shall forget he pee round the corner of the street in , while be bargain for the precious article ; or he agitation when she come slowly towards we after vainly offer a price , and be haile by the relenting broker , and go back again . the end of the negotiation be , that she buy the property on tolerably easy term , and be transport with pleasure . 'I be very much oblige to you , indeed , ' say Traddles , on hear it be to be send to where he liv , that night . ' if I might ask one other favour , I hope you would not think it absurd , ? ' I say beforehand , certainly not . ' then if you would be good enough , ' say Traddles to , 'to get the flower - pot now , I think I should like ( it be 's , ) to carry it home myself ! ' be glad to get it for he , and he overwhelm she with thanks , and go he way up , carry the flower - pot affectionately in he arm , with one of the most delighted expression of countenance I ever see . we then turn back towards my chamber . as the shop have charms for which I never know they possess in the same degree for anybody else , I saunter easily along , amuse by she staring in at the window , and wait for she as often as she choose . we be thus a good while in get to the . on we way upstairs , I call she attention to the sudden disappearance of 's pitfall , and also to the print of recent footstep . we be both very much surprised ,
, come higher up , to find my outer door stand open ( which I have shut ) and to hear voice inside . we look at one another , without know what to make of this , and go into the sitting - room . what be my amazement to find , of all people upon earth , my aunt there , and ! my aunt sit on a quantity of luggage , with she two bird before she , and she cat on she knee , like a female , drink tea . lean thoughtfully on a great kite , such as we have often be out together to fly , with more luggage pile about he ! ' my dear aunt ! ' cry I . ' why , what a unexpected pleasure ! ' we cordially embrace ; and and I cordially shook hand ; and , who be busy make tea , and could not be too attentive , cordially say she have know well as would have he heart in he mouth , when he see he dear relation . ' ! ' say my aunt to , who quail before she awful presence . ' how be you ? ' ' you remember my aunt , ? ' say I . ' for the love of goodness , child , ' exclaim my aunt , ' do not call the woman by that South Sea Island name ! if she marry and get rid of it , which be the best thing she could do , why do not you give she the benefit of the change ? what be you name now , - ? ' say my aunt , as a compromise for the obnoxious appellation . ' Barkis , ma 'am , ' say , with a curtsey . ' well ! that be human , ' say my aunt . ' it sound less as if you want a missionary . how would 'ye do , ? I hope you be well ? ' encourage by these gracious word , and by my aunt 's extend she hand , come forward , and take the hand , and curtsey she acknowledgement . ' we be older than we be , I see , ' say my aunt . ' we have only meet each other once before , you know . a nice business we make of it then ! , my dear , another cup . ' I hand it dutifully to my aunt , who be in she usual inflexible state of figure ; and venture a remonstrance with she on the subject of she sit on a box . ' let I draw the sofa here , or the easy - chair , aunt , ' say I . ' why should you be so uncomfortable ? ' ' thank you , , ' reply my aunt , 'i prefer to sit upon my property . ' here my aunt look hard at , and observe , ' we need not trouble you to wait , ma'am . ' ' shall I put a little more tea in the pot afore I go , ma 'am ? ' say . ' no , I thank you , ma 'am , ' reply my aunt . ' would you let I fetch another pat of butter , ma 'am ? ' say . ' or would you be persuade to try a new - laid hegg ? or should I brile a rasher ? be not there nothing I could do for you dear aunt , ? ' ' nothing , ma 'am , ' return my aunt . 'I shall do very well , I thank you . ' , who have be incessantly smile to express sweet temper , and incessantly hold she head on one side , to express a general feebleness of constitution , and incessantly rub she hand , to express a desire to be of service to all deserve object , gradually smile herself , one - sid herself , and rub herself , out of the room . ' ! ' say my aunt . ' you know what i tell you about time - server and wealth - worshipper ? ' - with rather a scared look , as if he have forget it - return a hasty answer in the affirmative . ' Mrs . Crupp be one of they , ' say my aunt . ' , I will trouble you to look after the tea , and let I have another cup , for I do not fancy that woman 's pouring - out ! ' I know my aunt sufficiently well to know that she have something of importance on she mind , and that there be far more matter in this arrival than a stranger might have suppose . I notice how she eye light on I , when she think my attention otherwise occupy ; and what a curiious process of hesitation appear to be go on within she , while she preserve she outward stiffness and composure . I begin to reflect whether I have do anything to offend she ; and my conscience whisper I that I have not yet tell she about . could it by any means be that , I wonder ! as I know she would only speak in she own good time , I sit down near she , and speak to the bird , and play with the cat , and be as easy as I could be . but I be very far from be really easy ; and I should still have be so , even if , lean over the great kite behind my aunt , have not take every secret opportunity of shak he head darkly at I , and point at she . ' trot , ' say my aunt at
at last , when she have finish she tea , and carefully smooth down she dress , and wip she lip - ' you need not go , ! - , have you get to be firm and self - reliant ? ' 'i hope so , aunt . ' ' what do you think ? ' inquire . 'I think so , aunt . ' ' then why , my love , ' say my aunt , look earnestly at I , ' why do you think I prefer to sit upon this property of mine tonight ? ' I shook my head , unable to guess . ' because , ' say my aunt , ' it be all I have . because I be ruin , my dear ! ' if the house , and every one of we , have tumble out into the river together , I could hardly have receive a greater shock . ' know it , ' say my aunt , lay she hand calmly on my shoulder . 'I be ruin , my dear trot ! all I have in the world be in this room , except the cottage ; and that I have leave to let . , I want to get a bed for this gentleman tonight . to save expense , perhaps you can make up something here for myself . anything will do . it be only for tonight . we will talk about this , more , tomorrow . ' I be rouse from my amazement , and concern for she - I be sure , for she - by she fal on my neck , for a moment , and cry that she only grieve for I . in another moment she suppress this emotion ; and say with a aspect more triumphant than deject : ' we must meet reverse boldly , and not suffer they to frighten we , my dear . we must learn to act the play out . we must live misfortune down , ! ' chapter 35 Depression as soon as I could recover my presence of mind , which quite desert I in the first overpowering shock of my aunt 's intelligence , I propose to to come round to the chandler 's shop , and take possession of the bed which have lately vacate . the chandler 's shop be in , and be a very different place in those day , there be a low wooden colonnade before the door ( not very unlike that before the house where the little man and woman use to live , in the old weather - glass ) , which please mightily . the glory of lodging over this structure would have compensate he , I dare say , for many inconvenience ; but , as there be really few to bear , beyond the compound of flavour I have already mention , and perhaps the want of a little more elbow - room , he be perfectly charme with he accommodation . have indignantly assure he that there be not room to sw a cat there ; but , as justly observe to I , sit down on the foot of the bed , nurse he leg , ' you know , Trotwood , I do not want to sw a cat . I never do sw a cat . therefore , what do that signify to I ! ' I try to ascertain whether have any understanding of the cause of this sudden and great change in my aunt 's affair . as I might have expect , he have none at all . the only account he could give of it be , that my aunt have say to he , the day before yesterday , ' now , , be you really and truly the philosopher I take you for ? ' that then he have say , yes , he hope so . that then my aunt have say , ' , I be ruin . ' that then he have say , 'Oh , indeed ! ' that then my aunt have praise he highly , which he be glad of . and that then they have come to I , and have have bottled porter and sandwich on the road . be so very complacent , sit on the foot of the bed , nurse he leg , and tell I this , with he eye wide open and a surprised smile , that I be sorry to say I be provoke into explaining to he that ruin mean distress , want , and starvation ; but I be soon bitterly reprove for this harshness , by see he face turn pale , and tears course down he lengthen cheek , while he fix upon I a look of such unutterable woe , that it might have soften a far harder heart than mine . I take infinitely greater pain to cheer he up again than I have take to depress he ; and I soon understand ( as I ink to have know at first ) that he have be so confident , merely because of he faith in the wisest and most wonderful of woman , and he unbounded reliance on my intellectual resource . the latter , I believe , he consider a match for any kind of disaster not absolutely mortal . ' what can we do , ? ' say . ' there be the memorial -' 'To be sure there be , ' say I . ' but all we can do just now , , be to keep a cheerful countenance , and not let my aunt see that we be think about it . ' he assent to this in the most earnest manner ; and implor I , if I should see he wander a inch out of the right course , to
to recall he by some of those superior method which be always at my command . but I regret to state that the fright I have give he prove too much for he best attempt at concealment . all the evening he eye wander to my aunt 's face , with a expression of the most dismal apprehension , as if he see she grow thing on the spot . he be conscious of this , and put a constraint upon he head ; but he keep that immovable , and sit roll he eye like a piece of machinery , do not mmend the matter at all . I see he look at the loaf at supper ( which happen to be a small one ) , as if nothing else stood between we and famine ; and when my aunt insist on he make he customary repast , I detect he in the act of pocketing fragment of he bread and cheese ; I have no doubt for the purpose of revive we with those savings , when we should have reach a advanced stage of attenuation . my aunt , on the other hand , be in a composed frame of mind , which be a lesson to all of we - to I , I be sure . she be extremely gracious to , except when I inadvertently call she by that name ; and , strange as I know she feel in , appear quite at home . she be to have my bed , and I be to lie in the sitting - room , to keep guard over she . she make a great point of be so near the river , in case of a conflagration ; and I suppose really do find some satisfaction in that circumstance . ' trot , my dear , ' say my aunt , when she see I make preparation for compound she usual night - dratch , ' no ! ' ' nothing , aunt ? ' ' not wine , my dear . . ' ' but there be wine here , aunt . and you always have it make of wine . ' ' keep that , in case of sickness , ' say my aunt . ' we must not use it carelessly , . ale for I . half a pint . ' I think would have fall , insensible . my aunt be resolute , I go out and get the ale myself . as it be grow late , and take that opportunity of repair to the chandler 's shop together . I part from he , poor fellow , at the corner of the street , with he great kite at he back , a very monument of human misery . my aunt be walk up and down the room when I return , crimp the border of she nightcap with she finger . I warm the ale and make the toast on the usual infallible principle . when it be ready for she , she be ready for it , with she nightcap on , and the skirt of she gown turn back on she knee . ' my dear , ' say my aunt , after take a spoonful of it ; ' it be a great deal better than wine . not half so bilious . ' I suppose I look doubtful , for she add : ' Tut , tut , child . if nothing worse than happen to we , we be well off . ' 'I should think so myself , aunt , I be sure , ' say I . ' well , then , why do not you think so ? ' say my aunt . ' because you and I be very different people ,' I return . ' stuff and nonsense , ! ' reply my aunt . my aunt go on with a quiet enjoyment , in which there be very little affectation , if any ; drink the warm ale with a tea - spoon , and soak she strips of toast in it . ' trot , ' say she , 'I do not care for strange face in general , but I rather like that of yours , do you know ! ' ' it be better than a hundred pound to hear you say so ! ' say I . ' it be a most extraordinary world , ' observ my aunt , rub she nose ; ' how that woman ever get into it with that name , be unaccountable to I . it would be much more easy to be bear a , or something of that sort , one would think . ' ' perhaps she think so , too ; it be not she fault , ' say I . 'I suppose not , ' return my aunt , rather grudge the admission ; ' but it be very aggravating . however , she be now . that be some comfort . be uncommonly fond of you , . ' ' there be nothing she would leave undone to prove it , ' say I . ' nothing , I believe , ' return my aunt . ' here , the poor fool have be begge and pray about handing over some of she money - because she have get too much of it . a simpleton ! ' my aunt 's tear of pleasure be positively trickl down into the warm ale . ' she be the most ridiculous creature that ever be bear , ' say my aunt . 'I know , from the first moment when I see she with that poor dear bless baby of a mother of yours , that she be the most ridiculous of mortal . but there be good point in ! ' affec to laugh , she get a opportunity of
of put she hand to she eye . have avail herself of it , she resume she toast and she discourse together . 'Ah ! mercy upon we ! ' sigh my aunt . 'I know all about it , ! and myself have quite a gossip while you be out with . I know all about it . I do not know where these wretched girl expect to go to , for my part . I wonder they do not knock out they brain against - against mantelpiece , ' say my aunt ; a idea which be probably suggest to she by she contemplation of mine . ' poor ! ' say I . 'Oh , do not talk to I about poor , ' return my aunt . ' she should have think of that , before she cause so much misery ! give I a kiss , . I be sorry for you early experience . ' as I bend forward , she put she tumbler on my knee to detain I , and say : 'Oh , , ! and so you fancy yourself in love ! do you ? ' ' Fancy , aunt ! ' I exclaim , as red as I could be . 'I adore she with my whole soul ! ' ' Dora , indeed ! ' return my aunt . ' and you mean to say the little thing be very fascinating , I suppose ? ' 'my dear aunt ,' I reply , ' no one can form the least idea what she be ! ' 'Ah ! and not silly ? ' say my aunt . ' Silly , aunt ! ' I seriously believe it have never once enter my head for a single moment , to consider whether she be or not . I resent the idea , of course ; but I be in a manner struck by it , as a new one altogether . ' not light - head ? ' say my aunt . ' light - head , aunt ! ' I could only repeat this daring speculation with the same kind of feeling with which i have repeat the precede question . ' well , well ! ' say my aunt . 'I only ask . I do not depreciate she . poor little couple ! and so you think you be form for one another , and be to go through a party -supper - table kind of life , like two pretty piece of confectionery , do you , ? ' she ask I this so kindly , and with such a gentle air , half playful and half sorrowful , that I be quite touch . ' we be young and inexperienced , aunt , I know ,' I reply ; ' and I dare say we say and think a good deal that be rather foolish . but we love one another truly , I be sure . if I think could ever love anybody else , or cease to love I ; or that I could ever love anybody else , or cease to love she ; I do not know what I should do - go out of my mind , I think ! ' 'Ah , ! ' say my aunt , shak she head , and smile gravely ; ' blind , blind , blind ! ' ' someone that I know , ,' my aunt pursue , after a pause , ' through of a very pliant disposition , have a earnestness of affection in he that remind I of poor . Earnestness be what that somebody must look for , to sustain he and improve he , . deep , downright , faithful earnestness . ' ' if you only know the earnestness of , aunt ! ' I cry . 'Oh , ! ' she say again ; ' blind , blind ! ' and without know why , I feel a vague unhappy loss or want of something overshadow I like a cloud . ' however , ' say my aunt , 'I do not want to put two young creature out of conceit with themselves , or to make they unhappy ; so , though it be a girl and boy attachment , and girl and boy attachment very often - mind ! I do not say always ! - come to nothing , still we will be serious about it , and hope for a prosperous issue one of these day . there be time enough for it to come to anything ! ' this be not upon the whole very comforting to a rapturous lover ; but I be glad to have my aunt in my confidence , and I be mindful of she be fatigue . so I thank she ardently for this mark of she affection , and for all she other kindness towards I ; and after a tender good night , she take she nightcap into my bedroom . how miserable I be , when I lay down ! how I think and think about my be poor , in 's eye ; about my not be what I think I be , when I propose to ; about the chivalrous necessity of tell what my worldly condition be , and release she from she engagement if she think fit ; about how I should contrive to live , during the long term of my article , when I be earn nothing ; about do something to assist my aunt , and see no way of do anything ; about come down to have no money in my pocket , and to wear a shabby coat , and to be able to carry Dora no little present , and to ride no gallant grey , and to show myself in no agreeable light ! Sordo and selfish as I know it
it be , and as I torture myself by know that it be , to let my mind run on my own distress so much , I be so devoted to that I could not help it . I know that it be base in I not to think more of my aunt , and less of myself ; but , so far , selfishness be inseparable from , and I could not put on one side for any mortal creature . how exceedingly miserable I be , that night ! as to sleep , I have dream of poverty in all sort of shape , but I seem to dream without the previous ceremony of go to sleep . now I be rag , want to sell match , six bundle for a halfpenny ; now I be at the office in a nightgown and boot , remonstrate with by on appear before the client in that airy attire ; now I be hungrily pick up the crumb that fall from old 's daily biscuit , regularly eat when 's struck one ; now I be hopelessly endeavour to get a licence to marry , have nothing but one of 's glove to offer in exchange , which the whole Commons reject ; and still , more or less conscious of my own room , I be always toss about like a distressed ship in a sea of bed - clothes . my aunt be restless , too , for I frequently hear she walking to and . two or three time in the course of the night , attire in a long flannel wrapper in which she look seven foot high , she appear , like a disturbed ghost , in my room , and come to the side of the sofa on which I lay . on the first occasion I start up in alarm , to learn that she infer from a particular light in the sky , that be on fire ; and to be consult in reference to the probability of its ignit , in case the wind change . lie still , after that , I find that she sit down near I , whisper to herself ' poor boy ! ' and then it make I twenty time more wretched , to know how unselfishly mindful she be of I , and how selfishly mindful I be of myself . it be difficult to believe that a night so long to I , could be short to anybody else . this consideration set I think and think of a imaginary party where people be dance the hour away , until that become a dream too , and I hear the music incessantly play one tune , and see incessantly dance one dance , without take the least notice of I . the man who have be play the harp all night , be try in vain to cover it with a ordinary - size nightcap , when I awoke ; or I should rather say , when I leave off try to go to sleep , and see the sun shining in through the window at last . there be a old bath in those day at the bottom of one of the street out of the - it may be there still - in which I have have many a cold plunge . Dresse myself as quietly as I could , and leave to look after my aunt , I tumble head foremost into it , and then go for a walk to . I have a hope that this brisk treatment might freshan my wit be a little ; and I think it do they good , for I soon come to the conclusion that the first step I ought to take be , to try if my article could be cancel and the premium recover . I get some breakfast on the Heath , and walk back to 's , along the water roads and through a pleasant smell of summer flower , grow in garden and carry into town on huckster ' head , intent on this first effort to meet we altered circumstance . I arrive at the office so soon , after all , that I have half a hour 's loitering about the Commons , before old , who be always first , appear with he key . then I sit down in my shady corner , look up at the sunlight on the opposite chimney - pots , and think about ; until come in , crisp and curly . ' how be you , ? ' say he . ' Fine morning ! ' ' beautiful morning , sir , ' say I . ' could I say a word to you before you go into ? ' ' by all mean , ' say he . ' come into my room . ' I follow he into he room , and he begin put on he gown , and touch himself up before a little glass he have , hang inside a closet door . 'I be sorry to say , ' say I , ' that I have some rather dishearten intelligence from my aunt . ' ' no ! ' say he . ' dear I ! not paralysis , I hope ? ' ' it have no reference to she health , sir ,' I reply . ' she have meet with some large loss . in fact , she have very little left , indeed . ' ' you as - tound I , ! ' cry . I shook my head . ' indeed , sir , ' say I , ' she affair be so change , that I wish to ask you whether it would be possible - at a sacrifice on we part of some portion of the premium , of course ,' I put
put in this , on the spur of the moment , warn by the blank expression of he face - 'to cancel my article ? ' what it cost I to make this proposal , nobody know . it be like ask , as a favour , to be sentence to transportation from . 'to cancel you article , ? ? ' I explain with tolerable firmness , that I really do not know where my means of subsistence be to come from , unless I could earn they for myself . I have no fear for the future , I say - and I laid great emphasis on that , as if to imply that I should still be decidedly eligible for a son - in - law one of these day - but , for the present , I be throw upon my own resource . 'I be extremely sorry to hear this , , ' say . ' extremely sorry . it be not usual to cancel article for any such reason . it be not a professional course of proceeding . it be not a convenient precedent at all . far from it . at the same time -' ' you be very good , sir ,' I murmure , anticipat a concession . ' not at all . do not mention it , ' say . ' at the same time , I be go to say , if it have be my lot to have my hand unfettered - if I have not a partner - -' my hope be dash in a moment , but I make another effort . ' do you think , sir , ' say I , ' if I be to mention it to - ' shook he head discouragingly . ' , ,' he reply , ' that I should do any man a injustice : still less , jorkin . but I know my partner , . jorkin be not a man to respond to a proposition of this peculiar nature . jorkins be very difficult to move from the beaten track . you know what he be ! ' I be sure I know nothing about he , except that he have originally be alone in the business , and now live by himself in a house near , which be fearfully in want of painting ; that he come very late of a day , and go away very early ; that he never appear to be consult about anything ; and that he have a dingy little black - hole of he own upstair , where no business be ever do , and where there be a yellow old cartridge - paper pad upon he desk , unsoil by ink , and report to be twenty year of age . ' would you object to my mention it to he , sir ? ' I ask . ' by no means , ' say . ' but I have some experience of jorkins , . I wish it be otherwise , for I should be happy to meet you view in any respect . I can not have the objection to you mention it to , , if you think it worth while . ' Avail myself of this permission , which be give with a warm shake of the hand , I sit think about , and look at the sunlight steal from the chimney - pots down the wall of the opposite house , until jorkins come . I then go up to 's room , and evidently astonished jorkin very much by make my appearance there . ' come in , , ' say jorkin . ' come in ! ' I go in , and sit down ; and state my case to jorkin pretty much as I have state it to . be not by any means the awful creature one might have expect , but a large , mild , smooth - face man of sixty , who take so much snuff that there be a tradition in the Commons that he liv principally on that stimulant , have little room in he system for any other article of diet . ' you have mention this to , I suppose ? ' say ; when he have hear I , very restlessly , to a end . I answer yes , and tell he that have introduce he name . ' he say I should object ? ' ask jorkin . I be oblige to admit that have consider it probable . 'I be sorry to say , , I can not advance you object , ' say , nervously . ' the fact be - but I have a appointment at the , if you will have the goodness to excuse I . ' with that he rise in a great hurry , and be go out of the room , when I make bold to say that I fear , then , there be no way of arrange the matter ? ' no ! ' say jorkin , stop at the door to shake he head . 'Oh , no ! I object , you know , ' which he say very rapidly , and go out . ' you must be aware , ,' he add , look restlessly in at the door again , ' if object -' ' personally , he do not object , sir , ' say I . 'Oh ! personally ! ' repeat , in a impatient manner . 'I assure you there be a objection , . hopeless ! what you wish to be do , can not be do . I - I really have get a appointment at the . ' with that he fairly run away ; and to the best of my knowledge , it be three day before he show himself in the
the again . be very anxious to leave no stone unturned , I wait until come in , and then describe what have pass ; give he to understand that I be not hopeless of he be able to soften the adamantine jorkin , if he would undertake the task . ' , ' return , with a gracious smile , ' you have not know my partner , jorkin , as long as I have . nothing be farther from my thought than to attribute any degree of artifice to jorkin . but jorkins have a way of state he objection which often deceive people . no , ! ' shak he head . ' be not to be move , believe I ! ' I be completely bewilder between and jorkin , as to which of they really be the objecting partner ; but I see with sufficient clearness that there be obduracy somewhere in the firm , and that the recovery of my aunt 's thousand pound be out of the question . in a state of despondency , which I remember with anything but satisfaction , for I know it still have too much reference to myself ( though always in connexion with ) , I leave the office , and go homeward . I be try to familiarize my mind with the worst , and to present to myself the arrangement we should have to make for the future in they sternest aspect , when a hackney - chariot come after I , and stop at my very foot , occasion I to look up . a fair hand be stretch forth to I from the window ; and the face I have never see without a feeling of serenity and happiness , from the moment when it first turn back on the old oak staircase with the great broad balustrade , and when I associate its soften beauty with the stain - glass window in the church , be smile on I . ' Agnes ! ' I joyfully exclaim . ' oh , my dear Agnes , of all people in the world , what a pleasure to see you ! ' ' be it , indeed ? ' she say , in she cordial voice . 'I want to talk to you so much ! ' say I . ' it be such a lightening of my heart , only to look at you ! if I have have a conjuror 's cap , there be no one I should have wish for but you ! ' ' what ? ' return . ' well ! perhaps first ,' I admit , with a blush . ' certainly , first , I hope , ' say , laugh . ' but you next ! ' say I . ' where be you go ? ' she be go to my room to see my aunt . the day be very fine , she be glad to come out of the chariot , which smelt ( I have my head in it all this time ) like a stable put under a cucumber - frame . I dismiss the coachman , and she take my arm , and we walk on together . she be like embody , to I . how different I feel in one short minute , have Agnes at my side ! my aunt have write she one of the odd , abrupt note - very little longer than a note - to which she epistolary effort be usually limit . she have state therein that she have fall into adversity , and be leave Dover for good , but have quite make up she mind to it , and be so well that nobody need be uncomfortable about she . Agnes have come to to see my aunt , between whom and herself there have be a mutual liking these many year : indeed , it date from the time of my take up my residence in 's house . she be not alone , she say . she papa be with she - and . ' and now they be partner , ' say I . ' Confound he ! ' ' yes , ' say . ' they have some business here ; and I take advantage of they come , to come too . you must not think my visit all friendly and disinterested , Trotwood , for - I be afraid I may be cruelly prejudice - I do not like to let papa go away alone , with he . ' ' do he exercise the same influence over still , ? ' Agnes shook she head . ' there be such a change at home , ' say she , ' that you would scarcely know the dear old house . they live with we now . ' ' they ? ' say I . ' and he mother . he sleep in you old room , ' say , look up into my face . 'I wish I have the ordering of he dream , ' say I . ' he would not sleep there long . ' 'I keep my own little room , ' say , ' where I use to learn my lesson . how the time go ! you remember ? the little panell room that open from the drawing - room ? ' ' remember , ? when I see you , for the first time , come out at the door , with you quaint little basket of key hang at you side ? ' ' it be just the same , ' say , smile . 'I be glad you think of it so pleasantly . we be very happy . ' ' we be , indeed , ' say I . 'I keep that room to myself still ; but I can not always
always desert . Heep , you know . and so , ' say , quietly , 'I feel obliged to bear she company , when I might prefer to be alone . but I have no other reason to complain off she . if she tire I , sometimes , by she praise of she son , it be only natural in a mother . he be a very good son to she . ' I look at when she say these word , without detect in she any consciousness of 's design . she mild but earnest eye meet mine with they own beautiful frankness , and there be no change in she gentle face . ' the chief evil of they presence in the house , ' say Agnes , 'is that I can not be as near papa as I could wish - be so much between we - and can not watch over he , if that be not too bold a thing to say , as closely as I would . but if any fraud or treachery be practise against he , I hope that simple love and truth will be strong in the end . I hope that real love and truth be stronger in the end than any evil or misfortune in the world . ' a certain bright smile , which I never see on any other face , die away , even while I think how good it be , and how familiar it have once be to I ; and she ask I , with a quick change of expression ( we be draw very near my street ) , if I know how the reverse in my aunt 's circumstance have be bring about . on my reply no , she have not tell I yet , become thoughtful , and I fancie I feel she arm tremble in mine . we find my aunt alone , in a state of some excitement . a difference of opinion have arisen between herself and , on a abstract question ( the propriety of chamber be inhabit by the gentler sex ) ; and my aunt , utterly indifferent to spasm on the part of , have cut the dispute short , by inform that lady that she smelt of my brandy , and that she would trouble she to walk out . both of these expressions consider actionable , and have express she intention of bring before a ' british ' - mean , it be suppose , the bulwark of we national liberty . my aunt , however , have have time to cool , while be out show the soldier at the horse Guard - and be , besides , greatly pleased to see Agnes - rather plume herself on the affair than otherwise , and receive we with unimpaired good humour . when lay she bonnet on the table , and sit down beside she , I could not but think , look on she mild eye and she radiant forehead , how natural it seem to have she there ; how trustfully , although she be so young and inexperienced , my aunt confide in she ; how strong she be , indeed , in simple love and truth . we begin to talk about my aunt 's loss , and I tell they what I have try to do that morning . ' which be injudicious , , ' say my aunt , ' but well meant . you be a generous boy - I suppose I must say , young man , now - and I be proud of you , my dear . so far , so good . now , and , let we look the case of in the face , and see how it stand . ' I observ turn pale , as she look very attentively at my aunt . my aunt , patt she cat , look very attentively at . ' , ' say my aunt , who have always keep she money matter to herself . ' - I do not mean you sister , , my dear , but myself - have a certain property . it do not matter how much ; enough to live on . more ; for she have save a little , and add to it . fund she property for some time , and then , by the advice of she man of business , laid it out on lande security . that do very well , and return very good interest , till be pay off . I be talk of as if she be a man - of - war . well ! then , have to look about she , for a new investment . she think she be wiser , now , than she man of business , who be not such a good man of business by this time , as he use to be - I be allud to you father , Agnes - and she take it into she head to lay it out for herself . so she take she pig , ' say my aunt , 'to a foreign market ; and a very bad market it turn out to be . first , she lose in the mining way , and then she lose in the diive way - fish up treasure , or some such nonsense , ' explain my aunt , rub she nose ; ' and then she lose in the mining way again , and , last of all , to set the thing entirely to rights , she lose in the banking way . I do not know what the share be worth for a little while , ' say my aunt ; ' cent per cent be the lowest of it , I believe ; but the be at the other end of the
the world , and tumble into space , for what I know ; anyhow , it fall to piece , and never will and never can pay sixpence ; and 's sixpence be all there , and there be a end of they . least say , soonest mende ! ' my aunt conclude this philosophical summary , by fix she eye with a kind of triumph on Agnes , whose colour be gradually return . ' dear , be that all the history ? ' say . 'I hope it be enough , child , ' say my aunt . ' if there have be more money to lose , it would not have be all , I dare say . Betsey would have contrive to throw that after the rest , and make another chapter , I have little doubt . but there be no more money , and there be no more story . ' Agnes have listen at first with suspend breath . she colour still come and go , but she breathe more freely . I think I know why . I think she have have some fear that she unhappy father might be in some way to blame for what have happen . my aunt take she hand in hers , and laugh . ' be that all ? ' repeat my aunt . ' why , yes , that be all , except , " and she live happy ever afterwards . " perhaps I may add that of yet , one of these day . now , Agnes , you have a wise head . so have you , , in some thing , though I can not compliment you always ' ; and here my aunt shook she own at I , with a energy peculiar to herself . ' what be to be do ? here be the cottage , take one time with another , will produce say seventy pound a year . I think we may safely put it down at that . well ! - that be all we have get , ' say my aunt ; with whom it be a idiosyncrasy , as it be with some horse , to stop very short when she appear to be in a fair way of go on for a long while . ' then , ' say my aunt , after a rest , ' there be . he be good for a hundr a - year , but of course that must be expend on himself . I would sooner send he away , though I know I be the only person who appreciate he , than have he , and not spend he money on himself . how can and I do best , upon we mean ? what do you say , ? ' 'I say , aunt ,' I interpose , ' that I must do something ! ' ' go for a soldier , do you mean ? ' return my aunt , alarm ; 'or go to sea ? I will not hear of it . you be to be a proctor . we be not go to have any knocking on the head in this family , if you please , sir . ' I be about to explain that I be not desirous of introduce that mode of provision into the family , when inquire if my room be hold for any long term ? ' you come to the point , my dear , ' say my aunt . ' they be not to be get rid of , for six month at least , unless they could be underlet , and that I do not believe . the last man die here . five people out of six would die - of course - of that woman in nankeen with the flannel petticoat . I have a little ready money ; and I agree with you , the best thing we can do , be , to live the term out here , and get a bedroom hard by . ' I think it my duty to hind at the discomfort my aunt would sustain , from live in a continual state of guerilla warfare with ; but she dispose of that objection summarily by declare that , on the first demonstration of hostility , she be prepare to astonish Crupp for the whole remainder of she natural life . 'I have be think , , ' say , diffidently , ' that if you have time -' 'I have a good deal of time , Agnes . I be always disengage after four or five o'clock , and I have time early in the morning . in one way and another , ' say I , conscious of redden a little as I think of the hour and hour I have devote to fagge about town , and to and for upon the , 'I have abundance of time . ' 'I know you would not mind , ' say , come to I , and speak in a low voice , so full of sweet and hopeful consideration that I hear it now , ' the duty of a secretary . ' ' mind , my dear Agnes ? ' ' because , ' continue , ' have act on he intention of retiring , and have come to live in ; and he ask papa , I know , if he could recommend he one . do not you think he would rather have he favourite old pupil near he , than anybody else ? ' ' dear Agnes ! ' say I . ' what should I do without you ! you be always my good angel . I tell you so . I never think of you in any other light . ' answer with she pleasant laugh , that one good angel
angel ( mean ) be enough ; and go on to remind I that the Doctor have be use to occupy himself in he study , early in the morning , and in the evening - and that probably my leisure would suit he requirement very well . I be scarcely more delighted with the prospect of earn my own bread , than with the hope of earn it under my old master ; in short , act on the advice of , I sit down and write a letter to the Doctor , state my object , and appoint to call on he next day at ten in the forenoon . this I address to Highgate - for in that place , so memorable to I , he liv - and go and post , myself , without lose a minute . wherever Agnes be , some agreeable token of she noiseless presence seem inseparable from the place . when I come back , I find my aunt 's bird hang , just as they have hung so long in the parlour window of the cottage ; and my easy - chair imitat my aunt 's much easier chair in its position at the open window ; and even the round green fan , which my aunt have bring away with she , screw on to the window - sill . I know who have do all this , by its seem to have quietly do itself ; and I should have know in a moment who have arrange my neglect book in the old order of my school day , even if I have suppose Agnes to be mile away , instead of see she busy with they , and smile at the disorder into which they have fall . my aunt be quite gracious on the subject of the ( it really do look very well with the sun upon it , though not like the sea before the cottage ) , but she could not relent towards the smoke , which , she say , ' pepper everything ' . a complete revolution , in which bear a prominent part , be be effect in every corner of my room , in regard of this pepper ; and I be look on , think how little even seem to do with a good deal of bustle , and how much do without any bustle at all , when a knock come at the door . 'I think , ' say , turn pale , ' it be papa . he promise I that he would come . ' I open the door , and admit , not only , but . I have not see Wickfield for some time . I be prepare for a great change in he , after what I have hear from , but he appearance shock I . it be not that he look many year older , though still dress with the old scrupulous cleanliness ; or that there be a unwholesome ruddiness upon he face ; or that he eye be full and bloodshot ; or that there be a nervous trembling in he hand , the cause of which I know , and have for some year see at work . it be not that he have lose he good look , or he old bearing of a gentleman - for that he have not - but the thing that strike I most , be , that with the evidences of he native superiority still upon he , he should submit himself to that crawl impersonation of meanness , . the reversal of the two nature , in they relative position , 's of power and 's of dependence , be a sight more painful to I than I can express . if I have see a Ape take command of a man , I should hardly have think it a more degrading spectacle . he appear to be only too conscious of it himself . when he come in , he stand still ; and with he head bow , as if he feel it . this be only for a moment ; for softly say to he , ' ! here be - and , whom you have not see for a long while ! ' and then he approach , and constrainedly give my aunt he hand , and shake hand more cordially with I . in the moment 's pause I speak of , I see 's countenance form itself into a most ill - favoured smile . Agnes see it too , I think , for she shrank from he . what my aunt see , or do not see , I defy the science of physiognomy to have make out , without she own consent . I believe there never be anybody with such a imperturbable countenance when she choose . she face might have be a dead - wall on the occasion in question , for any light it throw upon she thought ; until she break silence with she usual abruptness . ' well , ! ' say my aunt ; and he look up at she for the first time . 'I have be tell you daughter how well I have be dispose of my money for myself , because I could not trust it to you , as you be grow rusty in business matter . we have be take counsel together , and get on very well , all thing consider . Agnes be worth the whole firm , in my opinion . ' ' if I may umbly make the remark , ' say , with a writhe , ' I fully agree with , and should be only too appy if be a partner . ' ' you be a partner yourself , you know , ' return my aunt , ' and that be about
about enough for you , I expect . how do you find yourself , sir ? ' in acknowledgement of this question , address to he with extraordinary curtness , , uncomfortably clutch the blue bag he carry , reply that he be pretty well , he thank my aunt , and hope she be the same . ' and you , master - I should say , , ' pursue . 'i hope I see you well ! I be rejoice to see you , , even under present circumstance . ' I believe that ; for he seem to relish they very much . ' present circumstance be not what you friend would wish for you , , but it be not money make the man : it be - I be really unequal with my umble power to express what it be , ' say , with a fawning jerk , ' but it be not money ! ' here he shook hand with I : not in the common way , but stand at a good distance from I , and lift my hand up and down like a pump handle , that he be a little afraid of . ' and how do you think we be look , master Copperfield , - I should say , ? ' fawn . ' do not you find bloom , sir ? Years do not tell much in we firm , master Copperfield , except in raise up the umble , namely , mother and self - and in develop ,' he add , as a afterthotch , ' the beautiful , namely , . ' he jerke himself about , after this compliment , in such a intolerable manner , that my aunt , who have sit look straight at he , lose all patience . ' take the man ! ' say my aunt , sternly , ' what be he about ? do not be galvanic , sir ! ' 'I ask you pardon , , ' return ; 'I be aware you be nervous . ' 'Go along with you , sir ! ' say my aunt , anything but appease . ' do not presume to say so ! I be nothing of the sort . if you be a eel , sir , conduct yourself like one . if you be a man , control you limb , sir ! ! ' say my aunt , with great indignation , 'I be not go to be serpentin and corkscrew out of my sense ! ' be rather abash , as most people might have be , by this explosion ; which derive great additional force from the indignant manner in which my aunt afterwards move in she chair , and shake she head as if she be make snap or bounce at he . but he say to I aside in a meek voice : 'I be well aware , master , that , though a excellent lady , have a quick temper ( indeed I think I have the pleasure of know she , when I be a numble clerk , before you do , master Copperfield ) , and it be only natural , I be sure , that it should be make quicker by present circumstance . the wonder be , that it be not much worse ! I only call to say that if there be anything we could do , in present circumstance , mother or self , or and , - we should be really glad . I may go so far ? ' say , with a sickly smile at he partner . ' , ' say , in a monotonous force way , 'is active in the business , . what he say , I quite concur in . you know i have a old interest in you . apart from that , what say I quite concur in ! ' 'Oh , what a reward it be , ' say , draw up one leg , at the risk of bring down upon himself another visitation from my aunt , 'too be so trust in ! but I hope I be able to do something to relieve he from the fatigue of business , master Copperfield ! ' ' be a great relief to I , ' say , in the same dull voice . ' it be a load off my mind , Trotwood , to have such a partner . ' the red fox make he say all this , I know , to exhibit he to I in the light he have indicate on the night when he poisone my rest . I see the same ill - favour smile upon he face again , and see how he watch I . ' you be not go , papa ? ' say , anxiously . ' will you not walk back with Trotwood and I ? ' he would have look to , I believe , before reply , if that worthy have not anticipat he . 'I be bespeak myself , ' say , 'on business ; otherwise I should have be appy to have keep with my friend . but I leave my partner to represent the firm . , ever yours ! I wish you good - day , master , and leave my umble respects for . ' with those word , he retire , kiss he great hand , and leer at we like a mask . we sit there , talk about we pleasant old Canterbury day , a hour or two . , leave to , soon become more like he former self ; though there be a settled depression upon he , which he never shook off . for all that , he brighten ; and have a evident pleasure in hearing we recall the little incidents of we old life ,
, many of which he remember very well . he say it be like those time , to be alone with and I again ; and he wish to they have never change . I be sure there be a influence in the placid face of Agnes , and in the very touch of she hand upon he arm , that do wonder for he . my aunt ( who be busy nearly all this while with , in the inner room ) would not accompany we to the place where they be stay , but insist on my go ; and I go . we dine together . after dinner , sit beside he , as of old , and pour out he wine . he take what she give he , and no more - like a child - and we all three sat together at a window as the evening gather in . when it be almost dark , he lay down on a sofa , pillow he head and bend over he a little while ; and when she come back to the window , it be not so dark but I could see tear glitter in she eye . I pray heaven that I never may forget the dear girl in she love and truth , at that time of my life ; for if I should , I must be draw near the end , and then I would desire to remember she best ! she fill my heart with such good resolutions , strengthen my weakness so , by she example , so direct - I know not how , she be too modest and gentle to advise I in many word - the wander ardour and unsettled purpose within I , that all the little good I have do , and all the harm I have forborne , I solemnly believe I may refer to she . and how she speak to I of , sit at the window in the dark ; listen to my praise of she ; praise again ; and round the little fairy - figure she some glimpse of she own pure light , that make it yet more precious and more innocent to I ! oh , Agnes , sister of my boyhood , if I have know then , what I know long afterwards ! - there be a beggar in the street , when I go down ; and as I turn my head towards the window , think of she calm seraphic eye , he make I start by muttering , as if he be a echo of the morning : ' ! ! blind ! ' chapter 36 I begin the next day with another dive into the bath , and then start for . I be not dispirit now . I be not afraid of the shabby coat , and have no yearning after gallant grey . my whole manner of thinking of we late misfortune be change . what I have to do , be , to show my aunt that she past goodness to I have not be throw away on a insensible , ungrateful object . what I have to do , be , to turn the painful discipline of my younger day to account , by go to work with a resolute and steady heart . what I have to do , be , to take my woodman 's axe in my hand , and clear my own way through the forest of difficulty , by cut down the tree until I come to . and I go on at a mighty rate , as if it could be do by walking . when I find myself on the familiar Highgate road , pursue such a different errand from that old one of pleasure , with which it be associate , it seem as if a complete change have come on my whole life . but that do not discourage I . with the new life , come new purpose , new intention . great be the labour ; priceless the reward . be the reward , and must be win . I get into such a transport , that I feel quite sorry my coat be not a little shabby already . I want to be cut at those tree in the forest of difficulty , under circumstance that should prove my strength . I have a good mind to ask a old man , in wire spectacle , who be break stone upon the road , to lend I he hammer for a little while , and let I begin to beat a path to out of granite . I stimulate myself into such a heat , and get so out of breath , that I feel as if I have be earn I do not know how much . in this state , I go into a cottage that I see be to let , and examine it narrowly , - for I feel it necessary to be practical . it would do for I and admirably : with a little front garden for to run about in , and bark at the tradespeople through the railing , and a capital room upstairs for my aunt . I come out again , hotter and faster than ever , and dash up to , at such a rate that I be there a hour too early ; and , though I have not be , should have be oblige to stroll about to cool myself , before I be at all presentable . my first care , after put myself under this necessary course of preparation , be to find the Doctor 's house . it be not in that part of where live , but quite on the opposite side of the little town . when I have make this discovery , I go back
back , in a attraction I could not resist , to a lane by 's , and look over the corner of the garden wall . he room be shut up close . the conservatory door be stand open , and be walk , barehead , with a quick , impetuous step , up and down a gravel walk on one side of the lawn . she give I the idea of some fierce thing , that be drag the length of its chain to and for upon a beaten track , and wear it be heart out . I come softly away from my place of observation , and avoid that part of the neighbourhood , and wish I have not go near it , stroll about until it be ten o'clock . the church with the slender spire , that stand on the top of the hill now , be not there then to tell I the time . a old red -brick mansion , use as a school , be in its place ; and a fine old house it must have be to go to school at , as I recollect it . when I approach the Doctor 's cottage - a pretty old place , on which he seem to have expend some money , if I might judge from the embellishment and repair that have the look of be just complete - I see he walk in the garden at the side , gaiter and all , as if he have never leave off walking since the day of my pupilage . he have he old companion about he , too ; for there be plenty of high tree in the neighbourhood , and two or three rook be on the grass , look after he , as if they have be write to about he by the Canterbury rook , and be observe he closely in consequence . know the utter hopelessness of attract he attention from that distance , I make bold to open the gate , and walk after he , so as to meet he when he should turn round . when he do , and come towards I , he look at I thoughtfully for a few moment , evidently without think about I at all ; and then he benevolent face express extraordinary pleasure , and he take I by both hand . ' why , my dear , ' say the Doctor , ' you be a man ! how do you do ? I be delighted to see you . my dear Copperfield , how very much you have improve ! you be quite - yes - dear I ! ' I hope he be well , and too . ' oh dear , yes ! ' say the Doctor ; ' 's quite well , and she will be delighted to see you . you be always she favourite . she say so , last night , when I show she you letter . and - yes , to be sure - you recollect , ? ' ' perfectly , sir . ' ' of course , ' say the Doctor . 'To be sure . he be pretty well , too . ' ' have he come home , sir ? ' I inquire . ' from ? ' say the Doctor . ' yes . could not bear the climate , my dear . - you have not forget ? ' forget the ! and in that short time ! ' . , ' say the , ' be quite vex about he , poor thing ; so we have get he at home again ; and we have buy he a little patent place , which agree with he much better . ' I know enough of to suspect from this account that it be a place where there be not much to do , and which be pretty well pay . the Doctor , walk up and down with he hand on my shoulder , and he kind face turn encouragingly to mine , go on : ' now , my dear , in reference to this proposal of yours . it be very gratifying and agreeable to I , I be sure ; but do not you think you could do better ? you achieve distinction , you know , when you be with we . you be qualified for many good thing . you have lay a foundation that any edifice may be raise upon ; and be it not a pity that you should devote the spring - time of you life to such a poor pursuit as I can offer ? ' I become very glowing again , and , express myself in a rhapsodical style , I be afraid , urge my request strongly ; remind the Doctor that I have already a profession . ' well , well , ' say the , ' that be true . certainly , you have a profession , and be actually engage in study it , make a difference . but , my good young friend , what be seventy pound a year ? ' ' it double we income , , ' say I . ' dear I ! ' reply the Doctor . 'To think of that ! not that I mean to say it be rigidly limit to seventy pound a - year , because I have always contemplate make any young friend I might thus employ , a present too . undoubtedly , ' say the Doctor , still walk I up and down with he hand on my shoulder . 'I have always take a annual present into account . ' ' my dear tutor , ' say I ( now , really , without any nonsense ) , 'to whom I owe more obligation already than I ever can acknowledge - ' '
' no , no ,' interpose the Doctor . ' pardon I ! ' ' if you will take such time as I have , and that be my morning and evening , and can think it worth seventy pound a year , you will do I such a service as I can not express . ' ' dear I ! ' say the Doctor , innocently . 'To think that so little should go for so much ! dear , dear ! and when you can do better , you will ? on you word , now ? ' say the , - which he have always make a very grave appeal to the honour of we boy . 'On my word , sir ! ' I return , answer in we old school manner . ' then be it so , ' say the Doctor , clapp I on the shoulder , and still keep he hand there , as we still walk up and down . ' and I shall be twenty time happier , sir , ' say I , with a little - I hope innocent - flattery , ' if my employment be to be on the dictionary . ' the Doctor stop , smilingly clap I on the shoulder again , and exclaim , with a triumph most delightful to behold , as if I have penetrat to the profoundest depth of mortal sagacity , ' my dear young friend , you have hit it . it be the dictionary ! ' how could it be anything else ! he pockets be as full of it as he head . it be sticke out of he in all direction . he tell I that since he retirement from scholastic life , he have be advanc with it wonderfully ; and that nothing could suit he better than the propose arrangement for morning and evening work , as it be he custom to walk about in the daytime with he consider cap on . he papers be in a little confusion , in consequence of have lately proffer he occasional service as a amanuensis , and not be accustom to that occupation ; but we should soon put right what be amiss , and go on swimmingly . afterwards , when we be fairly at we work , I find 's effort more troublesome to I than I have expect , as he have not confin himself to make numerous mistake , but have sketch so many soldier , and lady ' head , over the Doctor 's manuscript , that I often become involved in labyrinth of obscurity . the Doctor be quite happy in the prospect of we go to work together on that wonderful performance , and we settle to begin next morning at seven o'clock . we be to work two hour every morning , and two or three hour every night , except on , when I be to rest . on , of course , I be to rest also , and I consider these very easy term . we plan be thus arrange to we mutual satisfaction , the take I into the house to present I to , whom we find in the 's new study , dust he book , - a freedom which he never permit anybody else to take with those sacred favourite . they have postpone they breakfast on my account , and we sit down to table together . we have not be seat long , when I see a approaching arrival in 's face , before I hear any sound of it . a gentleman on horseback come to the gate , and lead he horse into the little court , with the bridle over he arm , as if he be quite at home , tie he to a ring in the empty coach - house wall , and come into the breakfast parlour , whip in hand . it be ; and be not at all improve by , I think . I be in a state of ferocious virtue , however , as to yoing man who be not cut down tree in the forest of difficulty ; and my impression must be receive with due allowance . ' ! ' say the Doctor . ' ! ' shook hand with I ; but not very warmly , I believe ; and with a air of languid patronage , at which I secretly take great umbrage . but he languor altogether be quite a wonderful sight ; except when he address himself to he cousin . ' have you breakfaste this morning , ? ' say the Doctor . 'I hardly ever take breakfast , sir ,' he reply , with he head throw back in a easy - chair . 'I find it bore I . ' ' be there any news today ? ' inquire the Doctor . ' nothing at all , sir , ' reply . ' there be a account about the people be hungry and discontent down in the , but they be always be hungry and discontent somewhere . ' the look grave , and say , as though he wish to change the subject , ' then there be no news at all ; and no news , they say , be good news . ' ' there be a long statement in the papers , sir , about a murder , ' observe . ' but somebody be always be murder , and I do not read it . ' a display of indifference to all the action and passion of mankind be not suppose to be such a distinguished quality at that time , I think , as I have observe it to be consider since . I have know it very fashionable indeed . I have see it display with such success , that I have encounter
encounter some fine lady and gentleman who might as well have be bear caterpillar . perhaps it impress I the more then , because it be new to I , but it certainly do not tend to exal my opinion of , or to strengthen my confidence in , . 'I come out to inquire whether would like to go to the opera tonight , ' say , turn to she . ' it be the last good night there will be , this season ; and there be a singer there , whom she really ought to hear . she be perfectly exquisite . besides which , she be so charmingly ugly , ' relapse into languor . the Doctor , ever please with what be likely to please he young wife , turn to she and say : ' you must go , . you must go . ' 'I would rather not , ' she say to the doctor . 'I prefer to remain at home . I would much rather remain at home . ' without look at she cousin , she then address I , and ask I about , and whether she should see she , and whether she be not likely to come that day ; and be so much disturbed , that I wonder how even the Doctor , butter he toast , could be blind to what be so obvious . but he see nothing . he tell she , good - naturedly , that she be young and ink to be amuse and entertaine , and must not allow herself to be make dull by a dull old fellow . moreover , he say , he want to hear she s all the new singer 's song to he ; and how could she do that well , unless she go ? so the persist in make the engagement for she , and be to come back to dinner . this conclude , he go to he patent place , I suppose ; but at all event go away on he horse , look very idle . I be curious to find out next morning , whether she have be . she have not , but have send into to put she cousin off ; and have go out in the afternoon to see Agnes , and have prevail upon the Doctor to go with she ; and they have walk home by the field , the tell I , the evening be delightful . I wonder then , whether she would have go if Agnes have not be in town , and whether Agnes have some good influence over she too ! she do not look very happy , I think ; but it be a good face , or a very false one . I often glance at it , for she sit in the window all the time we be at work ; and make we breakfast , which we take by snatch as we be employ . when I leave , at nine o'clock , she be knee on the ground at the Doctor 's foot , put on he shoe and gaiter for he . there be a softened shade upon she face , throw from some green leave overhange the open window of the low room ; and I think all the way to 's , of the night when I have see it look at he as he read . I be pretty busy now ; up at five in the morning , and home at nine or ten at night . but I have infinite satisfaction in be so closely engage , and never walk slowly on any account , and feel enthusiastically that the more I ti myself , the more I be do to deserve . I have not revealead myself in my altered character to yet , because she be come to see in a few day , and I defer all I have to tell she until then ; merely inform she in my letter ( all we communication be secretly forward through ) , that I have much to tell she . in the meantime , I put myself on a short allowance of bear 's grease , wholly abandon scent soap and lavender water , and sell off three waistcoat at a prodigious sacrifice , as be too luxurious for my stern career . not satisfy with all these proceedings , but burn with impatience to do something more , I go to see Traddles , now lod up behind the parapet of a house in , . , who have be with I to Highgate twice already , and have resume he companionship with the Doctor , I take with I . I take with I , because , acutely sensitive to my aunt 's reverse , and sincerely believe that no galley - slave or convict work as I do , he have begin to fret and worry himself out of spirit and appetite , as have nothing useful to do . in this condition , he feel more incapable of finish the than ever ; and the harder he work at it , the oftener that unlucky head of the get into it . seriously apprehend that he malady would increase , unless we put some innocent deception upon he and cause he to believe that he be useful , or unless we could put he in the way of be really useful ( which would be better ) , I make up my mind to try if Traddles could help we . before we go , I write a full statement of all that have happen , and write I back a capital answer , expressive of he sympathy and friendship . we find he hard at work with he inkstand and papers , refresh by the sight of the flower - pot
pot stand and the little round table in a corner of the small apartment . he receive we cordially , and make friend with in a moment . profess a absolute certainty of have see he before , and we both say , ' very likely . ' the first subject on which i have to consult be this , - I have hear that many man distinguished in various pursuit have begin life by report the debate in parliament . Traddle have mention newspapers to I , as one of he hope , I have put the two thing together , and tell Traddle in my letter that I wish to know how I could qualify myself for this pursuit . Traddle now inform I , as the result of he inquiry , that the mere mechanical acquisition necessary , except in rare case , for thorough excellence in it , that be to say , a perfect and entire command of the mystery of short - hand writing and reading , be about equal in difficulty to the mastery of six language ; and that it might perhaps be attaine , by dint of perseverance , in the course of a few year . Traddle reasonably suppose that this would settle the business ; but I , only feel that here indeed be a few tall tree to be hew down , immediately resolve to work my way on to through this thicket , axe in hand . 'I be very much oblige to you , my dear Traddle ! ' say I . 'I will begin tomorrow . ' Traddle look astonished , as he well might ; but he have no notion as yet of my rapturous condition . 'I will buy a book , ' say I , ' with a good scheme of this art in it ; I will work at it at the , where I have not half enough to do ; I will take down the speech in we court for practice - Traddle , my dear fellow , I will master it ! ' ' dear I , ' say Traddles , open he eye , 'I have no idea you be such a determined character , ! ' I do not know how he should have have , for it be new enough to I . I pass that off , and bring on the carpet . ' you see , ' say , wistfully , 'if I could exert myself , - if I could beat a drum - or blow anything ! ' poor fellow ! I have little doubt he would have prefer such a employment in he heart to all other . Traddle , who would not have smile for the world , reply composedly : ' but you be a very good penman , sir . you tell I so , ? ' ' excellent ! ' say I . and indeed he be . he write with extraordinary neatness . ' do not you think , ' say , ' you could copy writing , sir , if I get they for you ? ' look doubtfully at I . 'Eh , ? ' I shook my head . shook he , and sigh . ' tell he about the , ' say . I explain to Traddle that there be a difficulty in keep the out of 's manuscript ; Dick in the meanwhile look very deferentially and seriously at , and suck he thumb . ' but these writings , you know , that I speak of , be already draw up and finish , ' say after a little consideration . ' have nothing to do with they . would not that make a difference , ? at all event , would not it be well to try ? ' this give we new hope . Traddle and I lay we head together apart , while anxiously watch we from he chair , we concoct a scheme in virtue of which we get he to work next day , with triumphant success . on a table by the window in , we set out the work procure for he - which be to make , I forget how many copy of a legal document about some right of way - and on another table we spread the last unfinished original of the great memorial . we instructions to be that he should copy exactly what he have before he , without the least departure from the original ; and that when he feel it necessary to make the slightest allusion to the , he should fly to the memorial . we exhort he to be resolute in this , and leave my aunt to observe he . my aunt report to we , afterwards , that , at first , he be like a man play the kettle - drum , and constantly divide he attention between the two ; but that , finde this confuse and fatigue he , and have he copy there , plainly before he eye , he soon sit at it in a orderly business - like manner , and postpone the to a more convenient time . in a word , although we take great care that he should have no more to do than be good for he , and although he do not begin with the beginning of a week , he earn by the follow night ten shilling and nine - pence ; and never , while I live , shall I forget he go about to all the shop in the neighbourhood to change this treasure into sixpence , or he bring they to my aunt arrange in the form of a heart upon a waiter , with tear of joy and pride in he eye . he be like one under the propitious influence of a charm , from
from the moment of he be usefully employ ; and if there be a happy man in the world , that night , it be the grateful creature who think my aunt the most wonderful woman in existence , and I the most wonderful young man . ' no starving now , , ' say , shak hand with I in a corner . 'I will provide for she , ! ' and he flourish he ten finger in the air , as if they be ten banks . I hardly know which be the better pleased , Traddle or I . ' it really , ' say Traddles , suddenly , take a letter out of he pocket , and give it to I , ' put quite out of my head ! ' the letter ( never miss any possible opportunity of write a letter ) be address to I , ' by the kindness of , , of the . ' it run thus : - , ' you may possibly not be unprepared to receive the intimation that something have turn up . I may have mention to you on a former occasion that I be in expectation of such a event . 'I be about to establish myself in one of the provincial town of we favoured island ( where the society may be describe as a happy admixture of the agricultural and the clerical ) , in immediate connexion with one of the learn profession . and we offspring will accompany I . we ash , at a future period , will probably be find commingled in the cemetery attach to a venerable pile , for which the spot to which i refer have acquire a reputation , shall I say from to ? ' in bidding adieu to the modern , where we have undergone many vicissitude , I trust not ignobly , . and myself can not disguise from we minds that we part , it may be for year and it may be for ever , with a individual link by strong associations to the altar of we domestic life . if , on the eve of such a departure , you will accompany we mutual friend , , to we present abode , and there reciprocate the wish natural to the occasion , you will confer a Boon 'On ' one ' who 'I ' ever yours , ' . ' I be glad to find that have get rid of he dust and ash , and that something really have turn up at last . learn from that the invitation refer to the evening then wear away , I express my readiness to do honou to it ; and we go off together to the lodging which occupy as , and which be situate near the top of the 's . the resource of this lodging be so limited , that we find the twin , now some eight or nine year old , repose in a turn - up bedstead in the family sit - room , where have prepare , in a wash - hand - stand jug , what he call ' of the agreeable beverage for which he be famous . I have the pleasure , on this occasion , of renew the acquaintance of master , whom I find a promise boy of about twelve or thirteen , very subject to that restlessness of limb which be not a unfrequent phenomenon in youth of he age . I also become once more known to he sister , , in whom , as tell we , 'her mother renew she youth , like the ' . 'My dear , ' say , ' yourself and find we on the brink of migration , and will excuse any little discomforts incidental to that position . ' Glance round as i make a suitable reply , I observe that the family effect be already pack , and that the amount of luggage be by no means overwhelm . I congratulate on the approach change . ' my dear , ' say , 'or you friendly interest in all we affair , I be well assure . my family may consider it banishment , if they please ; but I be a wife and mother , and I never will desert . ' Traddle , appeal to by 's eye , feelingly acquiesce . ' that , ' say , ' that , at least , be my view , my dear and , of the obligation which I take upon myself when I repeat the irrevocable word , " I , , take thee , Wilkins . " I read the service over with a flat - candle on the previous night , and the conclusion I derive from it be , that I never could desert . and , ' say , ' though it be possible I may be mistaken in my view of the ceremony , I never will ! ' 'My dear , ' say , a little impatiently , 'I be not conscious that you be expect to do anything of the sort . ' 'I be aware , my dear , ' pursue , ' that I be now about to cast my lot among strangers ; and I be also aware that the various member of my family , to whom have write in the most gentlemanly term , announce that fact , have not take the least notice of 's communication . indeed I may be superstitious , ' say , ' but it appear to I that be destin never to receive any answer whatever to the great majority of the communication he write . I may augur , from the silence of my family , that they object to the resolution I have take ; but I should not allow myself to be swerve from the path of
of duty , , even by my papa and mama , be they still liive . ' I express my opinion that this be go in the right direction . ' it may be a sacrifice , ' say , 'to immure one 's - self in a town ; but surly , , if it be a sacrifice in I , it be much more a sacrifice in a man of 's ability . ' 'Oh ! you be go to a Cathedral town ? ' say I . , who have be help we all , out of the wash - hand - stand jug , reply : . in fact , my dear Copperfield , I have enter into arrangement , by virtue of which I stand pledge and contract to we friend , to assist and serve he in the capacity of - and to be - he confidential clerk . ' I star at , who greatly enjoy my surprise . 'I be bound to state to you ,' he say , with a official air , ' that the business habit , and the prudent suggestion , of , have in a great measure conduce to this result . the gauntlet , to which . refer upon a former occasion , be throw down in the form of a advertisement , be take up by my friend Heep , and lead to a mutual recognition . of my friend , ' say , ' who be a man of remarkable shrewdness , I desire to speak with all possible respect . my friend Heep have not fix the positive remuneration at too high a figure , but he have make a great deal , in the way of extrication from the pressure of pecuniary difficulty , contingent on the value of my service ; and on the value of those service I pin my faith . such address and intelligence as I chance to possess , ' say , boastfully disparage himself , with the old genteel air , ' will be devote to my friend 's service . I have already some acquaintance with the law - as a defendant on civil process - and I shall immediately apply myself to the Commentaries of one of the most eminent and remarkable of we English jurist . I believe it be unnecessary to add that I allude to . ' these observation , and indeed the greater part of the observation make that evening , be interrupt by 's discovering that be sit on he boot , or hold he head on with both arm as if he feel it loose , or accidentally kick Traddle under the table , or shuffl he foot over one another , or produce they at distance from himself apparently outrageous to nature , or lie sideway with he hair among the wine - glass , or develop he restlessness of limb in some other form incompatible with the general interest of society ; and by master 's receive those discoveries in a resentful spirit . I sit all the while , amaze by 's disclosure , and wonder what it mean ; until resum the thread of the discourse , and claim my attention . ' what I particularly request to be careful of , be , ' say , ' that he do not , my dear , in apply himself to this subordinate branch of the law , place it out of he power to rise , ultimately , to the top of the tree . I be convince that , give he mind to a profession so adapt to he fertile resource , and he flow of language , must distinguish himself . now , for example , , ' say , assume a profound air , 'a judge , or even say a Chancellor . do a individual place himself beyond the pale of those preferment by enter on such a office as have accept ? ' 'My dear , ' observ - but glance inquisitively at , too ; 'we have time enough before we , for the consideration of those question . ' ' , ' she return , ' no ! you mistake in life be , that you do not look forward far enough . you be bound , in justice to you family , if not to yourself , to take in at a comprehensive glance the extremest point in the horizon to which you ability may lead you . ' cough , and drank he punch with a air of exceed satisfaction - still glance at , as if he desire to have he opinion . ' why , the plain state of the case , , ' say Traddles , mildly break the truth to she . 'I mean the real prosaic fact , you know -' ' just so , ' say , 'my dear , I wish to be as prosaic and literal as possible on a subject of so much importance . ' ' - be , ' say , ' that this branch of the law , even if be a regular solicitor -' ' exactly so , ' return . ( 'Wilkin , you be squint , and will not be able to get you eye back . ' ) ' - have nothing , ' pursue Traddle , 'to do with that . only a barrister be eligible for such preferment ; and could not be a barrister , without be enter at a inn of court as a student , for five year . ' ' do I follow you ? ' say , with she most affable air of business . ' do I understand , my dear , that , at the expiration of that period , would be eligible as a or ? ' 'he would be eligible , ' return Traddles , with a strong emphasis
emphasis on that word . ' thank you , ' say . ' that be quite sufficient . if such be the case , and forfeit no privilege by enter on these duty , my anxiety be set at rest . I speak , ' say , 'as a female , necessarily ; but I have always be of opinion that possess what I have hear my papa call , when I live at home , the judicial mind ; and I hope be now enter on a field where that mind will develop itself , and take a commanding station . ' I quite believe that see himself , in he judicial mind 's eye , on the woolsack . he pass he hand complacently over he bald head , and say with ostentatious resignation : ' my dear , we will not anticipate the decree of fortune . if I be reserve to wear a wig , I be at least prepare , externally , ' in allusion to he baldness , ' for that distinction . I do not , ' say , ' regret my hair , and I may have be deprive of it for a specific purpose . I can not say . it be my intention , my dear , to educate my son for the Church ; I will not deny that I should be happy , on he account , to attain to eminence . ' ' for the ? ' say I , still ponder , between whiles , on . ' yes , ' say . ' he have a remarkable head - voice , and will commence as a chorister . we residence at , and we local connexion , will , no doubt , enable he to take advantage of any vacancy that may arise in the Cathedral corps . ' on look at again , I see that he have a certain expression of face , as if he voice be behind he eyebrow ; where it presently appear to be , on he singe we ( as a alternative between that and bed ) ' the - tapping ' . after many compliment on this performance , we fall into some general conversation ; and as I be too full of my desperate intention to keep my altered circumstance to myself , I make they know to and . I can not express how extremely delighte they both be , by the idea of my aunt 's be in difficulty ; and how comfortable and friendly it make they . when we be nearly come to the last round of the punch , I address myself to Traddles , and remind he that we must not separate , without wish we friend health , happiness , and success in they new career . I beg to fill we bumper , and propose the toast in due form : shaking hand with he across the table , and kiss , to commemorate that eventful occasion . Traddle imitate I in the first particular , but do not consider himself a sufficiently old friend to venture on the second . ' my dear , ' say , rise with one of he thumb in each of he waistcoat pocket , ' the companion of my youth : if I may be allow the expression - and my esteem friend Traddle : if I may be permit to call he so - will allow I , on the part of , myself , and we offspring , to thank they in the warmest and most uncompromising term for they good wish . it may be expect that on the eve of a migration which will consign we to a perfectly new existence , ' speak as if they be go five hundred thousand mile , should offer a few valedictory remark to two such friend as I see before I . but all that I have to say in this way , I have say . whatever station in society I may attain , through the medium of the learn profession of which I be about to become a unworthy member , I shall endeaavor not to disgrase , and will be safe to adorn . under the temporary pressure of pecuniary liability , contract with a view to they immediate liquidation , but remain unliquidated through a combination of circumstance , I have be under the necessity of assume a garb from which my natural instinct recoil - I allude to spectacle - and possesse myself of a cognoman , to which I can establish no legitimate pretension . all I have to say on that score be , that the cloud have pass from the dreary scene , and the of be once more high upon the mountain top . on next , on the arrival of the four o'clock afternoon coach at , my foot will be on my native heath - my name , ! ' resume he seat on the close of these remark , and drank two glass of punch in grave succession . he then say with much solemnity : ' one thing more I have to do , before this separation be complete , and that be to perform a act of justice . my friend have , on two several occasion , " put he name " , if I may use a common expression , to bill of exchange for my accommodation . on the first occasion be leave - let I say , in short , in the lurch . the fulfilment of the second have not yet arrive . the amount of the first obligation , ' here carefully refer to papers , ' be , I believe , twenty - three , four , nine and a half , of the second , accord to my entry of that transaction , eighteen , six , two
two . these sum , unite , make a total , if my calculation be correct , amount to forty - one , ten , eleven and a half . my friend will perhaps do I the favour to check that total ? ' I do so and find it correct . 'to leave this metropolis , ' say , ' and my friend , without acquitt myself of the pecuniary part of this obligation , would weigh upon my mind to a insupportable extent . I have , therefore , prepared for my friend , and I now hold in my hand , a document , which accomplish the desire object . I beg to hand to my friend my I for forty - one , ten , eleven and a half , and I be happy to recover my moral dignity , and to know that I can once more walk erect before my fellow man ! ' with this introduction ( which greatly affect he ) , place he in the hand of Traddles , and say he wish he well in every relation of life . I be persuade , not only that this be quite the same to as pay the money , but that Traddle himself hardly know the difference until he have have time to think about it . walk so erect before he fellow man , on the strength of this virtuous action , that he chest look half as broad again when he light we downstair . we part with great heartiness on both side ; and when I have see Traddles to he own door , and be go home alone , I think , among the other odd and contradictory thing I muse upon , that , slippery as be , I be probably indebt to some compassionate recollection he retain of I as he boy - lodger , for never have be ask by he for money . I certainly should not have have the moral courage to refuse it ; and I have no doubt he know that ( to he credit be it write ) , quite as well as I do . chapter 37 a little could Water my new life have last for more than a week , and I be stronger than ever in those tremendous practical resolution that I feel the crisis require . I continue to walk extremely fast , and to have a general idea that I be get on . I make it a rule to take as much out of myself as I possibly could , in my way of do everything to which I apply my energie . I make a perfect victim of myself . I even entertain some idea of put myself on a vegetable diet , vaguly conceive that , in become a graminivorous animal , I should sacrifice to . as yet , little be quite unconscious of my desperate firmness , otherwise than as my letter darkly shadowed it forth . but another come , and on that evening she be to be at 's ; and when have go to he whist - club ( telegraph to I in the street , by a bird - cage in the drawing - room middle window ) , I be to go there to tea . by this time , we be quite settle down in , where continue he copy in a state of absolute felicity . my aunt have obtain a signal victory over , by pay she off , throw the first pitcher she plan on the stair out of window , and protect in person , up and down the staircase , a supernumerary whom she engage from the outer world . these vigorous measure struck such terror to the breast of , that she subside into she own kitchen , under the impression that my aunt be mad . my aunt be supremely indifferent to 's opinion and everybody else 's , and rather favour than discourage the idea , , of late the bold , become within a few day so faint - hear , that rather than encounter my aunt upon the staircase , she would endeaavor to hide she portly form behind door - leave visible , however , a wide margin of flannel petticoat - or would shrink into dark corner . this give my aunt such unspeakable satisfaction , that I believe she take a delight in prowl up and down , with she bonnet insanely perch on the top of she head , at time when Crupp be likely to be in the way . my aunt , be uncommonly neat and ingenious , make so many little improvement in we domestic arrangement , that I seem to be richer instead of poorer . among the rest , she convert the pantry into a dressing - room for I ; and purchase and embellish a bedstead for my occupation , which look as like a bookcase in the daytime as a bedstead could . I be the object of she constant solicitude ; and my poor mother herself could not have love I better , or study more how to make I happy . have consider herself highly privileged in be allow to participate in these labour ; and , although she still retain something of she old sentiment of awe in reference to my aunt , have receive so many mark of encouragement and confidence , that they be the best friend possible . but the time have now come ( I be speak of the when I be to take tea at 's ) when it be necessary for she to return home , and enter on the discharge of the duty she have undertake in behalf of . 'So good - bye , , ' say my aunt , 'and take care of yourself ! I be sure I never
never think I could be sorry to lose you ! ' I take to the coach office and see she off . she cry at parting , and confide she brother to my friendship as have do . we have hear nothing of he since he go away , that sunny afternoon . ' and now , my own dear , ' say , ' if , while you be a prentice , you should want any money to spend ; or if , when you be out of you time , my dear , you should want any to set you up ( and you must do one or other , or both , my darling ) ; who have such a good right to ask leave to lend it you , as my sweet girl 's own old stupid I ! ' I be not so savagely independent as to say anything in reply , but that if ever I borrowed money of anyone , I would borrow it of she . next to accept a large sum on the spot , I believe this give more comfort than anything I could have do . ' and , my dear ! ' whisper , ' tell the pretty little angel that I should so have like to see she , only for a minute ! and tell she that before she marry my boy , I will come and make you house so beautiful for you , if you will let I ! ' I declare that nobody else should touch it ; and this give such delight that she go away in good spirit . I fatigue myself as much as I possibly could in the Commons all day , by a variety of device , and at the appointed time in the evening repair to 's street . , who be a terrible fellow to fall asleep after dinner , have not yet go out , and there be no bird - cage in the middle window . he keep I wait so long , that I fervently hope the club would fine he for be late . at last he come out ; and then I see my own Dora hang up the bird - cage , and peep into the balcony to look for I , and run in again when she see I be there , while remain behind , to bark injuriously at a immense butcher 's dog in the street , who could have take he like a pill . come to the drawing - room door to meet I ; and come scrambling out , tumbl over he own growl , under the impression that I be a Bandit ; and we all three go in , as happy and loving as could be . I soon carry desolation into the bosom of we joy - not that I mean to do it , but that I be so full of the subject - by ask , without the smallest preparation , if she could love a beggar ? my pretty , little , start ! she only association with the word be a yellow face and a nightcap , or a pair of crutch , or a wooden leg , or a dog with a decanter - stand in he mouth , or something of that kind ; and she star at I with the most delightful wonder . ' how can you ask I anything so foolish ? ' poute . ' love a beggar ! ' ' , my own dearest ! ' say I . 'I be a beggar ! ' ' how can you be such a silly thing , ' reply , slapp my hand , 'a to sit there , tell such story ? I will make bite you ! ' she childish way be the most delicious way in the world to I , but it be necessary to be explicit , and I solemnly repeat : ' , my own life , I be you ruin ! ' 'i declare I will make bite you ! ' say , shak she curl , ' if you be so ridiculous . ' but I look so serious , that leave off shak she curl , and lay she trembl little hand upon my shoulder , and first look scared and anxious , then begin to cry . that be dreadful . I fall upon my knee before the sofa , caresse she , and implor she not to rmend my heart ; but , for some time , poor little do nothing but exclae oh dear ! oh dear ! and oh , she be so frightened ! and where be ! and oh , take she to , and go away , please ! until I be almost beside myself . at last , after a agony of supplication and protestation , I get to look at I , with a horrified expression of face , which I gradually soothe until it be only loving , and she soft , pretty cheek be lie against mine . then I tell she , with my arm clasp round she , how I love she , so dearly , and so dearly ; how I feel it right to offer to release she from she engagement , because now I be poor ; how I never could bear it , or recover it , if I lose she ; how I have no fear of poverty , if she have none , my arm be nerve and my heart inspire by she ; how I be already work with a courage such as none but lover know ; how I have begin to be practical , and look into the future ; how a crust well earn be sweeter far than a feast inherit ; and much more to the same purpose , which
which I deliver in a burst of passionate eloquence quite surprising to myself , though I have be think about it , day and night , ever since my aunt have astonished I . ' be you heart mine still , dear ? ' say I , rapturously , for I know by she cling to I that it be . 'Oh , yes ! ' cry . 'Oh , yes , it be all yours . oh , do not be dreadful ! ' I dreadful ! to ! ' do not talk about be poor , and work hard ! ' say , nestle closer to I . 'Oh , do not , do not ! ' ' my dearest love , ' say I , ' the crust well - earn -' 'Oh , yes ; but I do not want to hear any more about crust ! ' say . ' and Jip must have a mutton - chop every day at twelve , or he will die . ' I be charme with she childish , win way . I fondly explain to that should have he mutton - chop with he accustomed regularity . I draw a picture of we frugal home , make independent by my labour - sketch in the little house I have see at , and my aunt in she room upstairs . 'I be not dreadful now , ? ' say I , tenderly . 'Oh , no , no ! ' cry . ' but I hope you aunt will keep in she own room a good deal . and I hope she be not a scold old thing ! ' if it be possible for I to love more than ever , I be sure I do . but I feel she be a little impracticable . it dam my new - born ardour , to find that ardour so difficult of communication to she . I make another trial . when she be quite herself again , and be curl 's ear , as he lay upon she lap , I become grave , and say : ' my own ! may I mention something ? ' 'Oh , please do not be practical ! ' say , coaxingly . ' because it frighten I so ! ' ' ! ' I return ; ' there be nothing to alarm you in all this . I want you to think of it quite differently . I want to make it nerve you , and inspire you , ! ' 'Oh , but that be so shocke ! ' cry . ' my love , no . perseverance and strength of character will enable we to bear much worse thing . ' ' but I have not get any strength at all , ' say , shak she curl . ' have I , ? oh , do kiss Jip , and be agreeable ! ' it be impossible to resist kiss , when she hold he up to I for that purpose , put she own bright , rosy little mouth into kissing form , as she direct the operation , which she insist should be perform symmetrically , on the centre of he nose . I do as she bade I - reward myself afterwards for my obedience - and she charme I out of my graver character for I do not know how long . ' but , , my beloved ! ' say I , at last resume it ; be go to mention something . ' the judge of the might have fall in love with she , to see she fold she little hand and hold they up , begge and praie I not to be dreadful any more . ' indeed I be not go to be , my darling ! ' I assu she . ' but , , my love , if you will sometimes think , - not despondingly , you know ; far from that ! - but if you will sometimes think - just to encourage yourself - that you be engage to a poor man -' ' do not , do not ! pray do not ! ' cry . ' it be so very dreadful ! ' 'My soul , not at all ! ' say I , cheerfully . ' if you will sometimes think of that , and look about now and then at you papa 's housekeeping , and endeaavor to acquire a little habit - of account , for instance - ' poor little receive this suggestion with something that be half a sob and half a scream . ' - it would be so useful to we afterwards ,' I go on . ' and if you would promise I to read a little - a little that I would send you , it would be so excellent for both of we . for we path in life , my , ' say I , warm with the subject , ' be stony and rug now , and it rest with we to smooth it . we must fight we way onward . we must be brave . there be obstacle to be meet , and we must meet , and crush they ! ' I be go on at a great rate , with a clench hand , and a most enthusiastic countenance ; but it be quite unnecessary to proceed . I have say enough . I have do it again . oh , she be so frightened ! oh , where be ! oh , take she to , and go away , please ! so that , in short , I be quite distracted , and rav about the drawing - room . I think I have kill she , this time . I sprinkle water on she face . I go down on my
my knee . I pluck at my hair . I denounce myself as a remorseless brute and a ruthless beast . I implor she forgiveness . I besotch she to look up . I ravage 's work - box for a smell - bottle , and in my agony of mind apply a ivory needle - case instead , and drop all the needle over . I shook my fists at , who be as frantic as myself . I do every wild extravagance that could be do , and be a long way beyond the end of my wit when come into the room . ' who have do this ? ' exclaim , succour she friend . I reply , , ! I have do it ! behold the destroyer ! ' - or word to that effect - and hide my face from the light , in the sofa cushion . at first think it be a quarrel , and that we be verge on the desert of ; but she soon find out how matter stand , for my dear affectionate little Dora , embrace she , begin exclaim that I be 'a poor labourer ' ; and then cry for I , and embrace I , and ask I would I let she give I all she money to keep , and then fell on 's neck , sobb as if she tender heart be break . must have be bear to be a blessing to we . she ascertaine from I in a few word what it be all about , comforte , and gradually convince she that I be not a labourer - from my manner of state the case I believe conclude that I be a navigator , and go balance myself up and down a plank all day with a wheelbarrow - and so bring we together in peace . when we be quite compose , and have go up - stair to put some rose - water to she eye , rang for tea . in the ensuing interval , I tell that she be evermore my friend , and that my heart must cease to vibrate ere I could forget she sympathy . I then expound to what I have endeavoure , so very unsuccessfully , to expound to . reply , on general principle , that the Cottage of content be better than the palace of cold splendour , and that where love be , all be . I say to that this be very true , and who should know it better than I , who love Dora with a love that never mortal have experience yet ? but on obserive , with despondency , that it be well indeed for some heart if this be so , I explain that I beg leave to restrict the observation to mortal of the masculine gender . I then put it to , to say whether she consider that there be or be not any practical merit in the suggestion I have be anxious to make , concern the account , the housekeeping , and the ? , after some consideration , thus reply : ' , I will be plain with you . mental suffering and trial supply , in some nature , the place of year , and I will be as plain with you as if I be a . no . the suggestion be not appropriate to we Dora . we dearest be a favourite child of nature . she be a thing of light , and airiness , and joy . I be free to confess that if it could be do , it might be well , but - ' and shook she head . I be encourage by this closing admission on the part of to ask she , whether , for 's sake , if she have any opportunity of lur she attention to such preparation for a earnest life , she would avail herself of it ? reply in the affirmative so readily , that I further ask she if she would take charge of the ; and , if she ever could insinuate it upon 's acceptance , without frightene she , undertake to do I that crowning service . accept this trust , too ; but be not sanguine . and return , look such a lovely little creature , that I really doubt whether she ought to be trouble with anything so ordinary . and she love I so much , and be so captivat ( particularly when she make stand on he hind leg for toast , and when she pretend to hold that nose of he against the hot teapot for punishment because he would not ) , that I feel like a sort of who have get into a 's bower , when I think of have frightene she , and make she cry . after tea we have the guitar ; and sang those same dear old french song about the impossibility of ever on any account leave off dancing , , ra la , until I feel a much greater than before . we have only one check to we pleasure , and that happen a little while before I take my leave , when , chance to make some allusion to tomorrow morning , I unluckily let out that , be oblige to exert myself now , I get up at five o'clock . whether have any idea that I be a private , I be unable to say ; but it make a great impression on she , and she neither play nor sang any more . it be still on she mind when I bade she adieu ; and she say to I , in she pretty coax way - as if I be a doll , I use to think : ' now do not get up at five
five o'clock , you naughty boy . it be so nonsensical ! ' ' my love , ' say I , 'I have work to do . ' ' but do not do it ! ' return . ' why should you ? ' it be impossible to say to that sweet little surprised face , otherwise than lightly and playfully , that we must work to live . 'Oh ! how ridiculous ! ' cry . ' how shall we live without , ? ' say I . ' how ? any how ! ' say . she seem to think she have quite settle the question , and give I such a triumphant little kiss , direct from she innocent heart , that I would hardly have put she out of conceit with she answer , for a fortune . well ! I love she , and I go on love she , most absorbingly , entirely , and completely . but go on , too , work pretty hard , and busily keep red - hot all the iron I now have in the fire , I would sit sometimes of a night , opposite my aunt , think how I have frightened Dora that time , and how I could best make my way with a guitar - case through the forest of difficulty , until I use to fancy that my head be turn quite grey . chapter 38 a Dissolution of I do not allow my resolution , with respect to the , to cool . it be one of the iron I begin to heat immediately , and one of the iron I keep hot , and hammere at , with a perseverance I may honestly admire . I buy a approve scheme of the noble art and mystery of stenography ( which cost I ten and sixpence ) ; and plunge into a sea of perplexity that bring I , in a few week , to the confines of distraction . the change that be ring upon dot , which in such a position mean such a thing , and in such another position something else , entirely different ; the wonderful vagary that be play by circle ; the unaccountable consequence that result from mark like fly ' leg ; the tremendous effect of a curve in a wrong place ; not only trouble my waking hour , but reappear before I in my sleep . when I have grope my way , blindly , through these difficulty , and have master the alphabet , which be a egyptian Temple in itself , there then appear a procession of new horror , call arbitrary character ; the most despotic character I have ever know ; who insist , for instance , that a thing like the beginning of a cobweb , mean expectation , and that a pen -and - ink sky - rocket , stood for disadvantageous . when I have fix these wretch in my mind , I find that they have drive everything else out of it ; then , begin again , I forget they ; while I be pick they up , I drop the other fragment of the system ; in short , it be almost heart - breaking . it might have be quite heart - breaking , but for , who be the stay and anchor of my tempest - drive bark . every scratch in the scheme be a gnarl oak in the forest of difficulty , and I go on cut they down , one after another , with such vigour , that in three or four month I be in a condition to make a experiment on one of we crack speaker in the Commons . shall I ever forget how the crack speaker walk off from I before I begin , and leave my imbecile pencil stagger about the paper as if it be in a fit ! this would not do , it be quite clear . I be fly too high , and should never get on , so . I resort to Traddle for advice ; who suggest that he should dictate speeches to I , at a pace , and with occasional stoppage , adapt to my weakness . very grateful for this friendly aid , I accept the proposal ; and night after night , almost every night , for a long time , we have a sort of private parliament in , after I come home from the 's . I should like to see such a parliament anywhere else ! my aunt and represent the government or the opposition ( as the case might be ) , and Traddles , with the assistance of 's speaker , or a volume of parliamentary oration , thunder astonish invective against they . stand by the table , with he finger in the page to keep the place , and he right arm flourish above he head , Traddle , as , , , , , , or , would work himself into the most violent heats , and deliver the most withering denunciation of the profligacy and corruption of my aunt and ; while I use to sit , at a little distance , with my notebook on my knee , fagge after he with all my might and main . the inconsistency and recklessness of Traddles be not to be exceed by any real politician . he be for any description of policy , in the compass of a week ; and nai all sort of colour to every denomination of mast . my aunt , look very like a immovable Chancellor of the , would occasionally throw in a interruption or two , as ' ! ' or ' no ! ' or ! ' when the text seem to require it : which be always a signal to ( a perfect country
country gentleman ) to follow lustily with the same cry . but get tax with such thing in the course of he Parliamentary career , and be make responsible for such awful consequence , that he become uncomfortable in he mind sometimes . I believe he actually begin to be afraid he really have be do something , ten to the annihilation of the british constitution , and the ruin of the country . often and often we pursue these debate until the clock point to midnight , and the candle be burn down . the result of so much good practice be , that by and by I begin to keep pace with Traddle pretty well , and should have be quite triumphant if I have have the least idea what my note be about . but , as to read they after I have get they , I might as well have copy the chinese inscription of a immense collection of tea - chest , or the golden character on all the great red and green bottle in the chemist ' shops ! there be nothing for it , but to turn back and begin all over again . it be very hard , but I turn back , though with a heavy heart , and begin laboriously and methodically to plod over the same tedious ground at a snail 's pace ; stop to examine minutely every speck in the way , on all side , and make the most desperate effort to know these elusive character by sight wherever I meet they . I be always punctual at the office ; at the doctor 's too : and I really do work , as the common expression be , like a cart - horse . one day , when I go to the Commons as usual , I find in the doorway look extremely grave , and talk to himself . as he be in the habit of complaining of pain in he head - he have naturally a short throat , and I do seriously believe he over -starch himself - I be at first alarme by the idea that he be not quite right in that direction ; but he soon relieve my uneasiness . instead of return my ' good morning ' with he usual affability , he look at I in a distant , ceremonious manner , and coldly request I to accompany he to a certain coffee - house , which , in those day , have a door opening into the , just within the little archway in 's . I comply , in a very uncomfortable state , and with a warm shooting all over I , as if my apprehension be break out into bud . when I allow he to go on a little before , on account of the narrowness of the way , I observe that he carry he head with a lofy air that be particularly unpromising ; and my mind misgave I that he have find out about my darling . if I have not guess this , on the way to the coffee - house , I could hardly have fail to know what be the matter when I follow he into a upstairs room , and find there , support by a background of sideboard , on which be several invert tumbler sustain lemon , and two of those extraordinary boxe , all corner and fluting , for stick knife and fork in , which , happily for mankind , be now obsolete . give I she chilly finger - nail , and sit severely rigid . shut the door , motion I to a chair , and stand on the hearth - rug in front of the fireplace . ' have the goodness to show , ' say , what you have in you reticule , . ' I believe it be the old identical steel - clasp reticule of my childhood , that shut up like a bite . Compresse she lip , in sympathy with the snap , open it - open she mouth a little at the same time - and produce my last letter to , teem with expression of devoted affection . 'I believe that be you writing , ? ' say . I be very hot , and the voice I hear be very unlike mine , when I say , ' it be , sir ! ' ' if I be not mistaken , ' say Spenlow , as bring a parcel of letter out of she reticule , tie round with the dearest bit of blue ribbon , ' those be also from you pen , ? ' I take they from she with a most desolate sensation ; and , glance at such phrasis at the top , as ' my ever dearest and own ,' ' my best beloved angel ,' ' my bless one for ever , ' and the like , blush deeply , and inclin my head . ' no , thank you ! ' say , coldly , as I mechanically offer they back to he . 'I will not deprive you of they . , be so good as to proceed ! ' that gentle creature , after a moment 's thoughtful survey of the carpet , deliver herself with much dry unction as follow . ' I must confess to have entertaine my suspicions of , in reference to , for some time . I observ and , when they first meet ; and the impression make upon I then be not agreeable . the depravity of the human heart be such -' ' you will oblige I , ma 'am , ' interrupt , ' by confin yourself to fact . ' cast down she eye , shook she head as if protest against this unseemly interruption , and with frowning dignity resum :
: ' Since I be to confine myself to fact , I will state they as dryly as I can . perhaps that will be consider a acceptable course of proceeding . I have already say , sir , that I have have my suspicions of , in reference to , for some time . I have frequently endeavoure to find decisive corroboration of those suspicion , but without effect . I have therefore forborne to mention they to 's father ' ; look severely at he - ' know how little disposition there usually be in such case , to acknowledge the conscientious discharge of duty . ' seem quite cow by the gentlemanly sternness of 's manner , and deprecate she severity with a conciliatory little wave of he hand . ' on my return to , after the period of absence occasion by my brother 's marriage , ' pursue in a disdainful voice , 'and on the return of from she visit to she friend , I imagine that the manner of give I greater occasion for suspicion than before . therefore I watch closely . ' dear , tender little , so unconscious of this 's eye ! ' , ' resume , ' I find no proof until last night . it appear to I that receive too many letter from she friend ; but be she friend with she father 's full concurrence , ' another tell blow at , ' it be not for I to interfere . if I may not be permit to allude to the natural depravity of the human heart , at least I may - I must - be permit , so far to refer to misplace confidence . ' apologetically murmure he assent . ' last evening after tea , ' pursue , ' I observe the little dog start , roll , and grow about the drawing - room , worry something . I say to , " , what be that the dog have in he mouth ? it be paper . " immediately put she hand to she frock , give a sudden cry , and run to the dog . I interpose , and say , " Dora , my love , you must permit I . " ' oh , miserable Spaniel , this wretchedness , then , be you work ! ' endeavoure , ' say , 'to bribe I with kiss , work - box , and small article of jewellery - that , of course , I pass over . the little dog retreat under the sofa on my approach he , and be with great difficulty dislodge by the fire - iron . even when dislodge , he still keep the letter in he mouth ; and on my endeavouring to take it from he , at the imminent risk of be bite , he keep it between he tooth so pertinaciously as to suffer himself to be hold suspend in the air by means of the document . at length I obtain possession of it . after peruse it , I taxe Spenlow with have many such letter in she possession ; and ultimately obtain from she the packet which be now in 's hand . ' here she cease ; and snapp she reticule again , and shutt she mouth , look as if she might be break , but could never be bent . ' you have hear , ' say , turn to I . 'I beg to ask , , if you have anything to say in reply ? ' the picture I have before I , of the beautiful little treasure of my heart , sobb and cry all night - of she be alone , frightened , and wretch , then - of she have so piteously beg and pray that stony - hear woman to forgive she - of she have vainly offer she those kiss , work - box , and trinket - of she be in such grievous distress , and all for I - very much impaire the little dignity I have be able to muster . I be afraid I be in a tremulous state for a minute or so , though I do my best to disguise it . ' there be nothing I can say , sir ,' I return , ' except that all the blame be mine . -' ' , if you please , ' say she father , majestically . ' - be induce and persuade by I ,' I go on , swallow that colder designation , 'too consent to this concealment , and I bitterly regret it . ' ' you be very much to blame , sir , ' say , walk to and for upon the hearth - rug , and emphasize what he say with he whole body instead of he head , on account of the stiffness of he cravat and spine . ' you have do a stealthy and unbecoming action , . when I take a gentleman to my house , no matter whether he be nineteen , twenty - nine , or ninety , I take he there in a spirit of confidence . if he abuse my confidence , he commit a dishonourable action , . ' 'I feel it , sir , I assure you ,' I return . ' but I never think so , before . sincerely , honestly , indeed , , I never think so , before . I love to that extent -' ' Pooh ! nonsense ! ' say , redden . ' pray do not tell I to my face that you love my daughter , ! ' ' could I defend my conduct if I do not , sir ? ' I return , with all humility . ' can you defend you conduct if you do , sy ? '
' say , stop short upon the hearth - rug . ' have you consider you year , and my daughter 's year , ? have you consider what it be to undermine the confidence that should subsist between my daughter and myself ? have you consider my daughter 's station in life , the project I may contemplate for she advancement , the testamentary intention I may have with reference to she ? have you consider anything , ? ' ' very little , sir , I be afraid ;' I answer , speak to he as respectfully and sorrowfully as I feel ; ' but pray believe I , I have consider my own worldly position . when I explain it to you , we be already engage -' , ' say , more like punch than I have ever see he , as he energetically strike one hand upon the other - I could not help notice that even in my despair ; ' that you will not talk to I of engagement , ! ' the otherwise immovable laugh contemptuously in one short syllable . ' when I explain my altered position to you , sir ,' I begin again , substitute a new form of expression for what be so unpalatable to he , ' this concealment , into which I be so unhappy as to have lead , have begin . I have be in that altered position , I have strain every nerve , I have exert every energy , to improve it . I be sure I shall improve it in time . will you grant I time - any length of time ? we be both so young , sir , -' ' you be right , ' interrupt , nodd he head a great many time , and frown very much , ' you be both very young . it be all nonsense . let there be a end of the nonsense . take away those letter , and throw they in the fire . give I 's letter to throw in the fire ; and although we future intercourse must , you be aware , be restrict to the here , we will agree to make no further mention of the past . come , , you do not want sense ; and this be the sensible course . ' no . I could not think of agree to it . I be very sorry , but there be a higher consideration than sense . love be above all earthly consideration , and I love to idolatry , and love I . I do not exactly say so ; I soften it down as much as I could ; but I imply it , and I be resolute upon it . I do not think I make myself very ridiculous , but I know I be resolute . ' very well , , ' say , ' I must try my influence with my daughter . ' , by a expressive sound , a long drawn respiration , which be neither a sigh nor a moan , but be like both , give it as she opinion that he should have do this at first . 'I must try , ' say , confirm by this support , 'my influence with my daughter . do you decline to take those letter , ? ' for I have lay they on the table . yes . I tell he I hope he would not think it wrong , but I could not possibly take they from . ' from I ? ' say . no , I reply with the profoundest respect ; nor from he . ' very well ! ' say . a silence succeed , I be undecided whether to go or stay . at length I be move quietly towards the door , with the intention of say that perhaps I should consult he feeling best by withdraw : when he say , with he hand in he coat pocket , into which it be as much as he could do to get they ; and with what I should call , upon the whole , a decidedly pious air : ' you be probably aware , , that I be not altogether destitute of worldly possession , and that my daughter be my nearest and dearest relative ? ' I hurriedly make he a reply to the effect , that I hope the error into which I have be betraye by the desperate nature of my love , do not induce he to think I mercenary too ? 'I do not allude to the matter in that light , ' say . ' it would be better for yourself , and all of we , if you be mercenary , - I mean , if you be more discreet and less influence by all this youthful nonsense . no . I merely say , with quite another view , you be probably aware I have some property to bequeath to my child ? ' I certainly suppose so . ' and you can hardly think , ' say , ' have experience of what we see , in the here , every day , of the various unaccountable and negligent proceeding of man , in respect of they testamentary arrangement - of all subject , the one on which perhaps the strangest revelation of human inconsistency be to be meet with - but that mine be make ? ' I inclin my head in acquiescence . 'I should not allow , ' say , with a evident increase of pious sentiment , and slowly shak he head as he poise himself upon he toe and heel alternately , 'my suitable provision for my child to be influence by a piece of youthful folly like the present . it be mere folly . mere nonsense . in
in a little while , it will weigh lighter than any feather . but I might - I might - if this silly business be not completely relinquish altogether , be induce in some anxious moment to guard she from , and surround she with protections against , the consequence of any foolish step in the way of marriage . now , , I hope that you will not render it necessary for I to open , even for a quarter of a hour , that close page in the book of life , and unsetle , even for a quarter of a hour , grave affair long since compose . ' there be a serenity , a tranquillity , a calm sunset air about he , which quite affect I . he be so peaceful and resign - clearly have he affair in such perfect train , and so systematically wound up - that he be a man to feel touch in the contemplation of . I really think I see tear rise to he eye , from the depth of he own feeling of all this . but what could I do ? I could not deny and my own heart . when he tell I I have better take a week to consider of what he have say , how could I say I would not take a week , yet how could I fail to know that no amount of week could influence such love as mine ? ' in the meantime , confer with , or with any person with any knowledge of life , ' say , adjust he cravat with both hand . ' take a week , . ' I submit ; and , with a countenance as expressive as I be able to make it of deject and despair constancy , come out of the room . 's heavy eyebrow follow I to the door - I say she eyebrow rather than she eye , because they be much more important in she face - and she look so exactly as she use to look , at about that hour of the morning , in we parlour at , that I could have fancie I have be break down in my lesson again , and that the dead weight on my mind be that horrible old spelling - book , with oval woodcut , shape , to my youthful fancy , like the glassis out of spectacle . when I get to the office , and , shut out old and the rest of they with my hand , sit at my desk , in my own particular nook , think of this earthquake that have take place so unexpectedly , and in the bitterness of my spirit curse , I fall into such a state of torment about , that I wonder I do not take up my hat and rush insanely to . the idea of they frightene she , and make she cry , and of my not be there to comfort she , be so excruciating , that it impell I to write a wild letter to , beseech he not to visit upon she the consequence of my awful destiny . I implor he to spare she gentle nature - not to crush a fragile flower - and address he generally , to the best of my remembrance , as if , instead of be she father , he have be a Ogre , or the of .3 this letter I seal and lay upon he desk before he return ; and when he come in , I see he , through the half - open door of he room , take it up and read it . he say nothing about it all the morning ; but before he go away in the afternoon he call I in , and tell I that I need not make myself at all uneasy about he daughter 's happiness . he have assure she , he say , that it be all nonsense ; and he have nothing more to say to she . he believe he be a indulgent father ( as indeed he be ) , and I might spare myself any solicitude on she account . ' you may make it necessary , if you be foolish or obstinate , ,' he observe , ' for I to send my daughter abroad again , for a term ; but I have a better opinion of you . I hope you will be wiser than that , in a few day . as to , ' for I have allude to she in the letter , ' I respect that lady 's vigilance , and feel obliged to she ; but she have strict charge to avoid the subject . all I desire , , be , that it should be forget . all you have get to do , , be to forget it . ' all ! in the note I write to , I bitterly quote this sentiment . all I have to do , I say , with gloomy sarcasm , be to forget . that be all , and what be that ! I entreate to see I , that evening . if it could not be do with 's sanction and concurrence , I besotch a clandestine interview in the back kitchen where the Mangle be . I inform she that my reason be totter on its throne , and only she , , could prevent it be be depose . I sign myself , hers distractedly ; and I could not help feel , while I read this composition over , before send it by a porter , that it be something in the style of . however , I send it . at night I repair to 's street , and walk up and down , until I be
be stealthily fetch in by 's maid , and take the area way to the back kitchen . I have since see reason to believe that there be nothing on earth to prevent my go in at the front door , and be show up into the drawing - room , except 's love of the romantic and mysterious . in the back kitchen , I rav as become I . I go there , I suppose , to make a fool of myself , and I be quite sure I do it . have receive a hasty note from , tell she that all be discover , and say . ' oh pray come to I , , do , do ! ' but , mistrust the acceptability of she presence to the higher power , have not yet go ; and we be all benight in the of . have a wonderful flow of word , and like to pour they out . I could not help feel , though she mingl she tear with mine , that she have a dreadful luxury in we affliction . she pett they , as I may say , and make the most of they . a deep gulf , she observ , have open between and I , and could only span it with its rainbow . love must suffer in this stern world ; it ever have be so , it ever would be so . no matter , remarke . heart confin by cobweb would burst at last , and then be avenge . this be small consolation , but would not encourage fallacious hope . she make I much more wretched than I be before , and I feel ( and tell she with the deepest gratitude ) that she be indeed a friend . we resolve that she should go to the first thing in the morning , and find some means of assure she , either by look or word , of my devotion and misery . we part , overwhelm with grief ; and I think enjoy herself completely . I confide all to my aunt when I get home ; and in spite of all she could say to I , go to bed despairing . I get up despairing , and go out despairing . it be morning , and I go straight to the Commons . I be surprise , when I come within sight of we office - door , to see the ticket - porter stand outside talk together , and some half - dozen straggler gaze at the window which be shut up . I quicken my pace , and , pass among they , wonder at they look , go hurriedly in . the clerk be there , but nobody be do anything . , for the first time in he life I should think , be sit on somebody else 's stool , and have not hang up he hat . ' this be a dreadful calamity , , ' say he , as I enter . ' what be ? ' I exclaim . ' what be the matter ? ' ' do not you know ? ' cry , and all the rest of they , come round I . ' no ! ' say I , look from face to face . ' , ' say . ' what about he ! ' ' dead ! ' I think it be the office reel , and not I , as one of the clerk catch hold of I . they sit I down in a chair , untie my neck - cloth , and bring I some water . I have no idea whether this take any time . ' dead ? ' say I . ' he dine in town yesterday , and drive down in the phaeton by himself , ' say , ' have send he own groom home by the coach , as he sometimes do , you know -' ' well ? ' ' the go home without he . the horse stop at the stable - gate . the man go out with a lantern . nobody in the carriage . ' ' have they run away ? ' ' they be not hot , ' say , put on he glass ; 'no hotter , I understand , than they would have be , go down at the usual pace . the rein be broken , but they have be drag on the ground . the house be rouse up directly , and three of they go out along the road . they find he a mile off . ' ' more than a mile off , , ' interpose a junior . ' be it ? I believe you be right , ' say , - ' more than a mile off - not far from the church - lie partly on the roadside , and partly on the path , upon he face . whether he fall out in a fit , or get out , feel ill before the fit come on - or even whether he be quite dead then , though there be no doubt he be quite insensible - no one appear to know . if he breathe , certainly he never speak . Medical assistance be get as soon as possible , but it be quite useless . ' I can not describe the state of mind into which I be throw by this intelligence . the shock of such a event happen so suddenly , and happen to one with whom I have be in any respect at variance - the appalling vacancy in the room he have occupy so lately , where he chair and table seem to wait for he , and he handwriting of yesterday be like a ghost - the in - definable impossibility of
of separa he from the place , and feel , when the door open , as if he might come in - the lazy hush and rest there be in the office , and the insatiable relish with which we people talk about it , and other people come in and out all day , and gorge themselves with the subject - this be easily intelligible to anyone . what I can not describe be , how , in the innermost recess of my own heart , I have a lurking jealousy even of . how I feel as if it be might would push I from my ground in 's thought . how I be , in a grudging way I have no word for , envious of she grief . how it make I restless to think of she weeping to other , or be consol by other . how I have a grasping , avaricious wish to shut out everybody from she but myself , and to be all in all to she , at that unseasonable time of all time . in the trouble of this state of mind - not exclusively my own , I hope , but know to other - I go down to Norwood that night ; and find from one of the servants , when I make my inquirie at the door , that be there , get my aunt to direct a letter to she , which I write . I deplor the untimely death of Spenlow , most sincerely , and she tear in do so . I entreate she to tell , if be in a state to hear it , that he have speak to I with the utmost kindness and consideration ; and have couple nothing but tenderness , not a single or reproachful word , with she name . I know I do this selfishly , to have my name bring before she ; but I try to believe it be a act of justice to he memory . perhaps I do believe it . my aunt receive a few line next day in reply ; address , outside , to she ; within , to I . be overcome by grief ; and when she friend have ask she should she send she love to I , have only cried , as she be always crying , 'Oh , dear papa ! oh , poor papa ! ' but she have not say no , and that I make the most of . jorkin , who have be at since the occurrence , come to the office a few day afterwards . he and be close together for some few moment , and then Tiffey look out at the door and beckon I in . 'Oh ! ' say jorkin . ' and myself , , be about to examine the desk , the drawer , and other such repository of the decease , with the view of seal up he private papers , and search for a . there be no trace of any , elsewhere . it may be as well for you to assist we , if you please . ' I have be in agony to obtain some knowledge of the circumstance in which my would be place - as , in whose guardianship , and so forth - and this be something towards it . we begin the search at once ; jorkin unlock the drawer and desk , and we all take out the papers . the office - papers we place on one side , and the private papers ( which be not numerous ) on the other . we be very grave ; and when we come to a stray seal , or pencil - case , or ring , or any little article of that kind which we associate personally with he , we speak very low . we have seal up several packet ; and be still go on dustily and quietly , when jorkins say to we , apply exactly the same word to he late partner as he late partner have apply to he : ' be very difficult to move from the beaten track . you know what he be ! I be dispose to think he have make no will . ' 'Oh , I know he have ! ' say I . they both stop and look at I . 'On the very day when I last see he , ' say I , ' he tell I that he have , and that he affair be long since settled . ' jorkin and old shook they head with one accord . ' that look unpromising , ' say . ' very unpromising , ' say jorkin . ' surely you do not doubt -' I begin . ' my good ! ' say , lay he hand upon my arm , and shut up both he eye as he shook he head : ' if you have be in the as long as I have , you would know that there be no subject on which man be so inconsistent , and so little to be truste . ' ' why , bless my soul , he make that very remark ! ' I reply persistently . 'I should call that almost final , ' observe . 'My opinion be - no will . ' it appear a wonderful thing to I , but it turn out that there be no will . he have never so much as think of make one , so far as he papers afforde any evidence ; for there be no kind of hint , sketch , or memorandum , of any testamentary intention whatever . what be scarcely less astonish to I , be , that he affair be in a most disordered state . it be extremely difficult , I hear
hear , to make out what he owed , or what he have pay , or of what he die possess . it be consider likely that for year he could have have no clear opinion on these subject himself . by little and little it come out , that , in the competition on all point of appearance and gentility then run high in the Commons , he have spend more than he professional income , which be not a very large one , and have reduce he private means , if they ever have be great ( which be exceedingly doubtful ) , to a very low ebb indeed . there be a sale of the furniture and lease , at ; and Tiffey tell I , little think how interested I be in the story , that , pay all the just debt of the decease , and deduct he share of outstanding bad and doubtful debt due to the firm , he would not give a thousand pound for all the asset remain . this be at the expiration of about six week . I have suffer torture all the time ; and think I really must have laid violent hand upon myself , when still report to I , that my break - heart little would say nothing , when I be mention , but , poor papa ! oh , dear papa ! ' also , that she have no other relation than two aunt , maiden sister of , who live at , and who have not hold any other than chance communication with they brother for many year . not that they have ever quarrell ( inform I ) ; but that have be , on the occasion of 's christening , invite to tea , when they consider themselves privilege to be invite to dinner , they have express they opinion in writing , that it be 's better for the happiness of all party ' that they should stay away . since which they have go they road , and they brother have go he . these two lady now emerge from they retirement , and propose to take to live at . , cling to they both , and weeping , exclaim , 'O yes , aunt ! please take and I and to ! ' so they go , very soon after the funeral . how I find time to haunt , I be sure I do not know ; but I contrive , by some means or other , to prowl about the neighbourhood pretty often . , for the more exact discharge of the duty of friendship , keep a journal ; and she use to meet I sometimes , on the common , and read it , or ( if she have not time to do that ) lend it to I . how I treasure up the entry , of which I subjoin a sample ! - ' . my sweet D. still much depresse . Headache . call attention to as be beautifully sleek . fondle thus awaken , open floodgate of sorrow . rush of grief admit . ( be tear the dewdrop of the heart ? ) ' . weak and nervous . beautiful in pallor . ( do we not remark this in moon likewise ? ) , and take airing in carriage . look out of window , and bark violently at dustman , occasion smile to overspread feature of d . ( of such slight link be chain of life compose ! ) . D. comparatively cheerful . Sang to she , as congenial melody , " even Bells " . not soothe , but reverse . inexpressibly affect . find sobb afterwards , in own room . quote verse respect self and young . Ineffectually . also refer to patience on Monument . ( Qy . why on monument ? ) ' . certainly improve . better night . slight tinge of damask revisit cheek . resolve to mention name of . . introduce same , cautiously , in course of airing . immediately overcome . " oh , dear , dear ! oh , I have be a naughty and undutiful child ! " Sooth and caress . ideal picture of on verge of tomb . again overcome . " oh , what shall I do , what shall I do ? oh , take I somewhere ! " much alarm . Fainting of and glass of water from public - house . ( Poetical affinity . Chequer sign on door - post ; cheque human life . ! ) ' . day of incident . Man appear in kitchen , with blue bag , " for lady 's boot leave out to heel " . reply , " no such order . " Man argue point . withdraw to inquire , leave man alone with on 's return , man still argue point , but ultimately go . miss . distracte . information send to police . Man to be identify by broad nose , and leg like balustrade of bridge . search make in every direction . no weep bitterly , and inconsolable . renew reference to young . appropriate , but unavailing . towards evening , strange boy call . Bring into parlour . broad nose , but no balustrade . say he want 's a pound , and know a dog . Declines to explain further , though much presse . pound be produce by take to little house , where alone tie up to leg of table . of who dance round while he eat he supper . Embolden by this happy change , mention upstairs . weep afresh , cry piteously , " oh , do not , do not , do not ! it be so wicked to think of anything but poor papa ! " - embrace and sob
sob herself to sleep . ( must not confine himself to the broad pinion of time ? ) ' and she journal be my sole consolation at this period . to see she , who have see but a little while before - to trace the initial letter of 's name through she sympathetic page - to be make more and more miserable by she - be my only comforts . I feel as if I have be live in a palace of card , which have tumble down , leave only and I among the ruin ; I feel as if some grim enchanter have draw a magic circle round the innocent goddess of my heart , which nothing indeed but those same strong pinion , capable of carry so many people over so much , would enable I to enter ! chapter 39 Wickfield and Heep my aunt , begin , I imagine , to be make seriously uncomfortable by my prolonged dejection , make a pretence of be anxious that I should go to , to see that all be work well at the cottage , which be let ; and to conclude a agreement , with the same tenant , for a longer term of occupation . be draft into the service of , where I see she every day . she have be undecided , on leave Dover , whether or no to give the finishing touch to that renunciation of mankind in which she have be educate , by marry a pilot ; but she decide against that venture . not so much for the sake of principle , I believe , as because she happen not to like he . although it require a effort to leave , I fall rather willingly into my aunt 's pretence , as a means of enable I to pass a few tranquil hour with Agnes . I consult the good doctor relative to a absence of three day ; and the Doctor wish I to take that relaxation , - he wish I to take more ; but my energy could not bear that , - I make up my mind to go . as to the Commons , I have no great occasion to be particular about my duty in that quarter . to say the truth , we be get in no very good odour among the tip - top proctor , and be rapidly slide down to but a doubtful position . the business have be indifferent under jorkin , before 's time ; and although it have be quicken by the infusion of new blood , and by the display which , still it be not establish on a sufficiently strong basis to bear , without be shaken , such a blow as the sudden loss of its active manager . it fall off very much . jorkin , notwithstand he reputation in the firm , be a easy - go , incapable sort of man , whose reputation out of door be not calculate to back it up . I be turn over to he now , and when I see he take he snuff and let the business go , I regret my aunt 's thousand pound more than ever . but this be not the worst of it . there be a number of hanger - on and outsider about the , who , without be proctor themselves , dabble in common - form business , and get it do by real proctor , who lent they name in consideration of a share in the spoil ; - and there be a good many of these too . as we house now want business on any term , we join this noble band ; and throw out lure to the hanger - on and outsider , to bring they business to we . marriage licence and small probate be what we all look for , and what pay we best ; and the competition for these ran very high indeed . Kidnapper and inveigler be plant in all the avenue of entrance to the Commons , with instruction to do they utmost to cut off all persons in mourning , and all gentleman with anything bashful in they appearance , and entice they to the office in which they respective employer be interested ; which instruction be so well observe , that I myself , before I be know by sight , be twice hustl into the premise of we principal opponent . the conflict interest of these touting gentleman be of a nature to irritate they feeling , personal collision take place ; and the be even scandalize by we principal inveigler ( who have formerly be in the wine trade , and afterwards in the swear brokery line ) walk about for some day with a black eye . any one of these scout use to think nothing of politely assist a old lady in black out of a vehicle , kill any proctor whom she inquire for , represent he employer as the lawful successor and representative of that proctor , and bear the old lady off ( sometimes greatly affect ) to he employer 's office . many captive be brotch to I in this way . as to marriage licence , the competition rise to such a pitch , that a shy gentleman in want of one , have nothing to do but submit himself to the first inveigler , or be fight for , and become the prey of the strongest . one of we clerk , who be a outsider , use , in the height of this contest , to sit with he hat on , that he might be ready to rush out and swear before a surrogate any victim who be bring in . the system of inveigling continue , I believe , to this day . the last time
time I be in the , a civil able - bodi person in a white apron pounce out upon I from a doorway , and whisper the word 's marriage - licence ' in my ear , be with great difficulty prevent from take I up in he arm and lifte I into a proctor 's . from this digression , let I proceed to . I find everything in a satisfactory state at the cottage ; and be enable to gratify my aunt exceedingly by report that the tenant inherit she feud , and wage incessant war against donkey . have settle the little business I have to transact there , and sleep there one night , I walk on to early in the morning . it be now winter again ; and the fresh , cold windy day , and the sweeping downland , brighten up my hope a little . come into , I loiter through the old street with a sober pleasure that calm my spirits , and ease my heart . there be the old sign , the old name over the shop , the old people serve in they . it appear so long , since I have be a schoolboy there , that I wonder the place be so little change , until I reflect how little I be change myself . strange to say , that quiet influence which be inseparable in my mind from , seem to pervade even the city where she dwelt . the venerable cathedral towers , and the old jackdaw and rook whose airy voice make they more retired than perfect silence would have do ; the batter gateway , one stuck full with statue , long throw down , and crumble away , like the reverential pilgrim who have gaze upon they ; the still nook , where the ivied growth of centurie crept over gable end and ruin wall ; the ancient house , the pastoral landscape of field , orchard , and garden ; everywhere - on everything - I feel the same serener air , the same calm , thoughtful , soften spirit . arrive at 's house , I find , in the little lower room on the ground floor , where have be of old accustom to sit , ply he pen with great assiduity . he be dress in a legal - look suit of black , and loom , burly and large , in that small office . be extremely glad to see I , but a little confused too . he would have conduct I immediately into the presence of , but I decline . 'I know the house of old , you recollect , ' say I , ' and will find my way upstairs . how do you like the law , ? ' 'My dear , ' he reply . 'to a man possess of the higher imaginative power , the objection to legal study be the amount of detail which they involve . even in we professional correspondence , ' say , glance at some letter he be write , ' the mind be not at liberty to soar to any exalt form of expression . , it be a great pursuit . a great pursuit ! ' he then tell I that he have become the tenant of 's old house ; and that would be delighted to receive I , once more , under she own roof . ' it be humble , ' say , ' - to quote a favourite expression of my friend Heep ; but it may prove the stepping - stone to more ambitious domiciliary accommodation . ' I ask he whether he have reason , so far , to be satisfied with he friend 's treatment of he ? he get up to ascertain if the door be close shut , before he reply , in a lower voice : 'My dear , a man who labour under the pressure of pecuniary embarrassment , be , with the generality of people , at a disadvantage . that disadvantage be not diminish , when that pressure necessitate the drawing of stipendiary emolument , before those emolument be strictly due and payable . all I can say be , that my friend have responde to appeal to which I need not more particularly refer , in a manner calculate to redound equally to the honour of he head , and of he heart . ' 'I should not have suppose he to be very free with he money either ,' I observe . ' pardon I ! ' say , with a air of constraint , ' I speak of my friend Heep as I have experience . ' 'I be glad you experience be so favourable ,' I return . ' you be very obliging , my dear , ' say ; and hum a tune . ' do you see much of ? ' I ask , to change the subject . ' not much , ' say , slightingly . ' be , I dare say , a man of very excellent intention ; but he be - in short , he be obsolete . ' 'I be afraid he partner seek to make he so , ' say I . ' my dear ! ' return , after some uneasy evolutions on he stool , ' allow I to offer a remark ! I be here , in a capacity of confidence . I be here , in a position of trust . the discussion of some topic , even with herself ( so long the partner of my various vicissitude , and a woman of a remarkable lucidity of intellect ) , be , I be lead to consider , incompatible with the function now devolve on I . I would therefore take the liberty of suggest that in we friendly intercourse - which
which I trust will never be disturb ! - we draw a line . on one side of this line , ' say , represent it on the desk with the office ruler , 'i the whole range of the human intellect , with a trifling exception ; on the other , be that exception ; that be to say , the affair of and , with all belong and appertain thereuntoo . I trust I give no offence to the companion of my youth , in submit this proposition to he cooler judgement ? ' though I see a uneasy change in , which sit tightly on he , as if he new duty be a misfit , I feel I have no right to be offend . my tell he so , appear to relieve he ; and he shook hand with I . 'I be charme , , ' say , ' let I assure you , with . she be a very superior young lady , of very remarkable attraction , graces , and virtue . upon my honour , ' say , indefinitely kiss he hand and bow with he genteelest air , 'I do to ! ! ' 'I be glad of that , at least , ' say I . ' if you have not assure we , my dear , on the occasion of that agreeable afternoon we have the happiness of passing with you , that be you favourite letter , ' say , 'I should unquestionably have suppose that a . have be so . ' we have all some experience of a feeling , that come over we occasionally , of what we be say and do have be say and do before , in a remote time - of we have be surround , dim ag ago , by the same face , object , and circumstance - of we know perfectly what will be say next , as if we suddenly remember it ! I never have this mysterious impression more strongly in my life , than before he utter those word . I take my leave of , for the time , charge he with my best remembrance to all at home . as I leave he , resume he stool and he pen , and roll he head in he stock , to get it into easier writing order , I clearly perceive that there be something interpose between he and I , since he have come into he new function , which prevent we get at each other as we use to do , and quite alte the character of we intercourse . there be no one in the quaint old draw - room , though it present token of . 's whereabouts . I look into the room still belong to , and see she sit by the fire , at a pretty old - fashioned desk she have , write . my darken the light make she look up . what a pleasure to be the cause of that bright change in she attentive face , and the object of that sweet regard and welcome ! 'Ah , ! ' say I , when we be sit together , side by side ; 'I have miss you so much , lately ! ' ' indeed ? ' she reply . ! and so soon ? ' I shook my head . 'I do not know how it be , ; I seem to want some faculty of mind that I ought to have . you be so much in the habit of think for I , in the happy old day here , and I come so naturally to you for counsel and support , that I really think I have miss acquire it . ' ' and what be it ? ' say , cheerfully . 'I do not know what to call it ,' I reply . 'I think I be earnest and persever ? ' 'I be sure of it , ' say . ' and patient , ? ' I inquire , with a little hesitation . ' yes , ' return Agnes , laugh . ' pretty well . ' ' and yet , ' say I , 'I get so miserable and worried , and be so unsteady and irresolute in my power of assure myself , that I know I must want - shall I call it - reliance , of some kind ? ' ' call it so , if you will , ' say . ' well ! ' I return . ' see here ! you come to , I rely on you , and I have a object and a course at once . I be drive out of it , I come here , and in a moment I feel a altered person . the circumstance that distress I be not change , since I come into this room ; but a influence come over I in that short interval that alter I , oh , how much for the better ! what be it ? what be you secret , ? ' she head be bend down , look at the fire . ' it be the old story , ' say I . ' do not laugh , when I say it be always the same in little thing as it be in greater one . my old troubles be nonsense , and now they be serious ; but whenever I have go away from my adopted sister -' Agnes look up - with such a Heavenly face ! - and give I she hand , which I kiss . ' whenever I have not have you , Agnes , to advise and approve in the beginning , I have seem to go wild , and to get into all sort of difficulty . when I have come to
to you , at last ( as I have always do ) , I have come to peace and happiness . I come home , now , like a tired traveller , and find such a bless sense of rest ! ' I feel so deeply what I say , it affect I so sincerely , that my voice fail , and I cover my face with my hand , and break into tear . I write the truth . whatever contradiction and inconsistency there be within I , as there be within so many of we ; whatever might have be so different , and so much better ; whatever I have do , in which I have perversely wander away from the voice of my own heart ; I know nothing of . I only know that I be fervently in earnest , when I feel the rest and peace of have near I . in she placid sisterly manner ; with she beame eye ; with she tender voice ; and with that sweet composure , which have long ago make the house that hold she quite a sacred place to I ; she soon win I from this weakness , and lead I on to tell all that have happene since we last meeting . ' and there be not another word to tell , Agnes , ' say I , when I have make a end of my confidence . ' now , my reliance be on you . ' ' but it must not be on I , Trotwood , ' return , with a pleasant smile . ' it must be on someone else . ' ? ' say I . ' Assuredly . ' ' why , I have not mention , , ' say I , a little embarrassed , ' that be rather difficult to - I would not , for the world , say , to rely upon , because she be the soul of purity and truth - but rather difficult to - I hardly know how to express it , really , . she be a timid little thing , and easily disturb and frightene . some time ago , before she father 's death , when I think it right to mention to she - but I will tell you , if you will bear with I , how it be . ' accordingly , I tell Agnes about my declaration of poverty , about the cookery - book , the housekeeping account , and all the rest of it . 'Oh , ! ' she remonstrate , with a smile . ' just you old headlong way ! you might have be in earnest in strive to get on in the world , without be so very sudden with a timid , loving , inexperienced girl . poor dora! ' I never hear such sweet forbearing kindness express in a voice , as she express in make this reply . it be as if I have see she admiringly and tenderly embrace , and tacitly reprove I , by she considerate protection , for my hot haste in flutter that little heart . it be as if I have see , in all she fascinate artlessness , caresse Agnes , and thanke she , and coaxingly appeal against I , and love I with all she childish innocence . I feel so grateful to , and admire she so ! I see those two together , in a bright perspective , such well - associate friend , each adorn the other so much ! ' what ought I to do then , ? ' I inquire , after look at the fire a little while . ' what would it be right to do ? ' 'I think , ' say , ' that the honourable course to take , would be to write to those two lady . do not you think that any secret course be a unworthy one ? ' ' yes . if you think so , ' say I . 'I be poorly qualified to judge of such matter , ' reply , with a modest hesitation , ' but I certainly feel - in short , I feel that you be secret and clandestine , be not be like yourself . ' ' like myself , in the too high opinion you have of I , Agnes , I be afraid , ' say I . ' like yourself , in the candour of you nature , ' she return ; 'and therefore I would write to those two lady . I would relate , as plainly and as openly as possible , all that have take place ; and I would ask they permission to visit sometimes , at they house . consider that you be young , and strive for a place in life , I think it would be well to say that you would readily abide by any condition they might impose upon you . I would entreat they not to dismiss you request , without a reference to ; and to discuss it with she when they should think the time suitable . I would not be too vehement , ' say , gently , 'or propose too much . I would trust to my fidelity and perseverance - and to . ' ' but if they be to frighten again , Agnes , by speak to she , ' say I . ' and if be to cry , and say nothing about I ! ' ' be that likely ? ' inquire , with the same sweet consideration in she face . ' bless she , she be as easily scared as a bird , ' say I . ' it might be ! or if the two ( elderly lady of that sort be odd characters sometimes ) should not be likely
likely person to address in that way ! ' 'I do not think , , ' return , raise she soft eye to mine , 'I would consider that . perhaps it would be better only to consider whether it be right to do this ; and , if it be , to do it . ' I have no longer any doubt on the subject . with a lightened heart , though with a profound sense of the weighty importance of my task , I devote the whole afternoon to the composition of the draft of this letter ; for which great purpose , Agnes relinquish she desk to I . but first I go downstairs to see and . I find in possession of a new , plaster - smell office , build out in the garden ; look extraordinarily mean , in the midst of a quantity of book and papers . he receive I in he usual fawning way , and pretend not to have heard of my arrival from ; a pretence I take the liberty of disbelieving . he accompany I into 's room , which be the shadow of its former self - have be divest of a variety of convenience , for the accommodation of the new partner - and stood before the fire , warm he back , and shave he ching with he bony hand , while and I exchange greeting . ' you stay with we , Trotwood , while you remain in ? ' say , not without a glance at for he approval . ' be there room for I ? ' say I . 'I be sure , master - I should say , but the other come so natural , ' say , -'I would turn out of you old room with pleasure , if it would be agreeable . ' ' no , no , ' say . ' why should you be inconvenience ? there be another room . there be another room . ' 'Oh , but you know , ' return , with a grin , 'I should really be delighted ! ' to cut the matter short , I say I would have the other room or none at all ; so it be settled that I should have the other room ; and , take my leave of the firm until dinner , I go upstairs again . I have hope to have no other companion than Agnes . but . have ask permission to bring herself and she knitt near the fire , in that room ; on pretence of it be have a aspect more favourable for she rheumatic , as the wind then be , than the draw - room or dining - parlour . though I could almost have consign she to the mercy of the wind on the topmost pinnacle of the , without remorse , I make a virtue of necessity , and give she a friendly salutation . 'I be umbly thankful to you , sir , ' say . Heep , in acknowledgement of my inquiry concern she health , ' but I be only pretty well . I have not much to boast off . if I could see my well settle in life , I could not expect much more I think . how do you think my Ury look , sir ? ' I think he look as villainous as ever , and I reply that I see no change in he . ' oh , do not you think he be change ? ' say . ' there I must umbly beg leave to differ from you . do not you see a thinness in he ? ' ' not more than usual ,' I reply . ' do not you though ! ' say . ' but you do not take notice of he with a mother 's eye ! ' he mother 's eye be a evil eye to the rest of the world , I think as it meet mine , howsoever affectionate to he ; and I believe she and she son be devoted to one another . it pass I , and go on to Agnes . ' do not you see a wasting and a wearing in he , ? ' inquire . ' no , ' say , quietly pursue the work on which she be engage . ' you be too solicitous about he . he be very well . ' , with a prodigious sniff , resume she knitting . she never leave off , or leave we for a moment . I have arrive early in the day , and we have still three or four hour before dinner ; but she sit there , ply she knitting - needle as monotonously as a hour - glass might have pour out it be sands . she sit on one side of the fire ; I sit at the desk in front of it ; a little beyond I , on the other side , sit . Whensoever , slowly ponder over my letter , I lift up my eye , and meet the thoughtful face of , see it clear , and beam encouragement upon I , with its own angelic expression , I be conscious presently of the evil eye pass I , and go on to she , and come back to I again , and drop furtively upon the knitting . what the knitting be , I do not know , not be learn in that art ; but it look like a net ; and as she work away with those chinese chopstick of knitting - needle , she show in the firelight like a ill - look enchantress , baulk as yet by the radiant goodness opposite , but get ready for a cast of she net by and by . at dinner
dinner she maintain she watch , with the same unwinking eye . after dinner , she son take he turn ; and when , himself , and I be leave alone together , leer at I , and writh until I could hardly bear it . in the drawing - room , there be the mother knitt and watch again . all the time that sang and play , the mother sit at the piano . once she ask for a particular ballad , which she say she ( who be yawn in a great chair ) do on ; and at interval she look round at he , and report to Agnes that he be in rapture with the music . but she hardly ever speak - I question if she ever do - without make some mention of he . it be evident to I that this be the duty assign to she . this last until bedtime . to have see the mother and son , like two great bat hang over the whole house , and darken it with they ugly form , make I so uncomfortable , that I would rather have remain downstairs , knitt and all , than go to bed . I hardly get any sleep . next day the knitt and watch begin again , and last all day . I have not a opportunity of speak to , for ten minute . I could barely show she my letter . I propose to she to walk out with I ; but . Heep repeatedly complain that she be worse , charitably remain within , to bear she company . towards the twilight I go out by myself , muse on what I ought to do , and whether I be justified in withholding from , any longer , what have tell I in ; for that begin to trouble I again , very much . I have not walk out far enough to be quite clear of the town , upon the road , where there be a good path , when I be haile , through the dust , by somebody behind I . the shambling figure , and the scanty great - coat , be not to be mistaken . I stop , and come up . ' well ? ' say I . ' how fast you walk ! ' say he . ' my leg be pretty long , but you have give th'ey quite a job . ' ' where be you go ? ' say I . 'I be go with you , master , if you will allow I the pleasure of a walk with a old acquaintance . ' say this , with a jerk of he body , which might have be either propitiatory or derisive , he fall into step beside I . ' Uriah ! ' say I , as civilly as I could , after a silence . ' master ! ' say . 'to tell you the truth ( at which you will not be offend ) , I come out to walk alone , because I have have so much company . ' he look at I sideway , and say with he hardest grin , ' you mean mother . ' ' why yes , I do , ' say I . 'Ah ! but you know we be so very umble ,' he return . ' and have such a knowledge of we own umbleness , we must really take care that we be not push to the wall by they as be not umble . all stratagem be fair in love , sir . ' raise he great hand until they touch he ching , he rub they softly , and softly chuckle ; look as like a malevolent baboon , I think , as anything human could look . ' you see , ' he say , still hug himself in that unpleasant way , and shake he head at I , ' you be quite a dangerous rival , . you always be , you know . ' ' do you set a watch upon , and make she home no home , because of I ? ' say I . 'Oh ! master Copperfield ! those be very arsh word ,' he reply . ' put my meaning into any word you like , ' say I . ' you know what it be , Uriah , as well as I do . ' ' oh no ! you must put it into word ,' he say . 'Oh , really ! I could not myself . ' ' do you suppose , ' say I , constrain myself to be very temperate and quiet with he , on account of , ' that I regard otherwise than as a very dear sister ? ' ' well , ,' he reply , ' you perceive I be not bound to answer that question . you may not , you know . but then , you see , you may ! ' anything to equal the low cunning of he visage , and of he shadowless eye without the ghost of a eyelash , I never see . ' come then ! ' say I . ' for the sake of -' ' my Agnes ! ' he exclaim , with a sickly , angular contortion of himself . ' would you be so good as call she Agnes , master Copperfield ! ' ' for the sake of - bless she ! ' ' thank you for that blessing , master Copperfield ! 'he interpose . 'I will tell you what I should , under any other circumstance , as soon have think of tell to - . ' 'to who , sir ? ' say , stretch out he neck , and shade he ear with he hand . 'to
'to the hangman ,' I return . ' the most unlikely person I could think of , ' - though he own face have suggest the allusion quite as a natural sequence . 'I be engage to another young lady . I hope that content you . ' ' upon you soul ? ' say . I be about indignantly to give my assertion the confirmation he require , when he catch hold of my hand , and give it a squeeze . 'Oh , ! ' he say . ' if you have only have the condescension to return my confidence when I pour out the fulness of my art , the night I put you so much out of the way by sleeping before you sitting - room fire , I never should have doubte you . as it be , I be sure I will take off mother directly , and only too appy . I know you will excuse the precaution of affection , will not you ? what a pity , master , that you do not condescmend to return my confidence ! I be sure I give you every opportunity . but you never have condescende to I , as much as I could have wish . I know you have never like I , as I have like you ! ' all this time he be squeeze my hand with he damp fishy finger , while I make every effort I decently could to get it away . but I be quite unsuccessful . he draw it under the sleeve of he mulberry - colour great - coat , and I walk on , almost upon compulsion , arm -in - arm with he . ' shall we turn ? ' say , by and by wheel I face about towards the town , on which the early moon be now shine , silver the distant window . ' before we leave the subject , you ought to understand , ' say I , break a pretty long silence , ' that I believe to be as far above you , and as far remove from all you aspiration , as that moon herself ! ' ' ! be not she ! ' say . ' very ! now confess , master , that you have not like I quite as I have like you . all along you have think I too umble now , I should not wonder ? ' 'I be not fond of profession of humility ,' I return , 'or profession of anything else . ' ' there now ! ' say , look flabby and lead - coloured in the moonlight . ' do not I know it ! but how little you think of the rightful umbleness of a person in my station , master Copperfield ! and I be both bring up at a foundation school for boy ; and mother , she be likewise bring up at a public , sort of charitable , establishment . they teach we all a deal of umbleness - not much else that I know of , from morning to night . we be to be umble to this person , and umble to that ; and to pull off we cap here , and to make bow there ; and always to know we place , and abase ourselves before we betters . and we have such a lot of betters ! get the monitor -medal by be umble . so do I . Father get make a sexton by be umble . he have the character , among the gentlefolk , of be such a well - behaved man , that they be determined to bring he in . " be umble , , " say father to I , " and you will get on . it be what be always be dinn into you and I at school ; it be what go down best . be umble , " say father , " and you will do ! " and really it be not do bad ! ' it be the first time it have ever occur to I , that this detestable cant of false humility might have originate out of the Heep family . I have see the harvest , but have never think of the seed . ' when I be quite a young boy , ' say , 'I get to know what umbleness do , and I take to it . I eat umble pie with a appetite . I stop at the umble point of my learning , and say I , " hold hard ! " when you offer to teach I , I know better . " people like to be above you , " say father , " keep yourself down . " I be very umble to the present moment , master , but I have get a little power ! ' and he say all this - I know , as I see he face in the moonlight - that I might understand he be resolve to recompense himself by use he power . I have never doubt he meanness , he craft and malice ; but I fully comprehend now , for the first time , what a base , unrelenting , and revengeful spirit , must have be engender by this early , and this long , suppression . he account of himself be so far attend with a agreeable result , that it lead to he withdraw he hand in order that he might have another hug of himself under the ching . once apart from he , I be determined to keep apart ; and we walk back , side by side , say very little more by the way . whether he spirit be elevate by the communication I have make to he , or by he have
have indulge in this retrospect , I do not know ; but they be raise by some influence . he talk more at dinner than be usual with he ; ask he mother ( off duty , from the moment of we re-enter the house ) whether he be not grow too old for a bachelor ; and once look at so , that I would have give all I have , for leave to knock he down . when we three male be leave alone after dinner , he get into a more adventurous state . he have take little or no wine ; and I presume it be the mere insolence of triumph that be upon he , flush perhaps by the temptation my presence furnish to its exhibition . I have observ yesterday , that he try to entice to drink ; and , interpret the look which have give I as she go out , have limit myself to one glass , and then propose that we should follow she . I would have do so again today ; but be too quick for I . ' we seldom see we present visitor , sir , ' he say , address , sit , such a contrast to he , at the end of the table , ' and I should propose to give he welcome in another glass or two of wine , if you have no objection . , you elth and appiness ! ' I be oblige to make a show of take the hand he stretch across to I ; and then , with very different emotion , I take the hand of the broken gentleman , he partner . ' come , fellow - partner , ' say , ' if I may take the liberty , - now , suppose you give we something or another appropriate to Copperfield ! ' I pass over 's propose my aunt , he propose , he propose ' , he propose , he drink everything twice ; he consciousness of he own weakness , the ineffectual effort that he make against it ; the struggle between he shame in 's deportment , and he desire to conciliate he ; the manifest exultation with which twist and turn , and hold he up before I . it make I sick at heart to see , and my hand recoil from write it . ' come , fellow - partner ! ' say , at last , ' I will give you another one , and I umbly ask for bumper , see I intend to make it the divinest of she sex . ' she father have he empty glass in he hand . I see he set it down , look at the picture she be so like , put he hand to he forehead , and shrink back in he elbow - chair . 'I be a umble individual to give you she elth , ' proceed , ' but I admire - adore she . ' no physical pain that she father 's grey head could have borne , I think , could have be more terrible to I , than the mental endurance I see compress now within both he hand . ' Agnes , ' say , either not regard he , or not know what the nature of he action be , ' be , I be safe to say , the divinest of she sex . may I speak out , among friend ? to be she father be a proud distinction , but to be she usband -' spare I from ever again hear such a cry , as that with which she father rise up from the table ! ' what be the matter ? ' say , turn of a deadly colour . ' you be not go mad , after all , , I hope ? if I say I have a ambition to make you Agnes my Agnes , I have as good a right to it as another man . I have a better right to it than any other man ! ' I have my arm round , implor he by everything that I could think of , oftenest of all by he love for , to calm himself a little . he be mad for the moment ; tear out he hair , beat he head , try to force I from he , and to force himself from I , not answer a word , not look at or see anyone ; blindly striving for he know not what , he face all stare and distort - a frightful spectacle . I conjure he , incoherently , but in the most impassioned manner , not to abandon himself to this wildness , but to hear I . I besotch he to think of , to connect I with , to recollect how Agnes and I have grow up together , how I honoure she and love she , how she be he pride and joy . I try to bring she idea before he in any form ; I even reproach he with not have firmness to spare she the knowledge of such a scene as this . I may have effect something , or he wildness may have spend itself ; but by degree he struggle less , and begin to look at I - strangely at first , then with recognition in he eye . at length he say , 'I know , ! my darling child and you - I know ! but look at he ! ' he point to , pale and glower in a corner , evidently very much out in he calculation , and take by surprise . ' look at my torturer , ' he reply . ' before he I have step by step abandon name and reputation , peace
peace and quiet , house and home . ' 'I have keep you name and reputation for you , and you peace and quiet , and you house and home too , ' say , with a sulky , hurrie , defeat air of compromise . ' do not be foolish , . if I have go a little beyond what you be prepare for , I can go back , I suppose ? there be no harm do . ' 'I look for single motive in everyone , ' say , and I be satisfied I have bound he to I by motives of interest . but see what he be - oh , see what he be ! ' ' you have better stop he , , if you can , ' cry , with he long forefinger point towards I . ' he will say something presently - mind you ! - he will be sorry to have say afterwards , and you will be sorry to have heard ! ' 'I will say anything ! ' cry , with a desperate air . ' why should I not be in all the world 's power if I be in yours ? ' ' mind ! I tell you ! ' say , continue to warn I . ' if you do not stop he mouth , you be not he friend ! why should not you be in all the world 's power , ? because you have get a daughter . you and I know what we know , do not we ? let sleep dog lie - who want to rouse th'ey ? I do not . can not you see I be as umble as I can be ? I tell you , if I have go too far , I be sorry . what would you have , sir ? ' 'Oh , , !'exclaim , wringe he hand . ' what I have come down to be , since I first see you in this house ! I be on my downward way then , but the dreary , dreary road I have traverse since ! weak indulgence have ruin I . Indulgence in remembrance , and indulgence in forgetfulness . my natural grief for my child 's mother turn to disease ; my natural love for my child turn to disease . I have infect everything I touch . I have bring misery on what I dearly love , I know - you know ! I think it possible that I could truly love one creature in the world , and not love the rest ; I think it possible that I could truly mourn for one creature go out of the world , and not have some part in the grief of all who mourn . thus the lesson of my life have be pervert ! I have prey on my own morbid coward heart , and it have prey on I . Sordo in my grief , sordid in my love , sordid in my miserable escape from the darker side of both , oh see the ruin I be , and hate I , shin I ! ' he drop into a chair , and weakly sob . the excitement into which he have be rouse be leave he . come out of he corner . 'I do not know all I have do , in my fatuity , ' say , put out he hand , as if to deprecate my condemnation . ' he know best , ' mean , ' for he have always be at my elbow , whisper I . you see the millstone that he be about my neck . you find he in my house , you find he in my business . you hear he , but a little time ago . what need have I to say more ! ' ' you have not need to say so much , nor half so much , nor anything at all , ' observe , half defiant , and half fawn . ' you would not have take it up so , if it have not be for the wine . you will think better of it tomorrow , sir . if I have say too much , or more than I mean , what of it ? I have not stand by it ! ' the door open , and , glid in , without a vestige of colour in she face , put she arm round he neck , and steadily say , ' Papa , you be not well . come with I ! ' he lay he head upon she shoulder , as if he be oppress with heavy shame , and go out with she . she eye meet mine for but a instant , yet I see how much she know of what have pass . 'I do not expect he would cut up so rough , master , ' say . ' but it be nothing . I will be friend with he tomorrow . it be for he good . I be umbly anxious for he good . ' I give he no answer , and go upstairs into the quiet room where have so often sit beside I at my book . nobody come near I until late at night . I take up a book , and try to read . I hear the clock strike twelve , and be still read , without know what I read , when touch I . ' you will be go early in the morning , ! let we say good - bye , now ! ' she have be weep , but she face then be so calm and beautiful ! ' heaven bless you ! ' she say , give I she hand . ' Dearest Agnes ! ' I return ,
, 'I see you ask I not to speak of tonight - but be there nothing to be do ? ' ' there be to trust in ! ' she reply . ' can I do nothing - I , who come to you with my poor sorrow ? ' ' and make mine so much lighter , ' she reply . ' dear Trotwood , no ! ' ' dear Agnes ,' I say , ' it be presumptuous for I , who be so poor in all in which you be so rich - goodness , resolution , all noble quality - to doubt or direct you ; but you know how much I love you , and how much I owe you . you will never sacrifice yourself to a mistaken sense of duty , Agnes ? ' more agitate for a moment than I have ever see she , she take she hand from I , and move a step back . ' you have no such thought , dear Agne ! much more than sister ! think of the priceless gift of such a heart as yours , of such a love as yours ! ' oh ! long , long afterwards , I see that face rise up before I , with its momentary look , not wonder , not accuse , not regret . oh , long , long afterwards , I see that look subside , as it do now , into the lovely smile , with which she tell I she have no fear for herself - I need have none for she - and part from I by the name of , and be gone ! it be dark in the morning , when I get upon the coach at the inn door . the day be just break when we be about to start , and then , as I sit think of she , come struggle up the coach side , through the mingled day and night , 's head . ' ! ' say he , in a croaking whisper , as he hang by the iron on the roof , 'I think you would be glad to hear before you go off , that there be no square break between we . I have be into he room already , and we have make it all smooth . why , though I be umble , I be useful to he , you know ; and he understand he interest when he be not in liquor ! what a agreeable man he be , after all , ! ' I oblige myself to say that I be glad he have make he apology . 'Oh , to be sure ! ' say . ' when a person 's umble , you know , what be a apology ? so easy ! I say ! I suppose , ' with a jerk , ' you have sometimes pluck a pear before it be ripe , ? ' 'I suppose I have ,' I reply . 'I do that last night , ' say ; ' but it will ripen yet ! it only want attend to . I can wait ! ' Profuse in he farewell , he get down again as the coachman get up . for anything I know , he be eat something to keep the raw morning air out ; but he make motion with he mouth as if the pear be ripe already , and he be smack he lip over it . chapter 40 the Wanderer we have a very serious conversation in that night , about the domestic occurrences I have detailead in the last chapter . my aunt be deeply interested in they , and walk up and down the room with she arm fold , for more than two hour afterwards . whenever she be particularly discompose , she always perform one of these pedestrian feat ; and the amount of she discomposure might always be estimate by the duration of she walk . on this occasion she be so much disturb in mind as to find it necessary to open the bedroom door , and make a course for herself , comprise the full extent of the bedroom from wall to wall ; and while and I sit quietly by the fire , she keep pass in and out , along this measure track , at a unchanging pace , with the regularity of a clock - pendulum . when my aunt and I be leave to ourselve by be go out to bed , I sit down to write my letter to the two old lady . by that time she be tired of walking , and sit by the fire with she dress tuck up as usual . but instead of sit in she usual manner , hold she glass upon she knee , she suffer it to stand neglect on the chimney - piece ; and , rest she leave elbow on she right arm , and she ching on she left hand , look thoughtfully at I . as often as I raise my eye from what I be about , I meet hers . 'I be in the lovingest of temper , my dear , ' she would assure I with a nod , ' but I be fidget and sorry ! ' I have be too busy to observe , until after she be go to bed , that she have leave she night- mixture , as she always call it , untast on the chimney - piece . she come to she door , with even more than she usual affection of manner , when I knock to acquaint she with this discovery ; but only say , 'I have not the heart to take it , trot , tonight , ' and shake she head , and go in again .
. she read my letter to the two old lady , in the morning , and approve of it . I post it , and have nothing to do then , but wait , as patiently as I could , for the reply . I be still in this state of expectation , and have be , for nearly a week ; when I leave the 's one snowy night , to walk home . it have be a bitter day , and a cutting north - east wind have blown for some time . the wind have go down with the light , and so the snow have come on . it be a heavy , settled fall , I recollect , in great flake ; and it lay thick . the noise of wheel and tread of people be as hush , as if the street have be strew that depth with feather . my shortest way home , - and I naturally take the shortest way on such a night - be through 's . now , the church which give its name to the lane , stand in a less free situation at that time ; there be no open space before it , and the lane win down to the . as I pass the step of the portico , I encounter , at the corner , a woman 's face . it look in mine , pass across the narrow lane , and disappear . I know it . I have see it somewhere . but I could not remember where . I have some association with it , that struck upon my heart directly ; but I be think of anything else when it come upon I , and be confused . on the step of the church , there be the stooping figure of a man , who have put down some burden on the smooth snow , to adjust it ; my see the face , and my see he , be simultaneous . I do not think I have stop in my surprise ; but , in any case , as I go on , he rise , turn , and come down towards I . I stand face to face with ! then I remember the woman . it be , to whom have give the money that night in the kitchen . - side by side with whom , he would not have see he dear niece , have tell I , for all the treasure wreck in the sea . we shook hand heartily . at first , neither of we could speak a word . ' ! ' he say , grip I tight , ' it do my be good to see you , sir . well meet , well meet ! ' ' well meet , my dear old friend ! ' say I . 'I have my thowt of ' come to make inquiration for you , sir , tonight , ' he say , ' but know as you aunt be live along wi' you - fur I have be down yonder - Yarmouth way - I be afeerd it be too late . I should have come early in the morning , sir , afore go away . ' 'Again ? ' say I . ' yes , sir , ' he reply , patiently shak he head , 'I be away tomorrow . ' ' where be you go now ? ' I ask . ' well ! ' he reply , shak the snow out of he long hair , be a - go to turn in somewheer . ' in those day there be a side - entrance to the stable - yard of the , the inn so memorable to I in connexion with he misfortune , nearly opposite to where we stand . I point out the gateway , put my arm through he , and we go across . two or three public - room open out of the stable - yard ; and look into one of they , and find it empty , and a good fire burn , I take he in there . when I see he in the light , I observe , not only that he hair be long and rag , but that he face be bur not dark by the sun . he be greyer , the line in he face and forehead be deeper , and he have every appearance of have toil and wander through all variety of weather ; but he look very strong , and like a man upheld by steadfastness of purpose , whom nothing could tire out . he shook the snow from he hat and clothes , and brush it away from he face , while I be inwardly make these remark . as he sit down opposite to I at a table , with he back to the door by which we have enter , he put out he rough hand again , and grasp mine warmly . 'I will tell you , , ' he say , - ' wheer all I have be , and what - all we have heered . I have be fur , and we have heered little ; but I will tell you ! ' I ring the bell for something hot to drink . he would have nothing stronger than ale ; and while it be be bring , and be warm at the fire , he sit thinking . there be a fine , massive gravity in he face , I do not venture to disturb . ' when she be a child ,' he say , lift up he head soon after we be leave alone , ' she use to talk to I a deal about the sea , and about they coast where the sea get to be
be dark blue , and to lay a - shining and a - shining in the sun . I thowt , odd time , as she father be drownd make she think on it so much . I doe not know , you see , but maybe she believe - or hope - he have drift out to they part , where the flower be always a - blowing , and the country bright . ' ' it be likely to have be a childish fancy ,' I reply . ' when she be - lost , ' say , 'I know ' in my mind , as he would take she to they country . I know would in my mind , as he would have tell she wonder of 'em , and how she be to be a lady theer , and how he get she to listen to he fust , along of ' sech like . when we see he mother , I know would quite well as I be right . I go across - channel to , and land theer , as if I would fall down from the sky . ' I see the door move , and the snow drift in . I see it move a little more , and a hand softly interpose to keep it open . 'I find out a english gen'leman as be in authority , ' say , ' and tell he I be a - go to seek my niece . he get I they papers as I want yofu to carry I through - I doe not rightly know how they be call - and he would have give I money , but that I be thankful to have no need on . I thank he kind , for all he do , I be sure ! " I have write afore you , " he say to I , " and I shall speak too many as will come that way , and many will know you , fur distant from here , when you be a - travel alone . " I tell he , best as I be able , what my gratitoode be , and go away through . ' ' , and on foot ? ' say I . ' mostly a - foot , ' he rejoin ; ' sometimes in cart along with people go to market ; sometimes in empty coach . many mile a day a - foot , and often with some poor soldier or another , travel to see he friend . I could not talk to he , ' say , ' nor he to I ; but we be company for one another , too , along the dusty road . ' I should have know that by he friendly tone . ' when I come to any town , ' he pursue , ' I find the inn , and wait about the yard till someone turn up ( someone mostly do ) as know have . then I tell how that I be on my way to seek my niece , and they tell I what manner of gentlefolk be in the house , and I wait to see any as see like she , go in or out . when it war not 'ly , I go on agen . by little and little , when I come to a new village or that , among the poor people , I find they know ' about I . they would set I down at they cottage door , and give I what - not fur to eat and drink , and show I where to sleep ; and many a woman , , as have have a daughter of about 's age , I have find a - waiting yofu I , at Our saviour 's outside the village , yofu to do I sim'lar kindness . some have have daughter as be dead . and only know how good they mother be to I ! ' it be at the door . I see she haggard , listen face distinctly . my dread be lest he should turn he head , and see she too . ' they would often put they child - particular they little girl , ' say , ' upon my knee ; and many a time you might have see I sit at they door , when night be come in , a'most as if they have be my Darling 's child . oh , my Darling ! ' Overpower by sudden grief , he sob aloud . I lay my trembling hand upon the hand he put before he face . ' Thankee , sir ,' he say , ' doe not take no notice . ' in a very little while he take he hand away and put it on he breast , and go on with he story . ' they often walk with I ,' he say , 'in the morning , maybe a mile or two upon my road ; and when we part , and I say , " I be very thankful to you ! bless you ! " they always seem to understand , and answer pleasant . at last I come to the sea . it war not hard , you may suppose , for a seafar man like I to work he way over to . when I get theer , I wander on as I have do afore . the people be just as good to I , and I should have go from town to town , maybe the country through , but that I get news of she be see among they swiss mountain yonder . one have know have he servant see th'ey there , all three , and tell I how they travel , and where they be
be . I make yofu they mountain , , day and night . ever so fur as I go , ever so fur the mountain seem to shift away from I . but I come up with 'em , and I cross th'ey . when I get nigh the place as I have be tell of , I begin to think within my own self , " what shall I do when I see she ? " ' the listen face , insensible to the inclement night , still droop at the door , and the hand beg I - praye I - not to cast it forth . 'I never doubt she , ' say . ' no ! not a bit ! on 'y let she see my face - of and 'y let she beer my voice - of and 'y let my stann still afore she bring to she thought the home she have fle away from , and the child she have be - and if she have grow to be a lady , she would have fall down at my foot ! I know would it well ! many a time in my sleep have I heered she cry out , " uncle ! " and see she fall like death afore I . many a time in my sleep have I raise she up , and whisper to she , " 'ly , my dear , I be come yofu to bring forgiveness , and to take you home ! " ' he stop and shake he head , and go on with a sigh . ' he be nowt to I now . 'ly be all . I buy a country dress to put upon she ; and I know would that , once find , she would walk beside I over they stony roads , go where I would , and never , never , leave I more . to put that dress upon she , and to cast off what she wear - to take she on my arm again , and wander towards home - to stop sometimes upon the road , and heal she bruise foot and she worse - bruise heart - be all that I thowt of now . I doe not believe I should have do so much as look at he . but , , it war not to be - not yet ! I be too late , and they be gone . , I could not learn . some say beer , some say theer . I travel beer , and I travel theer , but I find no , and I travel home . ' ' how long ago ? ' I ask . 'a matter of ' fower day , ' say . 'I sigh the old boat arter dark , and the light a - shining in the winder . when I come nigh and look in through the glass , I see the faithful creetur sittin ' by the fire , as we have fix upon , alone . I call out , " not be afeerd ! it be ! " and I go in . I never could have thowt the old boat would have be so strange ! ' from some pocket in he breast , he take out , with a very careful hand a small paper bundle contain two or three letter or little packet , which he lay upon the table . ' this fust one come ,' he say , select it from the rest , 'afore I have be go a week . a fifty pound note , in a sheet of paper , direct to I , and put underneath the door in the night . she try to hide she write , but she could not hide it from I ! ' he fold up the note again , with great patience and care , in exactly the same form , and lay it on one side . ' this come to , ' he say , open another , ' two or three month ago . 'After look at it for some moment , he give it to I , and add in a low voice , ' be so good as read it , sir . ' I read as follow : ' oh what will you feel when you see this writing , and know it come from my wicked hand ! but try , try - not for my sake , but for uncle 's goodness , try to let you heart soften to I , only for a little little time ! try , pray do , to relent towards a miserable girl , and write down on a bit of paper whether he be well , and what he say about I before you leave off ever name I among yourselves - and whether , of a night , when it be my old time of come home , you ever see he look as if he think of one he use to love so dear . oh , my heart be break when I think about it ! I be knee down to you , begge and praie you not to be as hard with I as I deserve - as I well , well , know I deserve - but to be so gentle and so good , as to write down something of he , and to send it to I . you need not call I , you need not call I by the name I have disgrac ; but oh , listen to my agony , and have mercy on I so far as to write I some word of uncle , never , never to be see in this world by my eye again ! ' dear , if you heart be hard towards I - justly
justly hard , I know - but , listen , if it be hard , dear , ask he I have wrong the most - he whose wife I be to have be - before you quite decide against my poor poor prayer ! if he should be so compassionate as to say that you might write something for I to read - I think he would , oh , I think he would , if you would only ask he , for he always be so brave and so forgive - tell he then ( but not else ) , that when I hear the wind blow at night , I feel as if it be pass angrily from see he and uncle , and be go up to against I . tell he that if I be to die tomorrow ( and oh , if I be fit , I would be so glad to die ! ) I would bless he and uncle with my last word , and pray for he happy home with my last breath ! ' some money be enclose in this letter also . five pound . it be untouched like the previous sum , and he refold it in the same way . detailed instruction be add relative to the address of a reply , which , although they betraye the intervention of several hand , and make it difficult to arrive at any very probable conclusion in reference to she place of concealment , make it at least not unlikely that she have write from that spot where she be state to have be see . ' what answer be send ? ' I inquire of . ' ,' he return , ' not be a good scholar , sir , kindly draw it out , and she make a copy on it . they tell she I be go to seek she , and what my parting word be . ' ' be that another letter in you hand ? ' say I . ' it be money , sir , ' say , unfold it a little way . ' ten pound , you see . and write inside , " from a true friend , " like the fust . but the fust be put underneath the door , and this come by the post , day afore yesterday . I be a - go to seek she at the post-mark . ' he show it to I . it be a town on the . he have find out , at , some foreign dealers who know that country , and they have draw he a rude map on paper , which he could very well understand . he lay it between we on the table ; and , with he ching rest on one hand , track he course upon it with the other . I ask he how be ? he shook he head . ' he work , ' he say , 'as bold as a man can . he name 's as good , in all that part , as any man 's be , anywhere in the wureld . be hand be ready to help he , you understand , and he be ready to help they . he be never be heered yofu to complain . but my sister 's belief be ( 'twixt ourselves ) as it have cut he deep . ' ' poor fellow , I can believe it ! ' ' he be not no care , , ' say in a solemn whisper - ' kinder no care no - how for he life . when a man 's want for rough sarvice in rough weather , he be theer . when there be hard duty to be do with danger in it , he step for 'ard afore all he mate . and yet he be as gentle as any child . there be not a child in that doe not know he . ' he gather up the letter thoughtfully , smoothe they with he hand ; put they into they little bundle ; and place it tenderly in he breast again . the face be go from the door . I still see the snow drift in ; but nothing else be there . ' well ! ' he say , look to he bag , ' have see you tonight , ( and that doo I good ! ) , I shall away betimes tomorrow morning . you have see what I have get heer ' ; put he hand on where the little packet lay ; ' all that trouble I be , to think that any harm might come to I , afore that money be give back . if I be to die , and it be lose , or stole , or elseways make away with , and it be never know ' by he but what I would take it , I believe the t'other wureld would not hold I ! I believe I must come back ! ' he rise , and I rise too ; we grasp each other by the hand again , before go out . 'I would go ten thousand mile ,' he say , 'I would go till I drop dead , to lay that money down afore he . if I do that , and find my 'ly , I be content . if I doe not find she , maybe she will come to hear , sometime , as she love uncle only end he search for she when he end he life ; and if I know she , even that will turn she home at last ! ' as he go out into the rigorous night , I see the lonely figure flit away before we . I turn he hastily on some pretence , and hold
hold he in conversation until it be gone . he speak of a traveller 's house on the , where he know he could find a clean , plain lod for the night . I go with he over , and part from he on the shore . everything seem , to my imagination , to be hush in reverence for he , as he resume he solitary journey through the snow . I return to the inn yard , and , impress by my remembrance of the face , look awfully around for it . it be not there . the snow have cover we late footprint ; my new track be the only one to be see ; and even that begin to die away ( it snow so fast ) as I look back over my shoulder . chapter 41 's at last , a answer come from the two old lady . they present they compliment to , and inform he that they have give he letter they best consideration , ' with a view to the happiness of both party ' - which I think rather a alarming expression , not only because of the use they have make of it in relation to the family difference before - mention , but because i have ( and have all my life ) observe that conventional phrasis be a sort of firework , easily let off , and liable to take a great variety of shape and colour not at all suggest by they original form . the add that they beg to forbear expressing , ' through the medium of correspondence ' , a opinion on the subject of 's communication ; but that if would do they the favour to call , upon a certain day ( accompany , if he think proper , by a confidential friend ) , they would be happy to hold some conversation on the subject . to this favour , immediately reply , with he respectful compliment , that he would have the honour of waiting on the , at the time appoint ; accompany , in accordance with they kind permission , by he friend Traddles of the . have dispatch which missive , fell into a condition of strong nervous agitation ; and so remain until the day arrive . it be a great augmentation of my uneasiness to be bereave , at this eventful crisis , of the inestimable service of . but , who be always do something or other to annoy I - or I feel as if he be , which be the same thing - have bring he conduct to a climax , by take it into he head that he would go to . why should he go to , except to harass I ? to be sure he have nothing to do with any other part of the world , and have a good deal to do with that part ; be entirely in the trade , whatever that be ( I have float dream myself concern golden shawl and elephant ' tooth ) ; have be at in he youth ; and design now to go out there again , in the capacity of resident partner . but this be nothing to I . however , it be so much to he that for he be bound , and with he ; and go into the country to take leave of she relation ; and the house be put into a perfect suit of bill , announce that it be to be let or sell , and that the furniture ( Mangle and all ) be to be take at a valuation . so , here be another earthquake of which I become the sport , before I have recover from the shock of its predecessor ! I be in several minds how to dress myself on the important day ; be divide between my desire to appear to advantage , and my apprehension of put on anything that might impair my severely practical character in the eyes of the . I endeavoure to hit a happy medium between these two extreme ; my aunt approve the result ; and throw one of he shoe after Traddles and I , for luck , as we go downstairs . excellent fellow as I know Traddles to be , and warmly attach to he as I be , I could not help wish , on that delicate occasion , that he have never contract the habit of brush he hair so very upright . it give he a surprised look - not to say a hearth - broomy kind of expression - which , my apprehension whisper , might be fatal to we . I take the liberty of mention it to Traddles , as we be walk to ; and say that if he would smooth it down a little - ' my dear Copperfield , ' say Traddles , lift off he hat , and rub he hair all kind of way , ' nothing would give I greater pleasure . but it will not . ' ' will not be smooth down ? ' say I . ' no , ' say Traddles . ' nothing will induce it . if I be to carry a half - hundred - weight upon it , all the way to , it would be up again the moment the weight be take off . you have no idea what obstinate hair mine be , . I be quite a fretful porcupine . ' I be a little disappointed , I must confess , but thoroughly charme by he good - nature too . I tell he how I esteem he good - nature ; and say that he hair must have take all the obstinacy out of he character , for he have none . ' oh ! ' return
return Traddle , laugh . 'I assure you , it be quite a old story , my unfortunate hair . my uncle 's wife could not bear it . she say it exasperate she . it stand very much in my way , too , when I first fall in love with . very much ! ' ' do she object to it ? ' ' she do not , ' rejoin Traddle ; ' but she eldest sister - the one that be the beauty - quite make game of it , I understand . in fact , all the sister laugh at it . ' ' agreeable ! ' say I . 'yes , ' return Traddle with perfect innocence , ' it be a joke for we . they pretend that have a lock of it in she desk , and be obliged to shut it in a clasped book , to keep it down . we laugh about it . ' ' by the by , my dear Traddle , ' say I , ' you experience may suggest something to I . when you become engage to the young lady whom you have just mention , do you make a regular proposal to she family ? be there anything like - what we be go through today , for instance ? ' I add , nervously . ' why , ' reply Traddles , on whose attentive face a thoughtful shade have steal , ' it be rather a painful transaction , , in my case . you see , be of so much use in the family , none of they could endure the thought of she ever be marry . indeed , they have quite settled among themselves that she never be to be marry , and they call she the old maid . accordingly , when I mention it , with the greatest precaution , to -' ' the mama ? ' say I . ' the mama , ' say - ' - when I mention it with every possible precaution to , the effect upon she be such that she give a scream and become insensible . I could not approach the subject again , for month . ' ' you do at last ? ' say I . ' well , the do , ' say Traddles . ' he be a excellent man , most exemplary in every way ; and he point out to she that she ought , as a , to reconcile herself to the sacrifice ( especially as it be so uncertain ) , and to bear no uncharitable feel towards I . as to myself , , I give you my word , I feel a perfect bird of prey towards the family . ' ' the sister take you part , I hope , ? ' ' why , I can not say they do ,' he return . ' when we have comparatively reconcile to it , we have to break it to . you recollect my mention , as the one that have something the matter with she spine ? ' ' perfectly ! ' ' she clench both she hand , ' say Traddles , look at I in dismay ; ' shut she eye ; turn lead - colour ; become perfectly stiff ; and take nothing for two day but toast - and - water , administer with a tea - spoon . ' ' what a very unpleasant girl , Traddles ! ' I remarke . ' oh , I beg you pardon , ! ' say Traddles . ' she be a very charming girl , but she have a great deal of feeling . in fact , they all have . tell I afterwards , that the self - reproach she underwent while she be in attendance upon , no word could describe . I know it must have be severe , by my own feeling , ; which be like a criminal 's . after be restore , we still have to break it to the other eight ; and it produce various effect upon they of a most pathetic nature . the two little one , whom educate , have only just leave off - test I . ' ' at any rate , they be all reconcile to it now , I hope ? ' say I . 'ye - yes , I should say they be , on the whole , resign to it , ' say Traddles , doubtfully . ' the fact be , we avoid mention the subject ; and my unsettled prospect and indifferent circumstance be a great consolation to they . there will be a deplorable scene , whenever we be marry . it will be much more like a funeral , than a wedding . and they will all hate I for take she away ! ' he honest face , as he look at I with a serio-comic shake of he head , impress I more in the remembrance than it do in the reality , for I be by this time in a state of such excessive trepidation and wander of mind , as to be quite unable to fix my attention on anything . on we approach the house where the liv , I be at such a discount in respect of my personal look and presence of mind , that Traddles propose a gentle stimulant in the form of a glass of ale . this have be administer at a neighbour public - house , he conduct I , with tottering step , to the 's door . I have a vague sensation of being , as it be , on view , when the maid open it ; and of wavering , somehow , across a hall with a weather - glass in it , into a quiet little drawing
drawing - room on the ground - floor , command a neat garden . also of sit down here , on a sofa , and see 's hair start up , now he hat be remove , like one of those obtrusive little figure make of spring , that fly out of fictitious snuff - boxe when the lid be take off . also of hear a old - fashioned clock tick away on the chimney - piece , and try to make it keep time to the jerking of my heart , - which it would not . also of look round the room for any sign of , and see none . also of think that once bark in the distance , and be instantly chok by somebody . ultimately I find myself back Traddle into the fireplace , and bow in great confusion to two dry little elderly lady , dress in black , and each look wonderfully like a preparation in chip or tan of the late . ' pray , ' say one of the two little lady , ' be seat . ' when I have do tumbling over Traddles , and have sit upon something which be not a cat - my first seat be - I so far recover my sight , as to perceive that have evidently be the youngest of the family ; that there be a disparity of six or eight year between the two sister ; and that the younger appear to be the manager of the conference , inasmuch as she have my letter in she hand - so familiar as it look to I , and yet so odd ! - and be refer to it through a eye - glass . they be dress alike , but this sister wear she dress with a more youthful air than the other ; and perhaps have a trifle more frill , or tucker , or brooch , or bracelet , or some little thing of that kind , which make she look more lively . they be both upright in they carriage , formal , precise , compose , and quiet . the sister who have not my letter , have she arm cross on she breast , and rest on each other , like a . ' , I believe , ' say the sister who have get my letter , address herself to Traddles . this be a frightful beginning . Traddle have to indicate that I be , and I have to lay claim to myself , and they have to divest themselves of a preconceive opinion that be , and altogether we be in a nice condition . to improve it , we all distinctly hear give two short bark , and receive another choke . ' ! ' say the sister with the letter . I do something - bowed , I suppose - and be all attention , when the other sister strike in . ' my sister , ' say she ' be conversant with matter of this nature , will state what we consider most calculate to promote the happiness of both party . ' I discover afterwards that be a authority in affair of the heart , by reason of there have anciently exist a certain , who play short whist , and be suppose to have be enamoure of she . my private opinion be , that this be entirely a gratuitous assumption , and that be altogether innocent of any such sentiment - to which he have never give any sort of expression that I could ever hear of . both and have a superstition , however , that he would have declare he passion , if he have not be cut short in he youth ( at about sixty ) by over-drink he constitution , and over -do a attempt to set it right again by swill water . they have a lurking suspicion even , that he die of secret love ; though I must say there be a picture of he in the house with a damask nose , which concealment do not appear to have ever prey upon . ' we will not , ' say , ' enter on the past history of this matter . we poor brother 's death have cancel that . ' ' we have not , ' say , ' be in the habit of frequent association with we brother ; but there be no decided division or disunion between we . take he road ; we take ours . we consider it conducive to the happiness of all party that it should be so . and it be so . ' each of the sister lean a little forward to speak , shook she head after speak , and become upright again when silent . never move she arm . she sometimes play tune upon they with she finger - minuet and march I should think - but never move they . ' we niece 's position , or suppose position , be much change by we brother 's death , ' say ; 'and therefore we consider we brother 's opinion as regard she position as be change too . we have no reason to doubt , , that you be a young gentleman possess of good quality and honourable character ; or that you have a affection - or be fully persuade that you have a affection - for we niece . ' I reply , as I usually do whenever I have a chance , that nobody have ever love anybody else as I love . Traddle come to my assistance with a confirmatory murmur . be go on to make some rejoinder , when , who appear to be incessantly beset by a desire to refer to she brother , strike in again : ' if 's mama , ' she say
say , ' when she marry we brother , have at once say that there be not room for the family at the dinner - table , it would have be better for the happiness of all party . ' ' , ' say . ' perhaps we need not mind that now . ' ' , ' say , ' it belong to the subject . with you branch of the subject , on which alone you be competent to speak , I should not think of interfering . on this branch of the subject I have a voice and a opinion . it would have be better for the happiness of all party , if 's mama , when she marry we brother , have mention plainly what she intention were . we should then have know what we have to expect . we should have say " pray do not invite we , at any time " ; and all possibility of misunderstanding would have be avoid . ' when have shake she head , resum : again refer to my letter through she eye - glass . they both have little bright round twinkling eye , by the way , which be like bird ' eye . they be not unlike bird , altogether ; have a sharp , brisk , sudden manner , and a little short , spruce way of adjust themselves , like canary . , as I have say , resume : ' you ask permission of my sister and myself , , to visit here , as the accept suitor of we niece . ' ' if we brother , ' say , break out again , if I may call anything so calm a breaking out , ' wish to surround himself with a atmosphere of doctors 's Commons , and of doctor 's Commons only , what right or desire have we to object ? none , I be sure . we have ever be far from wish to obtrude ourselves on anyone . but why not say so ? let we brother and he wife have they society . let my sister and myself have we society . we can find it for ourselves , I hope . ' as this appear to be address to Traddles and I , both Traddle and I make some sort of reply . Traddle be inaudible . I think I observe , myself , that it be highly creditable to all concerned . I do not in the least know what I mean . ' , ' say , have now relieve she mind , ' you can go on , my dear . ' proceed : ' , my sister and I have be very careful indeed in consider this letter ; and we have not consider it without finally show it to we niece , and discuss it with we niece . we have no doubt that you think you like she very much . ' ' think , ma 'am ,' I rapturously begin , 'oh ! -' but give I a look ( just like a sharp canary ) , as request that I would not interrupt the oracle , I beg pardon . ' affection , ' say , glance at she sister for corroboration , which she give in the form of a little nod to every clause , ' mature affection , homage , devotion , do not easily express itself . it be be low . it be modest and retire , it lie in ambush , wait and wait . be the mature fruit . sometimes a life glide away , and find it still ripen in the shade . ' of course I do not understand then that this be a allusion to she suppose experience of the stricken Pidger ; but I see , from the gravity with which nod she head , that great weight be attach to these word . ' the light - for I call they , in comparison with such sentiment , the light - inclination of very young people , ' pursue , ' be dust , compare to rock . it be owe to the difficulty of know whether they be likely to endure or have any real foundation , that my sister and myself have be very undecided how to act , , and -' ' Traddle , ' say my friend , finde himself look at . 'I beg pardon . of the , I believe ? ' say , again glance at my letter . Traddle say ' exactly so , ' and become pretty red in the face . now , although I have not receive any express encouragement as yet , I fancie that I see in the two little sister , and particularly in , a intensified enjoyment of this new and fruitful subject of domestic interest , a settling down to make the most of it , a disposition to pet it , in which there be a good bright ray of hope . I think I perceive that would have uncommon satisfaction in superintending two young lover , like and I ; and that would have hardly less satisfaction in see she superintend we , and in chiming in with she own particular department of the subject whenever that impulse be strong upon she . this give I courage to protest most vehemently that I love better than I could tell , or anyone believe ; that all my friend know how I love she ; that my aunt , Agnes , Traddles , everyone who know I , know how I love she , and how earnest my love have make I . for the truth of this , I appeal to Traddles . and Traddle , fire up as if he be plunge into a , really do come out nobly : confirm I
I in good round term , and in a plain sensible practical manner , that evidently make a favourable impression . 'I speak , if I may presume to say so , as one who have some little experience of such thing , ' say , ' be myself engage to a young lady - one of ten , down in - and see no probability , at present , of we engagement come to a termination . ' ' you may be able to confirm what I have say , , ' observe , evidently take a new interest in he , 'or the affection that be modest and retire ; that wait and wait ? ' ' entirely , ma 'am , ' say Traddles . look at , and shake she head gravely . look consciously at , and heav a little sigh . ' , ' say , ' take my smelling - bottle . ' revive herself with a few whiff of aromatic vinegar - Traddle and I look on with great solicitude the while ; and then go on to say , rather faintly : ' my sister and myself have be in great doubt , , what course we ought to take in reference to the liking , or imaginary liking , of such very young people as you friend and we niece . ' ' we brother 's child , ' remark . ' if we brother 's wife have find it convenient in she lifetime ( though she have a unquestionable right to act as she think best ) to invite the family to she dinner - table , we might have know we brother 's child better at the present moment . , proceed . ' turn my letter , so as to bring the superscription towards herself , and refer through she eye - glass to some orderly - look note she have make on that part of it . ' it seem to we , ' say she , ' prudent , , to bring these feeling to the test of we own observation . at present we know nothing of they , and be not in a situation to judge how much reality there may be in they . therefore we be inclin so far to accede to 's proposal , as to admit he visit here . ' 'I shall never , dear lady ,' I exclaim , relieve of a immense load of apprehension , ' forget you kindness ! ' ' but , ' pursue , - ' but , we would prefer to regard those visit , , as make , at present , to we . we must guard ourselves from recognize any positive engagement between and we niece , until we have have a opportunity -' ' until you have have a opportunity , sister , ' say . ' be it so , ' assent , with a sigh - ' until I have have a opportunity of observe they . ' ' , ' say Traddles , turn to I , ' you feel , I be sure , that nothing could be more reasonable or considerate . ' ' nothing ! ' cry I . 'I be deeply sensible of it . ' 'In this position of affair , ' say , again refer to she note , ' and admit he visit on this understanding only , we must require from Copperfield a distinct assurance , on he word of honour , that no communication of any kind shall take place between he and we niece without we knowledge . that no project whatever shall be entertain with regard to we niece , without be first submit to we -' 'to you , sister , ' interpose . ' be it so , ! ' assent resignedly - 'to I - and receive we concurrence . we must make this a most express and serious stipulation , not to be break on any account . we wish to be accompany by some confidential friend today , ' with a inclination of she head towards , who bow , 'in order that there might be no doubt or misconception on this subject . if , or if you , , feel the least scruple , in give this promise , I beg you to take time to consider it . ' I exclaim , in a state of high ecstatic fervour , that not a moment 's consideration could be necessary . I bound myself by the require promise , in a most impassioned manner ; call upon Traddles to witness it ; and denounce myself as the most atrocious of character if I ever swerve from it in the least degree . ' stay ! ' say , hold up she hand ; 'we resolve , before we have the pleasure of receive you two gentleman , to leave you alone for a quarter of a hour , to consider this point . you will allow we to retire . ' it be in vain for I to say that no consideration be necessary . they persist in withdrawing for the specified time . accordingly , these little bird hop out with great dignity ; leave I to receive the congratulation of Traddles , and to feel as if I be translate to region of exquisite happiness . exactly at the expiration of the quarter of a hour , they reappear with no less dignity than they have disappear . they have go rust away as if they little dress be make of autumn - leave : and they come rust back , in like manner . I then bound myself once more to the prescribe condition . ' , ' say , ' the rest be with you . ' , unfold she arm for the first time , take the note and glance at they .
. ' we shall be happy , ' say , 'to see to dinner , every , if it should suit he convenience . we hour be three . ' I bow . ' in the course of the week , ' say , 'we shall be happy to see to tea . we hour be half - past six . ' I bow again . 'Twice in the week , ' say , ' but , as a rule , not oftener . ' I bow again . ' , ' say , ' mention in 's letter , will perhaps call upon we . when visiting be better for the happiness of all party , we be glad to receive visit , and return they . when it be better for the happiness of all party that no visiting should take place , ( as in the case of we brother , and he establishment ) that be quite different . ' I intimate that my aunt would be proud and delighted to make they acquaintance ; though I must say I be not quite sure of they get on very satisfactorily together . the condition be now close , I express my acknowledgement in the warmest manner ; and , take the hand , first of , and then of , press it , in each case , to my lip . then arise , and begge to excuse we for a minute , request I to follow she . I obey , all in a tremble , and be conduct into another room . there I find my blessed darling stop she ear behind the door , with she dear little face against the wall ; and in the plate - warmer with he head tie up in a towel . oh ! how beautiful she be in she black frock , and how she sob and cry at first , and would not come out from behind the door ! how fond we be of one another , when she do come out at last ; and what a state of bliss I be in , when we take out of the plate - warmer , and restore he to the light , sneeze very much , and be all three reunit ! ' my dearest Dora ! now , indeed , my own for ever ! ' 'Oh , do N'T ! ' plead . ' please ! ' ' be you not my own for ever , Dora? ' ' oh yes , of course I be ! ' cry , ' but I be so frightened ! ' ' Frighten , my own ? ' ' oh yes ! I do not like he , ' say . ' why do not he go ? ' ' who , my life ? ' ' you friend , ' say . ' it be not any business of he . what a stupid he must be ! ' 'my love ! ' ( there never be anything so coax as she childish way . ) ' he be the best creature ! ' 'Oh , but we do not want any best creature ! ' poute . 'My dear ,' I argue , ' you will soon know he well , and like he of all thing . and here be my aunt come soon ; and you will like she of all thing too , when you know she . ' ' no , please do not bring she ! ' say , give I a horrified little kiss , and fold she hand . ' do not . I know she be a naughty , mischief - make old thing ! do not let she come here , ! ' which be a corruption of . Remonstrance be of no use , then ; so I laugh , and admire , and be very much in love and very happy ; and she show I 's new trick of standing on he hind leg in a corner - which he do for about the space of a flash of lightning , and then fall down - and I do not know how long I should have stay there , oblivious of Traddles , if have not come in to take I away . be very fond of ( she tell I be exactly like what she have be herself at she age - she must have alte a good deal ) , and she treat just as if she have be a toy . I want to persuade to come and see Traddles , but on my propose it she run off to she own room and lock herself in ; so I go to Traddle without she , and walk away with he on air . ' nothing could be more satisfactory , ' say Traddle ; 'and they be very agreeable old lady , I be sure . I should not be at all surprise if you be to be marry year before I , . ' ' do you play on any instrument , Traddles ? ' I inquire , in the pride of my heart . ' she know enough of the piano to teach it to she little sister , ' say Traddles . ' do she se at all ? ' I ask . ' why , she sing ballad , sometimes , to freshen up the other a little when they be out of spirit , ' say Traddles . ' nothing scientific . ' ' she do not se to the guitar ? ' say I . ' oh dear no ! ' say Traddles . ' paint at all ? ' ' not at all , ' say Traddles . I promise Traddle that he should hear sing , and see some of she flower - painting . he say he should like
like it very much , and we go home arm in arm in great good humour and delight . I encourage he to talk about , on the way ; which he do with a loving reliance on she that I very much admired . I compare she in my mind with , with considerable inward satisfaction ; but I candidly admit to myself that she seem to be a excellent kind of girl for Traddles , too . of course my aunt be immediately make acquaint with the successful issue of the conference , and with all that have be say and do in the course of it . she be happy to see I so happy , and promise to call on 's aunt without loss of time . but she take such a long walk up and down we room that night , while I be write to , that I begin to think she mean to walk till morning . my letter to be a fervent and grateful one , narrat all the good effect that have result from my follow she advice . she write , by return of post , to I . she letter be hopeful , earnest , and cheerful . she be always cheerful from that time . I have my hand more full than ever , now . my daily journey to Highgate consider , be a long way off ; and I naturally want to go there as often as I could . the propose tea-drinking be quite impracticable , I compound with for permission to visit every afternoon , without detriment to my privileged . so , the close of every week be a delicious time for I ; and I get through the rest of the week by look forward to it . I be wonderfully relieved to find that my aunt and 's aunt rub on , all thing consider , much more smoothly than I could have expect . my aunt make she promise visit within a few day of the conference ; and within a few more day , 's aunt call upon she , in due state and form . similar but more friendly exchange take place afterwards , usually at interval of three or four week . I know that my aunt distress 's aunt very much , by utterly set at natch the dignity of fly - conveyance , and walk out to Putney at extraordinary time , as shortly after breakfast or just before tea ; likewise by wear she bonnet in any manner that happen to be comfortable to she head , without at all deferr to the prejudice of civilization on that subject . but 's aunt soon agree to regard my aunt as a eccentric and somewhat masculine lady , with a strong understanding ; and although my aunt occasionally ruffle the feather of 's aunt , by expressing heretical opinion on various point of ceremony , she love I too well not to sacrifice some of she little peculiarity to the general harmony . the only member of we small society who positively refuse to adapt himself to circumstance , be . he never see my aunt without immediately display every tooth in he head , retire under a chair , and grow incessantly : with now and then a doleful howl , as if she really be too much for he feeling . all kind of treatment be try with he , coaxing , scolding , slapp , bring he to ( where he instantly dash at the two cat , to the terror of all beholder ) ; but he never could prevail upon himself to bear my aunt 's society . he would sometimes think he have get the better of he objection , and be amiable for a few minute ; and then would put up he snub nose , and howl to that extent , that there be nothing for it but to blind he and put he in the plate-warmer . at length , regularly muff he in a towel and shut he up there , whenever my aunt be report at the door . one thing troublead I much , after we have fall into this quiet train . it be , that see by one consent to be regard like a pretty toy or plaything . my aunt , with whom she gradually become familiar , always call she ; and the pleasure of 's life be to wait upon she , curl she hair , make ornament for she , and treat she like a pet child . what do , she sister do as a matter of course . it be very odd to I ; but they all seem to treat , in she degree , much as treat in he . I make up my mind to speak to about this ; and one day when we be out walk ( for we be license by , after a while , to go out walk by ourselves ) , I say to she that I wish she could get they to behave towards she differently . ' because you know , my darling ,' I remonstrate , ' you be not a child . ' ' there ! ' say . ' now you be go to be ! ' ' , my love ? ' 'I be sure they be very kind to I , ' say , ' and I be very happy -' ' well ! but my dearest life ! ' say I , ' you might be very happy , and yet be treat rationally . ' give I a reproachful look - the prettiest look ! - and then begin to sob , say , if I do not like she , why have I ever want so much to be engage to she ? and why do not
not I go away , now , if I could not bear she ? what could I do , but kiss away she tear , and tell she how I do on she , after that ! 'I be sure I be very affectionate , ' say ; ' you ought not to be cruel to I , ! ' ' cruel , my precious love ! as if I would - or could - be cruel to you , for the world ! ' ' then do not find fault with I , ' say , make a rosebud of she mouth ; ' and I will be good . ' I be charme by she presently ask I , of she own accord , to give she that cookery - book I have once speak of , and to show she how to keep account as I have once promise I would . I bring the volume with I on my next visit ( I get it prettily bound , first , to make it look less dry and more inviting ) ; and as we stroll about the common , I show she a old housekeeping - book of my aunt 's , and give she a set of tablet , and a pretty little pencil - case and box of lead , to practise housekeeping with . but the cookery - book make 's head ache , and the figure make she cry . they would not add up , she say . so she rub they out , and draw little nosegay and likeness of I and , all over the tablet . then I playfully try verbal instruction in domestic matter , as we walk about on a afternoon . sometimes , for example , when we pass a butcher 's shop , I would say : ' now suppose , my pet , that we be marry , and you be go to buy a shoulder of mutton for dinner , would you know how to buy it ? ' my pretty little 's face would fall , and she would make she mouth into a bud again , as if she would very much prefer to shut mine with a kiss . ' would you know how to buy it , my darling ? ' I would repeat , perhaps , if I be very inflexible . would think a little , and then reply , perhaps , with great triumph : ' why , the butcher would know how to sell it , and what need I know ? oh , you silly boy ! ' so , when I once ask , with a eye to the cookery - book , what she would do , if we be married , and I be to say I should like a nice irish stew , she reply that she would tell the servant to make it ; and then clap she little hand together across my arm , and laugh in such a charming manner that she be more delightful than ever . consequently , the principal use to which the cookery - book be devoted , be be put down in the corner for to stand upon . but be so pleased , when she have train he to stand upon it without offer to come off , and at the same time to hold the pencil - case in he mouth , that I be very glad I have buy it . and we fall back on the guitar - case , and the flower - painting , and the songs about never leave off dancing , ra la ! and be as happy as the week be long . I occasionally wish I could venture to hint to , that she treat the darling of my heart a little too much like a plaything ; and I sometimes awoke , as it be , wonder to find that I have fall into the general fault , and treat she like a plaything too - but not often . chapter 42 I feel as if it be not for I to record , even though this manuscript be intend for no eye but mine , how hard I work at that tremendous short - hand , and all improvement appertain to it , in my sense of responsibility to and she aunt . I will only add , to what I have already write of my perseverance at this time of my life , and of a patient and continuous energy which then begin to be mature within I , and which I know to be the strong part of my character , if it have any strength at all , that there , on look back , I find the source of my success . I have be very fortunate in worldly matter ; many man have work much harder , and not succeed half so well ; but I never could have do what I have do , without the habits of punctuality , order , and diligence , without the determination to concentrate myself on one object at a time , no matter how quickly its successor should come upon it be heel , which I then for . know I write this , in no spirit of self - laudation . the man who review he own life , as I do mine , in go on here , from page to page , have need to have be a good man indeed , if he would be spare the sharp consciousness of many talents neglect , many opportunity waste , many erratic and pervert feeling constantly at war within he breast , and defeat he . I do not hold one natural gift , I dare say , that I have not abuse . my mean simply is , that whatever I have try to
to do in life , I have try with all my heart to do well ; that whatever I have devote myself to , I have devote myself to completely ; that in great aim and in small , I have always be thoroughly in earnest . I have never believe it possible that any natural or improved ability can claim immunity from the companionship of the steady , plain , hard - work qualitie , and hope to gain it be end . there be no such thing as such fulfilment on this earth . some happy talent , and some fortunate opportunity , may form the two side of the ladder on which some man mount , but the round of that ladder must be make of stuff to stand wear and tear ; and there be no substitute for thorough - go , ardent , and sincere earnestness . never to put one hand to anything , on which I could throw my whole self ; and never to affect depreciation of my work , whatever it be ; I find , now , to have be my golden rule . how much of the practice I have just reduce to precept , I owe to , I will not repeat here . my narrative proceed to , with a thankful love . she come on a visit of a fortnight to the Doctor 's . be the doctor 's old friend , and the Doctor wish to talk with he , and do he good . it have be matter of conversation with when she be last in town , and this visit be the result . she and she father come together . I be not much surprised to hear from she that she have engage to find a lodging in the neighbourhood for . Heep , whose rheumatic complaint require change of air , and who would be charme to have it in such company . neither be I surprise when , on the very next day , Uriah , like a dutiful son , bring he worthy mother to take possession . ' you see , , ' say he , as he force himself upon my company for a turn in the 's , ' where a person love , a person be a little jealous - leastway , anxious to keep a eye on the beloved one . ' ' of whom be you jealous , now ? ' say I . ' thanks to you , ,' he return , 'on no one in particular just at present - no male person , at least . ' ' do you mean that you be jealous of a female person ? ' he give I a sidelong glance out of he sinister red eye , and laugh . ' really , ,' he say , ' - I should say , but I know you will excuse the abit I have get into - you be so insinuating , that you draw I like a corkscrew ! well , I do not mind tell you , ' put he fish - like hand on mine , ' I be not a lady 's man in general , sir , and I never be , with . ' he eye look green now , as they watch mine with a rascally cunning . ' what do you mean ? ' say I . ' why , though I be a lawyer , master , ' he reply , with a dry grin , 'i mean , just at present , what I say . ' ' and what do you mean by you look ? ' I retort , quietly . ' by my look ? dear I , , that be sharp practice ! what do I mean by my look ? ' ' yes , ' say I . ' by you look . ' he seem very much amused , and laugh as heartily as it be in he nature to laugh . after some scraping of he ching with he hand , he go on to say , with he eye cast downward - still scrape , very slowly : ' when I be but a umble clerk , she always look down upon I . she be for ever have my Agnes backward and forward at she ouse , and she be for ever be a friend to you , ; but I be too far beneath she , myself , to be notice . ' ' well ? ' say I ; ' suppose you be ! ' ' - and beneath he too , ' pursue , very distinctly , and in a meditative tone of voice , as he continue to scrape he ching . ' do not you know the Doctor better , ' say I , ' than to suppose he conscious of you existence , when you be not before he ? ' he direct he eye at I in that sidelong glance again , and he make he face very lantern - jaw , for the greater convenience of scraping , as he answer : ' oh dear , I be not refer to the doctor ! oh no , poor man ! I mean ! ' my heart quite die within I . all my old doubt and apprehension on that subject , all the 's happiness and peace , all the mingled possibility of innocence and compromise , that I could not unravle , I see , in a moment , at the mercy of this fellow 's twisting . ' he never could come into the office , without order and shove I about , ' say . ' one of you fine gentleman he be ! I be very meek and umble - and I be . but I do not like that sort of thing -
- and I do not ! ' he leave off scrape he ching , and suck in he cheek until they seem to meet inside ; keep he sidelong glance upon I all the while . ' she be one of you lovely woman , she be ,' he pursue , when he have slowly restore he face to its natural form ; ' and ready to be no friend to such as I , I know . she be just the person as would put my Agne up to higher sort of game . now , I be not one of you lady 's man , master ; but I have have eye in my ed , a pretty long time back . we umble one have get eye , mostly speak - and we look out of th'ey . ' I endeavoure to appear unconscious and not disquiet , but , I see in he face , with poor success . ' now , I be not a - go to let myself be run down , ,' he continue , raise that part of he countenance , where he red eyebrow would have be if he have have any , with malignant triumph , ' and I shall do what I can to put a stop to this friendship . I do not approve of it . I do not mind acknowledge to you that I have get rather a grudging disposition , and want to keep off all intruder . I be not a - go , if I know it , to run the risk of be plot against . ' ' you be always plott , and delude yourself into the belief that everybody else be do the like , I think , ' say I . ' perhaps so , ,' he reply . ' but I have get a motive , as my fellow - partner use to say ; and I go at it tooth and nail . I must not be put upon , as a numble person , too much . I can not allow people in my way . really they must come out of the cart , master Copperfield ! ' 'I do not understand you , ' say I . ' do not you , though ? ' he return , with one of he jerk . 'I be astonish at that , , you be usually so quick ! I will try to be plainer , another time . - be that a - norseback , ring at the gate , sir ? ' ' it look like he ,' I reply , as carelessly as I could . stop short , put he hand between he great knob of knee , and double himself up with laughter . with perfectly silent laughter . not a sound escape from he . I be so repell by he odious behaviour , particularly by this concluding instance , that I turn away without any ceremony ; and leave he double up in the middle of the garden , like a scarecrow in want of support . it be not on that evening ; but , as I well remember , on the next evening but one , which be a ; that I take Agnes to see . I have arrange the visit , beforehand , with ; and be expect to tea . I be in a flutter of pride and anxiety ; pride in my dear little betroth , and anxiety that Agnes should like she . all the way to , be inside the stage - coach , and I outside , I picture to myself in every one of the pretty look I know so well ; now make up my mind that I should like she to look exactly as she look at such a time , and then doubt whether I should not prefer she look as she look at such another time ; and almost worry myself into a fever about it . I be troublead by no doubt of she be very pretty , in any case ; but it fall out that I have never see she look so well . she be not in the drawing - room when I present Agnes to she little aunt , but be shyly keep out of the way . I know where to look for she , now ; and sure enough I find she stop she ear again , behind the same dull old door . at first she would not come at all ; and then she plead for five minute by my watch . when at length she put she arm through mine , to be take to the drawing - room , she charme little face be flush , and have never be so pretty . but , when we go into the room , and it turn pale , she be ten thousand time prettier yet . be afraid of . she have tell I that she know be ' too clever ' . but when she see she look at once so cheerful and so earnest , and so thoughtful , and so good , she give a faint little cry of pleased surprise , and just put she affectionate arm round 's neck , and lay she innocent cheek against she face . I never be so happy . I never be so pleased as when I see those two sit down together , side by side . as when I see my little darling look up so naturally to those cordial eye . as when I see the tender , beautiful regard which cast upon she . and , in they way , of my joy . it be the pleasantest tea - table in the world . preside . I cut and hand the sweet seed - cake - the little sister
sister have a bird - like fondness for pick up seed and peck at sugar ; look on with benignant patronage , as if we happy love be all she work ; and we be perfectly contente with ourselves and one another . the gentle cheerfulness of go to all they heart . she quiet interest in everything that interest Dora ; she manner of make acquaintance with ( who respond instantly ) ; she pleasant way , when be asham to come over to she usual seat by I ; she modest grace and ease , elicit a crowd of blush little mark of confidence from ; seem to make we circle quite complete . 'I be so glad , ' say , after tea , ' that you like I . I do not think you would ; and I want , more than ever , to be like , now be gone . ' I have omit to mention it , by the by . have sail , and and I have go aboard a great at to see she ; and we have have preserved ginger , and guava , and other delicacy of that sort for lunch ; and we have leave weep on a camp - stool on the quarter - deck , with a large new diary under she arm , in which the original reflection awaken by the contemplation of be to be record under lock and key . Agnes say she be afraid I must have give she a unpromising character ; but correct that directly . ' oh no ! ' she say , shak she curl at I ; ' it be all praise . he think so much of you opinion , that I be quite afraid of it . ' ' my good opinion can not strengthen he attachment to some people whom he know , ' say , with a smile ; ' it be not worth they have . ' ' but please let I have it , ' say , in she coaxing way , ' if you can ! ' we make about 's want to be like , and say I be a goose , and she do not like I at any rate , and the short evening fly away on gossamer - wing . the time be at hand when the coach be to call for we . I be stand alone before the fire , when come steal softly in , to give I that usual precious little kiss before I go . ' do not you think , if I have have she for a friend a long time ago , , ' say , she bright eye shin very brightly , and she little right hand idly busy itself with one of the buttons of my coat , ' I might have be more clever perhaps ? ' 'my love ! ' say I , ' what nonsense ! ' ' do you think it be nonsense ? ' return , without look at I . ' be you sure it be ? ' ' of course I be ! ' 'I have forget , ' say , still turn the button round and round , ' what relation Agnes be to you , you dear bad boy . ' 'No blood - relation ,' I reply ; ' but we be bring up together , like brother and sister . ' 'I wonder why you ever fall in love with I ? ' say , begin on another button of my coat . ' perhaps because I could not see you , and not love you , ' ' suppose you have never see I at all , ' say , go to another button . ' suppose we have never be bear ! ' say I , gaily . I wonder what she be think about , as I glance in admiring silence at the little soft hand travel up the row of buttons on my coat , and at the clustering hair that lay against my breast , and at the lash of she downcast eye , slightly rise as they follow she idle finger . at length she eyes be lifte up to mine , and she stand on tiptoe to give I , more thoughtfully than usual , that precious little kiss - once , twice , three time - and go out of the room . they all come back together within five minute afterwards , and 's unusual thoughtfulness be quite gone then . she be laughingly resolve to put through the whole of he performance , before the coach come . they take some time ( not so much on account of they variety , as 's reluctance ) , and be still unfinish when it be hear at the door . there be a hurried but affectionate part between Agnes and herself ; and be to write to ( who be not to mind she letter be foolish , she say ) , and be to write to ; and they have a second parting at the coach door , and a third when , in spite of the remonstrance of , would come run out once more to remind Agnes at the coach window about writing , and to shake she curl at I on the box . the stage - coach be to put we down near , where we be to take another stage - coach for . I be impatient for the short walk in the interval , that Agnes might praise to I . ah ! what praise it be ! how lovingly and fervently do it commend the pretty creature I have win , with all she artless graces best display , to my most gentle care ! how thoughtfully remind I , yet with no pretence of do so , of the
the trust in which I hold the orphan child ! never , never , have I love so deeply and truly , as I love she that night . when we have aagain alighted , and be walk in the starlight along the quiet road that lead to the Doctor 's house , I tell it be she do . ' when you be sit by she , ' say I , ' you seem to be no less she guardian angel than mine ; and you seem so now , . ' 'a poor angel , ' she return , ' but faithful . ' the clear tone of she voice , go straight to my heart , make it natural to I to say : ' the cheerfulness that belong to you , Agnes ( and to no one else that ever I have see ) , be so restore , I have observe today , that I have begin to hope you be happier at home ? ' 'I be happier in myself , ' she say ; 'I be quite cheerful and light - hear . ' I glance at the serene face look upward , and think it be the star that make it seem so noble . ' there have be no change at home , ' say , after a few moment . ' no fresh reference , ' say I , 'too - I would not distress you , Agnes , but I can not help ask - to what we speak of , when we part last ? ' 'no , none , ' she answer . 'I have think so much about it . ' ' you must think less about it . remember that I confide in simple love and truth at last . have no apprehension for I , Trotwood , ' she add , after a moment ; ' the step you dread my take , I shall never take . ' although I think I have never really fear it , in any season of cool reflection , it be a unspeakable relief to I to have this assurance from she own truthful lip . I tell she so , earnestly . ' and when this visit be over , ' say I , - ' for we may not be alone another time , - how long be it likely to be , my dear Agnes , before you come to again ? ' ' probably a long time , ' she reply ; ' I think it will be best - for papa 's sake - to remain at home . we be not likely to meet often , for some time to come ; but I shall be a good correspondent of 's , and we shall frequently hear of one another that way . ' we be now within the little courtyard of the 's cottage . it be grow late . there be a light in the window of 's chamber , and Agnes , point to it , bade I good night . ' do not be troublead , ' she say , give I she hand , ' by we misfortune and anxiety . I can be happier in nothing than in you happiness . if you can ever give I help , rely upon it I will ask you for it . bless you always ! ' in she beame smile , and in these last tone of she cheerful voice , I seem again to see and hear my little in she company . I stand awhile , look through the porch at the star , with a heart full of love and gratitude , and then walk slowly forth . I have engage a bed at a decent alehouse close by , and be go out at the gate , when , happen to turn my head , I see a light in the Doctor 's study . a half - reproachful fancy come into my mind , that he have be work at the dictionary without my help . with the view of see if this be so , and , in any case , of bid he good night , if he be yet sit among he book , I turn back , and go softly across the hall , and gently open the door , look in . the first person whom I see , to my surprise , by the sober light of the shaded lamp , be . he be stand close beside it , with one of he skeleton hand over he mouth , and the other resting on the Doctor 's table . the sit in he study chair , cover he face with he hand . , sorely troublead and distress , be lean forward , irresolutely touch the Doctor 's arm . for a instant , I suppose that the Doctor be ill . I hastily advanc a step under that impression , when I meet 's eye , and see what be the matter . I would have withdraw , but the Doctor make a gesture to detain I , and I remaine . ' at any rate , ' observ , with a writhe of he ungainly person , 'we may keep the door shut . we need not make it know to all the town . ' say which , he go on he toe to the door , which I have leave open , and carefully close it . he then come back , and take up he former position . there be a obtrusive show of compassionate zeal in he voice and manner , more intolerable - at least to I - than any demeanour he could have assume . 'I have feel it incumbend upon I , master , ' say , 'to point out to what you and I have already
already talk about . you do not exactly understand I , though ? ' I give he a look , but no other answer ; and , go to my good old master , say a few word that I mean to be word of comfort and encouragement . he put he hand upon my shoulder , as it have be he custom to do when I be quite a little fellow , but do not lift he grey head . ' as you do not understand I , master , ' resume in the same officious manner , 'I may take the liberty of umbly mention , be among friend , that I have call 's attention to the goings - on of . it be much against the grain with I , I assure you , , to be concerned in anything so unpleasant ; but really , as it be , we be all mix ourselves up with what ought not to be . that be what my meaning be , sir , when you do not understand I . ' I wonder now , when I recall he leer , that I do not collar he , and try to shake the breath out of he body . 'I dare say I do not make myself very clear ,' he go on , ' nor you neither . naturally , we be both of we inclin to give such a subject a wide berth . Hows'ever , at last I have make up my mind to speak plain ; and I have mention to that - do you speak , sir ? ' this be to the Doctor , who have moan . the sound might have touch any heart , I think , but it have no effect upon 's . ' - mention to ,' he proceed , ' that anyone may see that , and the lovely and agreeable lady as be 's wife , be too sweet on one another . really the time be come ( we be at present all mix ourselves up with what ought not to be ) , when must be tell that this be full as plain to everybody as the sun , before go to ; that make excuse to come back , for nothing else ; and that he be always here , for nothing else . when you come in , sir , I be just put it to my fellow - partner , ' towards whom he turn , 'too say to upon he word and honour , whether he would ever be of this opinion long ago , or not . come , , sir ! would you be so good as tell we ? yes or no , sir ? come , partner ! ' ' for 's sake , my dear doctor , ' say again lay he irresolute hand upon the Doctor 's arm , ' do not attach too much weight to any suspicions I may have entertained . ' ' there ! ' cry , shak he head . ' what a melancholy confirmation : be not it ? ! such a old friend ! bless you soul , when I be nothing but a clerk in he office , , I have see he twenty time , if I have see he once , quite in a take about it - quite put out , you know ( and very proper in he as a father ; I be sure I can not blame he ) , to think that be mix herself up with what ought not to be . ' 'my dear strong , ' say in a tremulous voice , 'my good friend , I need not tell you that it have be my vice to look for some one master motive in everybody , and to try all action by one narrow test . I may have fall into such doubt as I have have , through this mistake . ' ' you have have doubt , , ' say the Doctor , without lift up he head . ' you have have doubt . ' ' speak up , fellow - partner , ' urge . 'I have , at one time , certainly , ' say . - forgive I - I think you have . ' 'no , no , no ! ' return the Doctor , in a tone of most pathetic grief . 'I think , at one time , ' say , ' that you wish to send abroad to effect a desirable separation . ' 'no , no , no ! ' return the Doctor . 'To give pleasure , by make some provision for the companion of she childhood . nothing else . ' ' so I find , ' say . 'I could not doubt it , when you tell I so . but I think - I implore you to remember the narrow construction which have be my besetting sin - that , in a case where there be so much disparity in point of year -' ' that be the way to put it , you see , ! ' observe , with fawning and offensive pity . ' - a lady of such youth , and such attraction , however real she respect for you , might have be influence in marrying , by worldly consideration only . I make no allowance for innumerable feeling and circumstance that may have all tend to good . for 's sake remember that ! ' ' how kind he put it ! ' say , shak he head . ' obserive she from one point of view , ' say ; ' but by all that be dear to you , my old friend , I entreat you to consider what it be ; I be force to confess now , have no
no escape -' ' no ! there be no way out of it , , sir , ' observe , ' when it be get to this . ' ' - that I do , ' say , glance helplessly and distractedly at he partner , ' that I do doubt she , and think she want in she duty to you ; and that I do sometimes , if I must say all , feel averse to be in such a familiar relation towards she , as to see what I see , or in my diseased theory fancie that I see . I never mention this to anyone . I never mean it to be know to anyone . and though it be terrible to you to hear , ' say , quite subdu , ' if you know how terrible it be for I to tell , you would feel compassion for I ! ' the Doctor , in the perfect goodness of he nature , put out he hand . hold it for a little while in he , with he head bow down . 'I be sure , ' say , writh himself into the silence like a Conger - eel , ' that this be a subject full of unpleasantness to everybody . but since we have get so far , I ought to take the liberty of mention that have notice it too . ' I turn upon he , and ask he how he da refer to I ! 'Oh ! it be very kind of you , , ' return , undulat all over , ' and we all know what a amiable character yours be ; but you know that the moment I speak to you the other night , you know what I mean . you know you know what I mean , . do not deny it ! you deny it with the best intention ; but do not do it , . ' I see the mild eye of the good old Doctor turn upon I for a moment , and I feel that the confession of my old misgiving and remembrance be too plainly write in my face to be overlook . it be of no use rage . I could not undo that . say what I would , I could not unsay it . we be silent again , and remain so , until the rise and walk twice or thrice across the room . presently he return to where he chair stood ; and , lean on the back of it , and occasionally put he handkerchief to he eye , with a simple honesty that do he more honour , to my thinking , than any disguise he could have effect , say : 'I have be much to blame . I believe I have be very much to blame . I have expose one whom I hold in my heart , to trials and aspersion - I call they aspersion , even to have be conceive in anybody 's inmost mind - of which she never , but for I , could have be the object . ' give a kind of snivel . I think to express sympathy . ' of which my , ' say the , ' never , but for I , could have be the object . gentlemen , I be old now , as you know ; I do not feel , tonight , that I have much to live for . but my life - my life - upon the truth and honour of the dear lady who have be the subject of this conversation ! ' I do not think that the best embodiment of chivalry , the realization of the handsomest and most romantic figure ever imagine by painter , could have say this , with a more impressive and affect dignity than the plain old do . ' but I be not prepare ,' he go on , 'too deny - perhaps I may have be , without know it , in some degree prepare to admit - that I may have unwittingly ensnar that lady into a unhappy marriage . I be a man quite unaccustom to observe ; and I can not but believe that the observation of several people , of different age and position , all too plainly ten in one direction ( and that so natural ) , be better than mine . ' I have often admired , as I have elsewhere describe , he benignant manner towards he youthful wife ; but the respectful tenderness he manifest in every reference to she on this occasion , and the almost reverential manner in which he put away from he the lightest doubt of she integrity , exalt he , in my eye , beyond description . 'I marry that lady , ' say the , ' when she be extremely young . I take she to myself when she character be scarcely form . so far as it be develop , it have be my happiness to form it . I know she father well . I know she well . I have teach she what I could , for the love of all she beautiful and virtuous quality . if I do she wrong ; as I fear I do , in take advantage ( but I never mean it ) of she gratitude and she affection ; I ask pardon of that lady , in my heart ! ' he walk across the room , and come back to the same place ; hold the chair with a grasp that tremble , like he subdue voice , in its earnestness . 'I regard myself as a refuge , for she , from the dangers and vicissitude of life . I persuade myself that , unequal though we be in year , she would live
live tranquilly and contentedly with I . I do not shut out of my consideration the time when I should leave she free , and still young and still beautiful , but with she judgement more mature - no , gentlemen - upon my truth ! ' he homely figure seem to be lighten up by he fidelity and generosity . every word he uttere have a force that no other grace could have impart to it . ' my life with this lady have be very happy . until tonight , I have have uninterrupted occasion to bless the day on which I do she great injustice . ' he voice , more and more falter in the utterance of these word , stop for a few moment ; then he go on : ' once awaken from my dream - I have be a poor dreamer , in one way or other , all my life - I see how natural it be that she should have some regretful feeling towards she old companion and she equal . that she do regard he with some innocent regret , with some blameless thought of what might have be , but for I , be , I fear , too true . much that I have see , but not note , have come back upon I with new meaning , during this last try hour . but , beyond this , gentlemen , the dear lady 's name never must be couple with a word , a breath , of doubt . ' for a little while , he eye kind and he voice be firm ; for a little while he be again silent . presently , he proceed as before : ' it only remain for I , to bear the knowledge of the unhappiness I have occasion , as submissively as I can . it be she who should reproach ; not I . to save she from misconstruction , cruel misconstruction , that even my friend have not be able to avoid , become my duty . the more retired we live , the better I shall discharge it . and when the time come - may it come soon , if it be he merciful pleasure ! - when my death shall release she from constraint , I shall close my eye upon she honoured face , with unbounded confidence and love ; and leave she , with no sorrow then , to happier and brighter day . ' I could not see he for the tear which he earnestness and goodness , so adorn by , and so adorn , the perfect simplicity of he manner , bring into my eye . he have move to the door , when he add : ' gentlemen , I have show you my heart . I be sure you will respect it . what we have say tonight be never to be say more . Wickfield , give I a old friend 's arm upstairs ! ' hasten to he . without interchange a word they go slowly out of the room together , Uriah look after they . ' well , ! ' say , meekly turn to I . ' the thing have not take quite the turn that might have be expect , for the old - what a excellent man ! - be as blind as a brickbat ; but this family be out of the cart , I think ! ' I need but the sound of he voice to be so madly enrage as I never be before , and never have be since . ' you villain , ' say I , ' what do you mean by entrapp I into you scheme ? how dare you appeal to I just now , you false rascal , as if we have be in discussion together ? ' as we stand , front to frond , I see so plainly , in the stealthy exultation of he face , what I already so plainly know ; I mean that he force he confidence upon I , expressly to make I miserable , and have set a deliberate trap for I in this very matter ; that I could not bear it . the whole of he lank cheek be invitingly before I , and I struck it with my open hand with that force that my finger tingle as if I have burn they . he catch the hand in he , and we stand in that connexion , look at each other . we stand so , a long time ; long enough for I to see the white mark of my finger die out of the deep red of he cheek , and leave it a deeper red . ' ,' he say at length , in a breathless voice , ' have you take leave of you sense ? ' 'I have take leave of you , ' say I , wrest my hand away . ' you dog , I will know no more of you . ' ' will not you ? ' say he , constrain by the pain of he cheek to put he hand there . ' perhaps you will not be able to help it . be not this ungrateful of you , now ? ' 'I have show you often enough , ' say I , ' that I despise you . I have show you now , more plainly , that I do . why should I dread you do you worst to all about you ? what else do you ever do ? ' he perfectly understand this allusion to the consideration that have hithertoo restrain I in my communication with he . I rather think that neither the blow , nor the allusion , would have escape I , but for the assurance I have have from
from that night . it be no matter . there be another long pause . he eye , as he look at I , seem to take every shade of colour that could make eye ugly . ' ,' he say , remove he hand from he cheek , ' you have always go against I . I know you always use to be against I at 's . ' ' you may think what you like , ' say I , still in a towering rage . ' if it be not true , so much the worthier you . ' ' and yet I always like you , ! ' he rejoin . I deign to make he no reply ; and , take up my hat , be go out to bed , when he come between I and the door . ' ,' he say , ' there must be two party to a quarrel . I will not be one . ' ' you may go to the devil ! ' say I . ' do not say that ! ' he reply . 'I know you will be sorry afterwards . how can you make yourself so inferior to I , as to show such a bad spirit ? but I forgive you . ' ' you forgive I ! ' I repeat disdainfully . 'I do , and you can not help yourself , ' reply . 'To think of you go and attack I , that have always be a friend to you ! but there can not be a quarrel without two party , and I will not be one . I will be a friend to you , in spite of you . so now you know what you have get to expect . ' the necessity of carry on this dialogue ( he part in which be very slow ; mine very quick ) in a low tone , that the house might not be disturb at a unseasonable hour , do not improve my temper ; though my passion be cool down . merely tell he that I should expect from he what I always have expect , and have never yet be disappointed in , I open the door upon he , as if he have be a great walnut put there to be crack , and go out of the house . but he sleep out of the house too , at he mother 's lodging ; and before I have go many hundred yard , come up with I . ' you know , , ' he say , in my ear ( I do not turn my head ) , ' you be in quite a wrong position ' ; which I feel to be true , and that make I chafe the more ; ' you can not make this a brave thing , and you can not help be forgive . I do not intend to mention it to mother , nor to any living soul . I be determined to forgive you . but I do wonder that you should lift you hand against a person that you know to be so umble ! ' I feel only less mean than he . he know I better than I know myself . if he have retort or openly exasperate I , it would have be a relief and a justification ; but he have put I on a slow fire , on which I lay torment half the night . in the morning , when I come out , the early church - bell be ring , and he be walk up and down with he mother . he address I as if nothing have happen , and I could do no less than reply . I have struck he hard enough to give he the toothache , I suppose . at all event he face be tie up in a black silk handkerchief , which , with he hat perch on the top of it , be far from improve he appearance . I hear that he go to a dentist 's in on the morning , and have a tooth out . I hope it be a double one . the Doctor give out that he be not quite well ; and remain alone , for a considerable part of every day , during the remainder of the visit . Agnes and she father have be go a week , before we resume we usual work . on the day precede its resumption , the give I with he own hand a fold note not seal . it be address to myself ; and lay a injunction on I , in a few affectionate word , never to refer to the subject of that evening . I have confide it to my aunt , but to no one else . it be not a subject I could discuss with , and certainly have not the least suspicion of what have pass . neither , I feel convinced , have then . several week elapse before I see the least change in she . it come on slowly , like a cloud when there be no wind . at first , she seem to wonder at the gentle compassion with which the Doctor speak to she , and at he wish that she should have she mother with she , to relieve the dull monotony of she life . often , when we be at work , and she be sit by , I would see she pausing and look at he with that memorable face . afterwards , I sometimes observ she rise , with she eye full of tear , and go out of the room . gradually , a unhappy shadow fall upon she beauty , and deepen every day . be a regular inmate of the cottage
cottage then ; but she talk and talk , and see nothing . as this change stole on , once like sunshine in the 's house , the become older in appearance , and more grave ; but the sweetness of he temper , the placid kindness of he manner , and he benevolent solicitude for she , if they be capable of any increase , be increase . I see he once , early on the morning of she birthday , when she come to sit in the window while we be at work ( which she have always done , but now begin to do with a timid and uncertain air that I think very touching ) , take she forehead between he hand , kiss it , and go hurriedly away , too much move to remain . I see she stand where he have leave she , like a statue ; and then bend down she head , and clasp she hand , and weep , I can not say how sorrowfully . sometimes , after that , I fancie that she try to speak even to I , in interval when we be leave alone . but she never utter a word . the Doctor always have some new project for she participating in amusement away from home , with she mother ; and , who be very fond of amusement , and very easily dissatisfied with anything else , enter into they with great good - will , and be loud in she commendation . but , in a spiritless unhappy way , only go whither she be lead , and seem to have no care for anything . I do not know what to think . neither do my aunt ; who must have walk , at various time , a hundred mile in she uncertainty . what be strangest of all be , that the only real relief which seem to make its way into the secret region of this domestic unhappiness , make its way there in the person of . what he thought be on the subject , or what he observation be , I be as unable to explain , as I dare say he would have be to assist I in the task . but , as I have record in the narrative of my school day , he veneration for the Doctor be unbounded ; and there be a subtlety of perception in real attachment , even when it be borne towards man by one of the lower animal , which leave the highest intellect behind . to this mind of the heart , if I may call it so , in , some bright ray of the truth shot straight . he have proudly resume he privilege , in many of he spare hour , of walk up and down the garden with the Doctor ; as he have be accustom to pace up and down the 's at . but matter be no sooner in this state , than he devote all he spare time ( and get up earlier to make it more ) to these perambulation . if he have never be so happy as when the doctor read that marvellous performance , the , to he ; he be now quite miserable unless the pull it out of he pocket , and begin . when the doctor and I be engage , he now fall into the custom of walk up and down with , and help she to trim she favourite flower , or we the bed . I dare say he rarely speak a dozen word in a hour : but he quiet interest , and he wistful face , find immediate response in both they breast ; each knew that the other like he , and that he love both ; and he become what no one else could be - a link between they . when I think of he , with he impenetrably wise face , walk up and down with the Doctor , delighte to be batter by the hard word in the dictionary ; when I think of he carry huge watering - pots after ; knee down , in very paw of glove , at patient microscopic work among the little leave ; express as no philosopher could have express , in everything he do , a delicate desire to be she friend ; showering sympathy , trustfulness , and affection , out of every hole in the watering - pot ; when I think of he never wander in that better mind of he to which unhappiness address itself , never bring the unfortunate King Charles into the garden , never wave in he grateful service , never divert from he knowledge that there be something wrong , or from he wish to set it right - I really feel almost asham of have know that he be not quite in he wit , take account of the utmost I have do with mine . ' nobody but myself , , know what that man be ! ' my aunt would proudly remark , when we converse about it . ' Dick will distinguish himself yet ! ' I must refer to one other topic before I close this chapter . while the visit at the 's be still in progress , I observ that the postman bring two or three letter every morning for , who remaine at until the rest go back , it be a leisure time ; and that these be always direct in a business - like manner by , who now assume a round legal hand . I be glad to infer , from these slight premise , that be do well ; and consequently be much surprised to receive , about this time , the follow letter from he amiable wife . ' CANTERBURy , evening .
. ' you will doubtless be surprise , my dear , to receive this communication . still more so , by its contents . still more so , by the stipulation of implicit confidence which I beg to impose . but my feeling as a wife and mother require relief ; and as I do not wish to consult my family ( already obnoxious to the feeling of ) , I know no one of whom I can better ask advice than my friend and former lodger . ' you may be aware , my dear , that between myself and ( whom I will never desert ) , there have always be preserve a spirit of mutual confidence . may have occasionally give a bill without consult I , or he may have misl I as to the period when that obligation would become due . this have actually happen . but , in general , have have no secret from the bosom of affection - I allude to he wife - and have invariably , on we retirement to rest , recal the event of the day . ' you will picture to yourself , my dear , what the poignancy of my feeling must be , when I inform you that be entirely change . he be reserve . he be secret . he life be a mystery to the partner of he joy and sorrow - I again allude to he wife - and if I should assure you that beyond know that it be pass from morning to night at the office , I now know less of it than I do of the man in the south , connect with whose mouth the thoughtless child repeat a idle tale respect cold plum porridge , I should adopt a popular fallacy to express a actual fact . ' but this be not all . be morose . he be severe . he be estrange from we eldest son and daughter , he have no pride in he twin , he look with a eye of coldness even on the unoffending stranger who last become a member of we circle . the pecuniary means of meet we expense , keep down to the utmost farthing , be obtain from he with great difficulty , and even under fearful threat that he will settle himself ( the exact expression ) ; and he inexorably refuse to give any explanation whatever of this distracting policy . ' this be hard to bear . this be heart - breaking . if you will advise I , know my feeble power such as they be , how you think it will be best to exert they in a dilemma so unwonted , you will add another friendly obligation to the many you have already render I . with love from the child , and a smile from the happily - unconscious stranger , I remain , dear , you afflict , ' . ' I do not feel justified in give a wife of 's experience any other recommendation , than that she should try to reclaim by patience and kindness ( as I know she would in any case ) ; but the letter set I think about he very much . chapter 43 once again , let I pause upon a memorable period of my life . let I stand aside , to see the phantoms of those day go by I , accompany the shadow of myself , in dim procession . week , month , season , pass along . they seem little more than a summer day and a winter evening . now , the common where I walk with be all in bloom , a field of bright gold ; and now the unseen heather lie in mounds and bunch underneath a covering of snow . in a breath , the river that flow through we walk be sparkl in the summer sun , be ruffle by the winter wind , or thicken with drifting heap of ice . faster than ever river run towards the sea , it flash , darken , and roll away . not a thread change , in the house of the two little bird - like lady . the clock tick over the fireplace , the weather - glass hang in the hall . neither clock nor weather - glass be ever right ; but we believe in both , devoutly . I have come legally to man 's estate . I have attain the dignity of twenty - one . but this be a sort of dignity that may be thrust upon one . let I think what I have achieve . I have tame that savage stenographic mystery . I make a respectable income by it . I be in high repute for my accomplishment in all pertain to the art , and be join with eleven other in report the debate in parliament for a . night after night , I record prediction that never come to pass , profession that be never fulfil , explanations that be only mean to mystify . I wallow in word . , that unfortunate female , be always before I , like a trussed fowl : skewer through and through with office -pen , and bound hand and foot with red tape . I be sufficientely behind the scene to know the worth of political life . I be quite a Infidel about it , and shall never be convert . my dear old Traddles have try he hand at the same pursuit , but it be not in Traddles 's way . he be perfectly good - humour respect he failure , and remind I that he always do consider himself slow . he have occasional employment on the same newspaper , in get up the fact of dry subject , to be write about and embellish by
by more fertile mind . he be call to the bar ; and with admirable industry and self - denial have scrape another hundred pound together , to fee a Conveyancer whose chamber he attend . a great deal of very hot port wine be consume at he call ; and , consider the figure , I should think the must have make a profit by it . I have come out in another way . I have take with fear and trembl to authorship . I write a little something , in secret , and send it to a magazine , and it be publish in the magazine . since then , I have take heart to write a good many trifling piece . now , I be regularly pay for they . altogether , I be well off , when I tell my income on the finger of my left hand , I pass the third finger and take in the fourth to the middle joint . we have remove , from , to a pleasant little cottage very near the one I look at , when my enthusiasm first come on . my aunt , however ( who have sell the house at , to good advantage ) , be not go to remain here , but intend remove herself to a still more tiny cottage close at hand . what do this portend ? my marriage ? yes ! yes ! I be go to be marry to ! and have give they consent ; and if ever canary bird be in a flutter , they be . , self - charge with the superintendence of my darling 's wardrobe , be constantly cut out brown - paper cuirass , and differ in opinion from a highly respectable young man , with a long bundle , and a yard measure under he arm . a dressmaker , always stab in the breast with a needle and thread , board and lodg in the house ; and seem to I , eat , drink , or sleeping , never to take she thimble off . they make a lay - figure of my dear . they be always send for she to come and try something on . we can not be happy together for five minute in the evening , but some intrusive female knock at the door , and say , ' oh , if you please , , would you step upstairs ! ' and my aunt roam all over , to find out article of furniture for and I to look at . it would be better for they to buy the goods at once , without this ceremony of inspection ; for , when we go to see a kitchen fender and meat - screen , see a chinese house for , with little bell on the top , and prefer that . and it take a long time to accustom to he new residence , after we have buy it ; whenever he go in or out , he make all the little bell ring , and be horribly frightened . come up to make herself useful , and fall to work immediately . she department appear to be , to clean everything over and over again . she rub everything that can be rub , until it shine , like she own honest forehead , with perpetual friction . and now it be , that I begin to see she solitary brother pass through the dark street at night , and look , as he go , among the wander face . I never speak to he at such a hour . I know too well , as he grave figure pass onward , what he seek , and what he dread . why do look so important when he call upon I this afternoon in the Commons - where I still occasionally attend , for form 's sake , when I have time ? the realization of my boyish day - dream be at hand . I be go to take out the licence . it be a little document to do so much ; and contemplate it , as it lie upon my desk , half in admiration , half in awe . there be the name , in the sweet old visionary connexion , and ; and there , in the corner , be that , the , which be so benignantly interested in the various transaction of human life , look down upon we union ; and there be the of invoke a blessing on we in print , and do it as cheap as could possibly be expect . nevertheless , I be in a dream , a flustered , happy , hurry dream . I can not believe that it be go to be ; and yet I can not believe but that everyone I pass in the street , must have some kind of perception , that I be to be marry the day after tomorrow . the Surrogate know I , when I go down to be swear ; and dispose of I easily , as if there be a masonic understanding between we . Traddle be not at all want , but be in attendance as my general backer . ' I hope the next time you come here , my dear fellow ,' I say to , ' it will be on the same errand for yourself . and I hope it will be soon . ' ' thank you for you good wish , my dear Copperfield , ' he reply . 'I hope so too . it be a satisfaction to know that she will wait for I any length of time , and that she really be the dearest girl -' ' when be you to meet she at the coach ? ' I ask . ' at
at seven , ' say Traddles , look at he plain old silver watch - the very watch he once take a wheel out of , at school , to make a water-mill . ' that be about 's time , be it not ? ' 'a little earlier . she time be half past eight . ' 'I assure you , my dear boy , ' say Traddles , 'I be almost as pleased as if I be go to be marry myself , to think that this event be come to such a happy termination . and really the great friendship and consideration of personally associate with the joyful occasion , and invite she to be a bridesmaid in conjunction with , demand my warmest thanks . I be extremely sensible of it . ' I hear he , and shake hand with he ; and we talk , and walk , and dine , and so on ; but I do not believe it . nothing be real . Sophy arrive at the house of 's aunt , in due course . she have the most agreeable of face , - not absolutely beautiful , but extraordinarily pleasant , - and be one of the most genial , unaffected , frank , engage creature I have ever see . Traddle present she to we with great pride ; and rub he hand for ten minute by the clock , with every individual hair upon he head stand on tiptoe , when I congratulate he in a corner on he choice . I have bring Agnes from the coach , and she cheerful and beautiful face be among we for the second time . Agnes have a great liking for Traddle , and it be capital to see they meet , and to observe the glory of Traddles as he commend the dearest girl in the world to she acquaintance . still I do not believe it . we have a delightful evening , and be supremely happy ; but I do not believe it yet . I can not collect myself . I can not check off my happiness as it take place . I feel in a misty and unsettled kind of state ; as if I have get up very early in the morning a week or two ago , and have never be to be since . I can not make out when yesterday be . I seem to have be carry the licence about , in my pocket , many month . next day , too , when we all go in a flock to see the house - we house - Dora and mine - I be quite unable to regard myself as its master . I seem to be there , by permission of somebody else . I half expect the real master to come home presently , and say he be glad to see I . such a beautiful little house as it be , with everything so bright and new ; with the flower on the carpet look as if freshly gather , and the green leave on the paper as if they have just come out ; with the spotless muslin curtain , and the blushing rise -coloured furniture , and 's garden hat with the blue ribbon - do I remember , now , how I love she in such another hat when I first know she ! - already hang on its little peg ; the guitar - case quite at home on its heel in a corner ; and everybody tumbl over 's , which be much too big for the establishment . another happy evening , quite as unreal as all the rest of it , and I steal into the usual room before go away . be not there . I suppose they have not do try on yet . peep in , and tell I mysteriously that she will not be long . she be rather long , notwithstanding ; but by and by I hear a rustling at the door , and someone tap . I say , ' come in ! ' but someone tap again . I go to the door , wonder who it be ; there , I meet a pair of bright eye , and a blush face ; they be 's eye and face , and have dress she in tomorrow 's dress , bonnet and all , for I to see . I take my little wife to my heart ; and give a little scream because I tumble the bonnet , and laugh and cry at once , because I be so pleased ; and I believe it less than ever . ' do you think it pretty , ? ' say . pretty ! I should rather think I do . ' and be you sure you like I very much ? ' say . the topic be fraught with such danger to the bonnet , that give another little scream , and beg I to understand that be only to be look at , and on no account to be touch . so stand in a delightful state of confusion for a minute or two , to be admire ; and then take off she bonnet - look so natural without it ! - and run away with it in she hand ; and come dance down again in she own familiar dress , and ask if I have get a beautiful little wife , and whether he will forgive she for be married , and kneel down to make he stand upon the cookery - book , for the last time in she single life . I go home , more incredulous than ever , to a lodging that I have hard by ; and get up very early in the morning , to ride to the Highgate road and fetch
fetch my aunt . I have never see my aunt in such state . she be dress in lavender - colou silk , and have a white bonnet on , and be amazing . have dress she , and be there to look at I . be ready to go to church , intend to behold the ceremony from the gallery . , who be to give my darling to I at the altar , have have he hair curl . Traddle , whom I have take up by appointment at the turnpike , present a dazzling combination of cream colour and light blue ; and both he and have a general effect about they of be all glove . no doubt I see this , because I know it be so ; but I be astray , and seem to see nothing . nor do I believe anything whatever . still , as we drive along in a open carriage , this fairy marriage be real enough to fill I with a sort of wonder pity for the unfortunate people who have no part in it , but be swee out the shop , and go to they daily occupations . my aunt sit with my hand in hers all the way . when we stop a little way short of the church , to put down , whom we have bring on the box , she give it a squeeze , and I a kiss . ' bless you , ! my own boy never could be dearer . I think of poor dear baby this morning . ' ' so do I . and of all I owe to you , dear aunt . ' ' Tut , child ! ' say my aunt ; and give she hand in overflowing cordiality to , who then give he to , who then give he to I , who then give mine to Traddles , and then we come to the church door . the church be calm enough , I be sure ; but it might be a steam - power loom in full action , for any sedative effect it have on I . I be too far go for that . the rest be all a more or less incoherent dream . a dream of they come in with ; of the pew-opener arrange we , like a drill - sergeant , before the altar rail ; of my wondering , even then , why pew-opener must always be the most disagreeable female procurable , and whether there be any religious dread of a disastrous infection of good - humour which render it indispensable to set those vessel of vinegar upon the road to . of the clergyman and clerk appear ; of a few boatman and some other people stroll in ; of a ancient mariner behind I , strongly flavour the church with rum ; of the service begin in a deep voice , and we all be very attentive . of , who act as a semi-auxiliary bridesmaid , be the first to cry , and of she do homage ( as I take it ) to the memory of , in sob ; of apply a smell - bottle ; of take care of ; of my aunt endeavour to represent herself as a model of sternness , with tear roll down she face ; of little trembl very much , and make she response in fai nt whisper . of we knee down together , side by side ; of 's trembling less and less , but always clasp by the hand ; of the service be get through , quietly and gravely ; of we all look at each other in a state of smile and tear , when it be over ; of my young wife be hysterical in the vestry , and cry for she poor papa , she dear papa . of she soon cheer up again , and we sign the register all round . of my go into the gallery for to bring she to sign it ; of 's hug I in a corner , and tell I she see my own dear mother marry ; of its be over , and we go away . of my walking so proudly and lovingly down the aisle with my sweet wife upon my arm , through a mist of half - see people , pulpit , monument , pew , font , organ , and church window , in which there flutter faint air of association with my childish church at home , so long ago . of they whispering , as we pass , what a youthful couple we be , and what a pretty little wife she be . of we all be so merry and talkative in the carriage go back . of tell we that when she see Traddles ( whom I have entrust with the licence ) ask for it , she almost faint , have be convince that he would contrive to lose it , or to have he pocket pick . of Agnes laugh gaily ; and of be so fond of that she will not be separate from she , but still keep she hand . of there be a breakfast , with abundance of thing , pretty and substantial , to eat and drink , whereor I partake , as I should do in any other dream , without the least perception of they flavour ; eating and drinking , as I may say , nothing but love and marriage , and no more believe in the viand than in anything else . of my make a speech in the same dreamy fashion , without have a idea of what I want to say , beyond such as may be comprehend in the full conviction that I have not say it . of we be very
very sociably and simply happy ( always in a dream though ) ; and of 's have wedding cake , and it be not agree with he afterwards . of the pair of hired post-horse be ready , and of 's go away to change she dress . of my aunt and remain with we ; and we walk in the garden ; and my aunt , who have make quite a speech at breakfast touch 's aunt , be mightily amuse with herself , but a little proud of it too . of 's be ready , and of 's hover about she , loth to lose the pretty toy that have give she so much pleasant occupation . of 's make a long series of surprised discoveries that she have forget all sort of little thing ; and of everybody be run everywhere to fetch they . of they all closing about , when at last she begin to say good - bye , look , with they bright colour and ribbon , like a bed of flower . of my darling be almost smother among the flower , and come out , laugh and cry both together , to my jealous arm . have my want to carry ( who be to go along with we ) , and be say no , that she must carry he , or else he will think she do not like he any more , now she be marry , and will break he heart . of we go , arm in arm , and stop and look back , and say , ' if I have ever be cross or ungrateful to anybody , do not remember it ! ' and burst into tear . of she waive she little hand , and we go away once more . of she once more stop , and look back , and hurrie to , and give Agne , above all the other , she last kiss and farewell . we drive away together , and I awake from the dream . I believe it at last . it be my dear , dear , little wife beside I , whom I love so well ! ' be you happy now , you foolish boy ? ' say , ' and sure you do not repent ? ' I have stand aside to see the phantoms of those day go by I . they be gone , and I resume the journey of my story . chapter 44 we Housekeeping it be a strange condition of thing , the honeymoon be over , and the bridesmaid go home , when I find myself sit down in my own small house with ; quite throw out of employment , as I may say , in respect of the delicious old occupation of make love . it seem such a extraordinary thing to have always there . it be so unaccountable not to be oblige to go out to see she , not to have any occasion to be torment myself about she , not to have to write to she , not to be scheme and devise opportunity of be alone with she . sometimes of a evening , when I look up from my writing , and see she seat opposite , I would lean back in my chair , and think how queer it be that there we be , alone together as a matter of course - nobody 's business any more - all the romance of we engagement put away upon a shelf , to rust - no one to please but one another - one another to please , for life . when there be a debate , and I be keep out very late , it seem so strange to I , as I be walk home , to think that be at home ! it be such a wonderful thing , at first , to have she come softly down to talk to I as I eat my supper . it be such a stupendous thing to know for certain that she put she hair in papers . it be altogether such a astonish event to see she do it ! I doubt whether two young bird could have know less about keep house , than I and my pretty do . we have a servant , of course . she keep house for we . I have still a latent belief that she must have be 's daughter in disguise , we have such a awful time of it with . she name be . she nature be represent to we , when we engage she , as be feebly express in she name . she have a write character , as large as a proclamation ; and , accord to this document , could do everything of a domestic nature that ever I hear of , and a great many thing that I never do hear of . she be a woman in the prime of life ; of a severe countenance ; and subject ( particularly in the arm ) to a sort of perpetual measle or fiery rash . she have a cousin in the life - guard , with such long leg that he look like the afternoon shadow of somebody else . he shell - jacket be as much too little for he as he be too big for the premise . he make the cottage smaller than it need have be , by be so very much out of proportion to it . besides which , the walls be not thick , and , whenever he pass the evening at we house , we always know of it by hear one continual growl in the kitchen . we treasure be warrante sober and honest . I be therefore willing to believe that she be in a fit when we
we find she under the boiler ; and that the deficient tea - spoon be attributable to the dustman . but she prey upon we minds dreadfully . we feel we inexperience , and be unable to help ourselves . we should have be at she mercy , if she have have any ; but she be a remorseless woman , and have none . she be the cause of we first little quarrel . ' my dearest life ,' I say one day to , 'do you think have any idea of time ? ' ' why , ? ' inquire , look up , innocently , from she drawing . ' my love , because it be five , and we be to have dine at four . ' glance wistfully at the clock , and hint that she think it be too fast . 'On the contrary , my love , ' say I , refer to my watch , ' it be a few minute too slow . ' my little wife come and sit upon my knee , to coax I to be quiet , and draw a line with she pencil down the middle of my nose ; but I could not dine off that , though it be very agreeable . ' do not you think , my dear , ' say I , ' it would be better for you to remonstrate with ? ' ' oh no , please ! I could not , ! ' say . ' why not , my love ? ' I gently ask . 'Oh , because I be such a little goose , ' say , ' and she know I be ! ' I think this sentiment so incompatible with the establishment of any system of check on , that I frown a little . ' oh , what ugly wrinkle in my bad boy 's forehead ! ' say , and still be on my knee , she trace they with she pencil ; put it to she rosy lip to make it mark blacker , and work at my forehead with a quaint little mockery of be industrious , that quite delighte I in spite of myself . ' there be a good child , ' say , ' it make it be face so much prettier to laugh . ' ' but , my love , ' say I . ' no , no ! please ! ' cry , with a kiss , 'do not be a naughty ! do not be serious ! ' 'my precious wife , ' say I , 'we must be serious sometimes . come ! sit down on this chair , close beside I ! give I the pencil ! there ! now let we talk sensibly . you know , dear ' ; what a little hand it be to hold , and what a tiny wedding - ring it be to see ! ' you know , my love , it be not exactly comfortable to have to go out without one 's dinner . now , be it ? ' and - and - no ! ' reply , faintly . ' my love , how you tremble ! ' ' because I know you be go to scold I , ' exclaim , in a piteous voice . ' my sweet , I be only go to reason . ' 'Oh , but reason be worse than scolding ! ' exclaim , in despair . 'I do not marry to be reaso with . if you mean to reason with such a poor little thing as I be , you ought to have tell I so , you cruel boy ! ' I try to pacify , but she turn away she face , and shake she curl from side to side , and say , ' you cruel , cruel boy ! ' so many time , that I really do not exactly know what to do : so I take a few turn up and down the room in my uncertainty , and come back again . ' , my darling ! ' ' no , I be not you darling . because you must be sorry that you marry I , or else you would not reason with I ! ' return . I feel so injured by the inconsequential nature of this charge , that it give I courage to be grave . ' now , my own , ' say I , ' you be very childish , and be talk nonsense . you must remember , I be sure , that I be obliged to go out yesterday when dinner be half over ; and that , the day before , I be make quite unwell by be obliged to eat underdone veal in a hurry ; today , I do not dine at all - and I be afraid to say how long we wait for breakfast - and then the water do not boil . I do not mean to reproach you , my dear , but this be not comfortable . ' 'Oh , you cruel , cruel boy , to say I be a disagreeable wife ! ' cry . ' now , my dear , you must know that I never say that ! ' ' you say , I be not comfortable ! ' cry . 'I say the housekeeping be not comfortable ! ' ' it be exactly the same thing ! ' cry . and she evidently think so , for she weep most grievously . I take another turn across the room , full of love for my pretty wife , and distract by self - accusatory inclination to knock my head against the door . I sit down again , and say : 'I be not blame you , . we have both a
a great deal to learn . I be only try to show you , my dear , that you must - you really must ' ( I be resolve not to give this up ) - ' accustom yourself to look after . likewise to act a little for yourself , and I . ' 'I wonder , I do , at you making such ungrateful speech , ' sob . ' when you know that the other day , when you say you would like a little bit of fish , I go out myself , mile and mile , and order it , to surprise you . ' ' and it be very kind of you , my own darling , ' say I . 'I feel it so much that I would not on any account have even mention that you buy a - which be too much for two . or that it cost one pound six - which be more than we can afford . ' ' you enjoy it very much , ' sob . ' and you say I be a mouse . ' ' and I will say so again , my love ,' I return , 'a thousand time ! ' but I have wound 's soft little heart , and she be not to be comforte . she be so pathetic in she sobb and bewail , that I feel as if I have say I do not know what to hurt she . I be oblige to hurry away ; I be keep out late ; and I feel all night such pang of remorse as make I miserable . I have the conscience of a assassin , and be haunt by a vague sense of enormous wickedness . it be two or three hour past midnight when I get home . I find my aunt , in we house , sit up for I . ' be anything the matter , aunt ? ' say I , alarm . ' nothing , , ' she reply . ' sit down , sit down . have be rather out of spirit , and I have be keep she company . that be all . ' I lean my head upon my hand ; and feel more sorry and downcast , as I sit look at the fire , than I could have suppose possible so soon after the fulfilment of my brightest hope . as I sit think , I happen to meet my aunt 's eye , which be rest on my face . there be a anxious expression in they , but it clear directly . 'I assure you , aunt , ' say I , 'I have be quite unhappy myself all night , to think of 's be so . but I have no other intention than to speak to she tenderly and lovingly about we home - affair . ' my aunt nod encouragement . ' you must have patience , , ' say she . ' of course . know I do not mean to be unreasonable , aunt ! ' ' no , no , ' say my aunt . ' but be a very tender little blossom , and the wind must be gentle with she . ' I thank my good aunt , in my heart , for she tenderness towards my wife ; and I be sure that she know I do . ' do not you think , aunt , ' say I , after some further contemplation of the fire , ' that you could advise and counsel a little , for we mutual advantage , now and then ? ' ' trot , ' return my aunt , with some emotion , 'no ! do not ask I such a thing . ' she tone be so very earnest that I raise my eye in surprise . 'I look back on my life , child , ' say my aunt , ' and I think of some who be in they grave , with whom I might have be on kinder term . if I judge harshly of other people 's mistakes in marriage , it may have be because I have bitter reason to judge harshly of my own . let that pass . I have be a grumpy , frumpy , wayward sort of a woman , a good many year . I be still , and I always shall be . but you and I have do one another some good , trot , - at all event , you have do I good , my dear ; and division must not come between we , at this time of day . ' ' division between we ! ' cry I . ' child , child ! ' say my aunt , smooth she dress , ' how soon it might come between we , or how unhappy I might make we , if I meddle in anything , a prophet could not say . I want we pet to like I , and be as gay as a butterfly . remember you own home , in that second marriage ; and never do both I and she the injury you have hint at ! ' I comprehend , at once , that my aunt be right ; and I comprehend the full extent of she generous feeling towards my dear wife . ' these be early day , , ' she pursue , ' and be not build in a day , nor in a year . you have choose freely for yourself ' ; a cloud pass over she face for a moment , I think ; ' and you have choose a very pretty and a very affectionate creature . it will be you duty , and it will be you pleasure too - of course I know that ; I
I be not deliver a lecture - to estimate she ( as you choose she ) by the quality she have , and not by the quality she may not have . the latter you must develop in she , if you can . and if you cannot , child ,' here my aunt rub she nose , ' you must just accustom yourself to do without th'ey . but remember , my dear , you future be between you two . no one can assist you ; you be to work it out for yourselves . this be marriage , trot ; and bless you both , in it , for a pair of babe in the wood as you be ! ' my aunt say this in a sprightly way , and give I a kiss to ratify the blessing . ' now , ' say she , ' light my little lantern , and see I into my bandbox by the garden path ' ; for there be a communication between we cottage in that direction . ' 's love to , when you come back ; and whatever you do , trot , never dream of set up as a scarecrow , for if I ever see she in the glass , she be quite grim enough and gaunt enough in she private capacity ! ' with this my aunt tie she head up in a handkerchief , with which she be accustom to make a bundle of it on such occasion ; and I escort she home . as she stand in she garden , hold up she little lantern to light I back , I think she observation of I have a anxious air again ; but I be too much occupy in pondering on what she have say , and too much impressed - for the first time , in reality - by the conviction that and I have indeed to work out we future for ourselves , and that no one could assist we , to take much notice of it . come steal down in she little slipper , to meet I , now that I be alone ; and cry upon my shoulder , and say I have be hard - hear and she have be naughty ; and I say much the same thing in effect , I believe ; and we make it up , and agree that we first little difference be to be we last , and that we be never to have another if we liv a hundred year . the next domestic trial we go through , be the of . 's cousin desert into we coal - hole , and be bring out , to we great amazement , by a piquet of he companion in arm , who take he away handcuff in a procession that cover we front - garden with ignominy . this nerve I to get rid of , who go so mildly , on receipt of wage , that I be surprised , until I find out about the tea - spoon , and also about the little sum she have borrowed in my name of the tradespeople without authority . after a interval of - the oldest inhabitant of , I believe , who go out charing , but be too feeble to execute she conception of that art - we find another treasure , who be one of the most amiable of woman , but who generally make a point of fall either up or down the kitchen stair with the tray , and almost plunge into the parlour , as into a bath , with the tea - thing . the ravage commit by this unfortunate , render she dismissal necessary , she be succeed ( with interval of ) by a long line of Incapable ; terminate in a young person of genteel appearance , who go to in 's bonnet . after whom I remember nothing but a average equality of failure . everybody we have anything to do with seem to cheat we . we appearance in a shop be a signal for the damaged goods to be bring out immediately . if we buy a lobster , it be full of water . all we meat turn out to be tough , and there be hardly any crust to we loave . in search of the principle on which joint ought to be roast , to be roast enough , and not too much , I myself refer to the , and find it there establish as the allowance of a quarter of a hour to every pound , and say a quarter over . but the principle always fail we by some curiious fatality , and we never could hit any medium between redness and cinder . I have reason to believe that in accomplish these failure we incur a far greater expense than if we have achieve a series of triumph . it appear to I , on look over the tradesman 's book , as if we might have keep the basement storey pave with butter , such be the extensive scale of we consumption of that article . I do not know whether the Excise return of the period may have exhibit any increase in the demand for pepper ; but if we performance do not affect the market , I should say several family must have leave off use it . and the most wonderful fact of all be , that we never have anything in the house . as to the washerwoman pawn the clothes , and come in a state of penitent intoxication to apologize , I suppose that might have happen several time to anybody . also the chimney on fire , the parish engine , and perjury on the part of the . but I apprehend that we be personally fortunate in engage
engage a servant with a taste for cordial , who swell we run account for porter at the public - house by such inexplicable item as ' quartern rum shrub ( ) ' ; - quartern gin and clove ( ) ' ; ' rum and peppermint ( . ) ' - the parentheses always refer to , who be suppose , it appear on explanation , to have imbibe the whole of these refreshment . one of we first feat in the housekeeping way be a little dinner to Traddles . I meet he in town , and ask he to walk out with I that afternoon . he readily consent , I write to , say I would bring he home . it be pleasant weather , and on the road we make my domestic happiness the theme of conversation . Traddle be very full of it ; and say , that , picture himself with such a home , and wait and prepare for he , he could think of nothing want to complete he bliss . I could not have wish for a prettier little wife at the opposite end of the table , but I certainly could have wish , when we sit down , for a little more room . I do not know how it be , but though there be only two of we , we be at once always cramp for room , and yet have always room enough to lose everything in . I suspect it may have be because nothing have a place of its own , except 's pagoday , which invariably block up the main thoroughfare . on the present occasion , be so hem in by the pagoday and the guitar - case , and 's flower - painting , and my writing - table , that I have serious doubt of the possibility of he use he knife and fork ; but he protest , with he own good - humour , ' Ocean of room , ! I assure you , ! ' there be another thing I could have wish , namely , that have never be encourage to walk about the tablecloth during dinner . I begin to think there be something disorderly in he be there at all , even if he have not be in the habit of put he foot in the salt or the melte butter . on this occasion he seem to think he be introduce expressly to keep Traddle at bay ; and he bark at my old friend , and make short run at he plate , with such undaunted pertinacity , that he may be say to have engross the conversation . however , as I know how tender - hear my dear be , and how sensitive she would be to any slight upon she favourite , I hint no objection . for similar reason i make no allusion to the skirmish plate upon the floor ; or to the disreputable appearance of the castor , which be all at six and seven , and look drunk ; or to the further blockade of Traddle by wander vegetable dish and jug . I could not help wonder in my own mind , as I contemplate the boiled leg of mutton before I , previous to carve it , how it come to pass that we joint of meat be of such extraordinary shape - and whether we butcher contract for all the deformed sheep that come into the world ; but I keep my reflection to myself . ' my love , ' say I to , ' what have you get in that dish ? ' I could not imagine why have be make temp little face at I , as if she want to kiss I . ' Oyster , dear , ' say , timidly . ' be that you think ? ' say I , delight . 'ye - yes , , ' say . ' there never be a happier one ! ' I exclaim , lay down the carving - knife and fork . ' there be nothing Traddles like so much ! ' 'ye - yes , , ' say , ' and so I buy a beautiful little barrel of they , and the man say they be very good . but I - I be afraid there be something the matter with they . they do not seem right . ' here shook she head , and diamonds twinkle in she eye . ' they be only open in both shell , ' say I . ' take the top one off , my love . ' ' but it will not come off ! ' say , try very hard , and look very much distressed . ' do you know , , ' say Traddles , cheerfully examine the dish , ' I think it be in consequence - they be capital oyster , but I think it be in consequence - of they never have be open . ' they never have be open ; and we have no oyster - knife - and could not have use they if we have ; so we look at the oyster and eat the mutton . at least we eat as much of it as be do , and make up with caper . if I have permit he , I be satisfied that Traddle would have make a perfect savage of himself , and eat a plateful of raw meat , to express enjoyment of the repast ; but I would hear of no such immolation on the altar of friendship , and we have a course of bacon instead ; there happen , by good fortune , to be cold bacon in the larder . my poor little wife be in such affliction when she think I should be annoyed , and
and in such a state of joy when she find I be not , that the discomfiture I have subdue , very soon vanish , and we pass a happy evening ; sit with she arm on my chair while Traddles and I discuss a glass of wine , and take every opportunity of whispering in my ear that it be so good of I not to be a cruel , cross old boy . by and by she make tea for we ; which it be so pretty to see she do , as if she be busy herself with a set of doll 's tea - thing , that I be not particular about the quality of the beverage . then Traddles and I play a game or two at cribbage ; and singe to the guitar the while , it seem to I as if we courtship and marriage be a tender dream of mine , and the night when I first listen to she voice be not yet over . when Traddles go away , and I come back into the parlour from see he out , my wife plan she chair close to mine , and sit down by my side . 'I be very sorry , ' she say . ' will you try to teach I , ? ' 'I must teach myself first , , ' say I . 'I be as bad as you , love . ' 'Ah ! but you can learn , ' she return ; 'and you be a clever , clever man ! ' ' Nonsense , mouse ! ' say I . 'I wish , ' resume my wife , after a long silence , ' that I could have go down into the country for a whole year , and live with ! ' she hand be clasp upon my shoulder , and she ching rest on they , and she blue eye look quietly into mine . ' why so ? ' I ask . 'I think she might have improve I , and I think I might have learn from she , ' say . ' all in good time , my love . Agnes have have she father to take care of for these many year , you should remember . even when she be quite a child , she be the Agne whom we know , ' say I . ' will you call I a name I want you to call I ? ' inquire , without move . ' what be it ? ' I ask with a smile . ' it be a stupid name , ' she say , shak she curl for a moment . ' child - wife . ' I laughingly ask my child - wife what she fancy be in desire to be so call . she answer without move , otherwise than as the arm I twin about she may have bring she blue eye nearer to I : 'I do not mean , you silly fellow , that you should use the name instead of . I only mean that you should think of I that way . when you be go to be angry with I , say to yourself , " it be only my child - wife ! " when I be very disappointing , say , " I know , a long time ago , that she would make but a child - wife ! " when you miss what I should like to be , and I think can never be , say , " still my foolish child - wife love I ! " for indeed I do . ' I have not be serious with she ; have no idea until now , that she be serious herself . but she affectionate nature be so happy in what I now say to she with my whole heart , that she face become a laughing one before she glittering eye be dry . she be soon my child - wife indeed ; sit down on the floor outside the chinese House , ring all the little bell one after another , to punish for he recent bad behaviour ; while lay blink in the doorway with he head out , even too lazy to be tease . this appeal of 's make a strong impression on I . I look back on the time I write of ; I invoke the innocent figure that I dearly love , to come out from the mist and shadows of the past , and turn it be gentle head towards I once again ; and I can still declare that this one little speech be constantly in my memory . I may not have use it to the best account ; I be young and inexperienced ; but I never turn a deaf ear to its artless pleading . tell I , shortly afterwards , that she be go to be a wonderful housekeeper . accordingly , she polish the tablet , point the pencil , buy a immense account - book , carefully stitch up with a needle and thread all the leave of the which have torn , and make quite a desperate little attempt 'too be good ' , as she call it . but the figure have the old obstinate propensity - they would not add up . when she have enter two or three laborious item in the account - book , would walk over the page , wag he tail , and smear they all out . she own little right - hand middle finger get steep to the very bone in ink ; and I think that be the only decide result obtain . sometimes , of a evening , when I be at home and at work - for I write a good deal now , and be begin in
in a small way to be know as a writer - I would lay down my pen , and watch my child - wife try to be good . first of all , she would bring out the immense account - book , and lay it down upon the table , with a deep sigh . then she would open it at the place where have make it illegible last night , and call , to look at he misdeed . this would occasion a diversion in 's favour , and some inking of he nose , perhaps , as a penalty . then she would tell to lie down on the table instantly , ' like a lion ' - which be one of he trick , though I can not say the likeness be strike - and , if he be in a obedient humour , he would obey . then she would take up a pen , and begin to write , and find a hair in it . then she would take up another pen , and begin to write , and find that it splutter . then she would take up another pen , and begin to write , and say in a low voice , ' oh , it be a talking pen , and will disturb ! ' and then she would give it up as a bad job , and put the account - book away , after pretend to crush the lion with it . or , if she be in a very sedate and serious state of mind , she would sit down with the tablet , and a little basket of bill and other document , which look more like curl - papers than anything else , and endeavou to get some result out of they . after severely compare one with another , and make entry on the tablet , and blott they out , and count all the finger of she left hand over and over again , backward and forward , she would be so vex and discourage , and would look so unhappy , that it give I pain to see she bright face cloude - and for I ! - and I would go softly to she , and say : ' what be the matter , ? ' would look up hopelessly , and reply , ' they will not come right . they make my head ache so . and they will not do anything I want ! ' then I would say , ' now let we try together . let I show you , ' then I would commence a practical demonstration , to which would pay profound attention , perhaps for five minute ; when she would begin to be dreadfully tired , and would lighten the subject by curl my hair , or try the effect of my face with my shirt - collar turn down . if I tacitly check this playfulness , and persist , she would look so scared and disconsolate , as she become more and more bewildered , that the remembrance of she natural gaiety when I first stray into she path , and of she be my child - wife , would come reproachfully upon I ; and I would lay the pencil down , and call for the guitar . I have a great deal of work to do , and have many anxiety , but the same consideration make I keep they to myself . I be far from sure , now , that it be right to do this , but I do it for my child - wife 's sake . I search my breast , and I commit its secret , if I know they , without any reservation to this paper . the old unhappy loss or want of something have , I be conscious , some place in my heart ; but not to the embitterment of my life . when I walk alone in the fine weather , and think of the summer day when all the air have be fill with my boyish enchantment , I do miss something of the realization of my dream ; but I think it be a softened glory of the , which nothing could have throw upon the present time . I do feel , sometimes , for a little while , that I could have wish my wife have be my counsellor ; have have more character and purpose , to sustain I and improve I by ; have be endow with power to fill up the void which somewhere seem to be about I ; but I feel as if this be a unearthly consummation of my happiness , that never have be mean to be , and never could have be . I be a boyish husband as to year . I have know the softening influence of no other sorrow or experience than those record in these leave . if I do any wrong , as I may have do much , I do it in mistaken love , and in my want of wisdom . I write the exact truth . it would avail I nothing to extenuate it now . thus it be that I take upon myself the toil and care of we life , and have no partner in they . we live much as before , in reference to we scrambling household arrangement ; but I have get used to those , and I be pleased to see be seldom vex now . she be bright and cheerful in the old childish way , love I dearly , and be happy with she old trifle . when the debate be heavy - I mean as to length , not quality , for in the last respect they be not often otherwise - and I go home late , would
would never rest when she hear my footstep , but would always come downstairs to meet I . when my evening be unoccupy by the pursuit for which i have qualifie myself with so much pain , and I be engage in writing at home , she would sit quietly near I , however late the hour , and be so mute , that I would often think she have drop asleep . but generally , when I raise my head , I see she blue eye look at I with the quiet attention of which I have already speak . 'Oh , what a weary boy ! ' say one night , when I meet she eye as I be shut up my desk . ' what a weary girl ! ' say I . ' that be more to the purpose . you must go to be another time , my love . it be far too late for you . ' ' no , do not send I to bed ! ' plead , come to my side . ' pray , do not do that ! ' ' ! ' to my amazement she be sobb on my neck . ' not well , my dear ! not happy ! ' ' yes ! quite well , and very happy ! ' say . ' but say you will let I stop , and see you write . ' ' why , what a sight for such bright eye at midnight ! ' I reply . ' be they bright , though ? ' return , laugh . 'I be so glad they be bright . ' ' ! ' say I . but it be not vanity ; it be only harmless delight in my admiration . I know that very well , before she tell I so . ' if you think they pretty , say I may always stop , and see you write ! ' say . ' do you think they pretty ? ' ' very pretty . ' ' then let I always stop and see you write . ' 'I be afraid that will not improve they brightness , ' ' yes , it will ! because , you clever boy , you will not forget I then , while you be full of silent fancie . will you mind it , if I say something very , very silly ? - more than usual ? ' inquire , pee over my shoulder into my face . ' what wonderful thing be that ? ' say I . ' please let I hold the pens , ' say . 'I want to have something to do with all those many hour when you be so industrious . may I hold the pens ? ' the remembrance of she pretty joy when I say yes , bring tear into my eye . the next time I sit down to write , and regularly afterwards , she sit in she old place , with a spare bundle of pens at she side . she triumph in this connexion with my work , and she delight when I want a new pen - which I very often feigned to do - suggest to I a new way of please my child - wife . I occasionally make a pretence of want a page or two of manuscript copy . then be in she glory . the preparations she make for this great work , the apron she put on , the bib she borrowed from the kitchen to keep off the ink , the time she take , the innumerable stoppage she make to have a laugh with as if he understand it all , she conviction that she work be incomplete unless she sign she name at the end , and the way in which she would bring it to I , like a school - copy , and then , when I praise it , clasp I round the neck , be touch recollection to I , simple as they might appear to other man . she take possession of the key soon after this , and go jingl about the house with the whole bunch in a little basket , tie to she slender waist . I seldom find that the place to which they belong be lock , or that they be of any use except as a plaything for - but be pleased , and that please I . she be quite satisfie that a good deal be effect by this make - belief of housekeeping ; and be as merry as if we have be keep a baby - house , for a joke . so we go on . be hardly less affectionate to my aunt than to I , and often tell she of the time when she be afraid she be 'a cross old thing ' . I never see my aunt unbend more systematically to anyone . she court , though never respond ; listen , day after day , to the guitar , though I be afraid she have no taste for music ; never attack the Incapable , though the temptation must have be severe ; go wonderful distance on foot to purchase , as surprise , any trifle that she find out want ; and never come in by the garden , and miss she from the room , but she would call out , at the foot of the stair , in a voice that sound cheerfully all over the house : ' 's ? ' chapter 45 Fulfils my aunt 's prediction it be some time now , since I have leave the Doctor . live in he neighbourhood , I see he frequently ; and we all go to he house on two or three occasion to dinner or tea . the be in permanent quarter under
under the 's roof . she be exactly the same as ever , and the same immortal butterfly hover over she cap . like some other mother , whom I have know in the course of my life , be far more fond of pleasure than she daughter be . she require a great deal of amusement , and , like a deep old soldier , pretend , in consult she own inclination , to be devote herself to she child . the Doctor 's desire that should be entertain , be therefore particularly acceptable to this excellent parent ; who express unqualified approval of he discretion . I have no doubt , indeed , that she probe the Doctor 's wound without know it . mean nothing but a certain matured frivolity and selfishness , not always inseparable from full - blown year , I think she confirm he in he fear that he be a constraint upon he young wife , and that there be no congeniality of feeling between they , by so strongly commend he design of lighten the load of she life . ' my dear soul , ' she say to he one day when I be present , ' you know there be no doubt it would be a little pokey for to be always shut up here . ' the nod he benevolent head . ' when she come to she mother 's age , ' say , with a flourish of she fan , ' then it will be another thing . you might put I into a , with genteel society and a rubber , and I should never care to come out . but I be not , you know ; and be not she mother . ' ' surely , surely , ' say the Doctor . ' you be the best of creature - no , I beg you pardon ! ' for the Doctor make a gesture of deprecation , ' I must say before you face , as I always say behind you back , you be the best of creature ; but of course you do not - now do you ? - enter into the same pursuits and fancie as ? ' ' no , ' say the , in a sorrowful tone . ' no , of course not , ' retort the . ' take you dictionary , for example . what a useful work a be ! what a necessary work ! the meaning of word ! without , or somebody of that sort , we might have be at this present moment call a italian - iron , a bedstead . but we can not expect a dictionary - especially when it be make - to interest , can we ? ' the shook he head . ' and that be why I so much approve , ' say , tap he on the shoulder with she shut - up fan , 'or you thoughtfulness . it show that you do not expect , as many elderly people do expect , old head on young shoulders . you have study 's character , and you understand it . that be what I find so charming ! ' even the calm and patient face of strong express some little sense of pain , I think , under the infliction of these compliment . ' therefore , my dear doctor , ' say the , give he several affectionate tap , ' you may command I , at all time and season . now , do understand that I be entirely at you service . I be ready to go with to operas , concert , exhibition , all kind of place ; and you shall never find that I be tired . , my dear doctor , before every consideration in the universe ! ' she be as good as she word . she be one of those people who can bear a great deal of pleasure , and she never flinch in she perseverance in the cause . she seldom get hold of the newspaper ( which she settle herself down in the softest chair in the house to read through a eye - glass , every day , for two hour ) , but she find out something that she be certain would like to see . it be in vain for to protest that she be weary of such thing . she mother 's remonstrance always be , ' now , my dear Annie , I be sure you know better ; and I must tell you , my love , that you be not make a proper return for the kindness of . ' this be usually say in the Doctor 's presence , and appear to I to constitute 's principal inducement for withdraw she objection when she make any . but in general she resign herself to she mother , and go where the would . it rarely happen now that accompany they . sometimes my aunt and be invite to do so , and accept the invitation . sometimes only be ask . the time have be , when I should have be uneasy in she go ; but reflection on what have pass that former night in the 's study , have make a change in my mistrust . I believe that the Doctor be right , and I have no worse suspicion . my aunt rub she nose sometimes when she happen to be alone with I , and say she could not make it out ; she wish they be happier ; she do not think we military friend ( so she always call the ) mende the matter at all . my aunt further express she opinion , ' that if we military friend would cut off those butterfly , and give th'ey to the chimney - sweeper for -
- day , it would look like the beginning of something sensible on she part . ' but she abide reliance be on . that man have evidently a idea in he head , she say ; and if he could only once pen it up into a corner , which be he great difficulty , he would distinguish himself in some extraordinary manner . Unconscious of this prediction , continue to occupy precisely the same ground in reference to the and to . he seem neither to advance nor to recede . he appear to have settle into he original foundation , like a building ; and I must confess that my faith in he ever move , be not much greater than if he have be a building . but one night , when I have be marry some month , put he head into the parlour , where I be write alone ( have go out with my aunt to take tea with the two little bird ) , and say , with a significant cough : ' you could not speak to I without inconvenience yourself , Trotwood , I be afraid ? ' ' certainly , , ' say I ; ' come in ! ' ' Trotwood , ' say , lay he finger on the side of he nose , after he have shaken hand with I . ' before I sit down , I wish to make a observation . you know you aunt ? ' 'a little ,' I reply . ' she be the most wonderful woman in the world , sir ! ' after the delivery of this communication , which he shoot out of himself as if he be load with it , sit down with greater gravity than usual , and look at I . ' now , boy , ' say , 'I be go to put a question to you . ' 'as many as you please , ' say I . ' what do you consider I , sir ? ' ask , fold he arm . 'a dear old friend , ' say I . ' thank you , Trotwood , ' return , laugh , and reach across in high glee to shake hand with I . ' but I mean , boy , ' resume he gravity , ' what do you consider I in this respect ? ' touch he forehead . I be puzzl how to answer , but he help I with a word . ' ? ' say . ' well ,' I reply , dubiously . ' Rather so . ' ' exactly ! ' cry , who seem quite enchant by my reply . ' that be , , when they take some of the trouble out of you - know - who be head , and put it you know where , there be a - ' make he two hand revolve very fast about each other a great number of time , and then bring they into collision , and roll they over and over one another , to express confusion . ' there be that sort of thing do to I somehow . Eh ? ' I nod at he , and he nod back again . ' in short , boy , ' say , drop he voice to a whisper , 'I be simple . ' I would have qualifie that conclusion , but he stop I . ' yes , I be ! she pretend I be not . she will not hear of it ; but I be . I know I be . if she have not stand my friend , sir , I should have be shut up , to lead a dismal life these many year . but I will provide for she ! I never spend the copy money . I put it in a box . I have make a will . I will leave it all to she . she shall be rich - noble ! ' take out he pocket - handkerchief , and wip he eye . he then fold it up with great care , press it smooth between he two hand , put it in he pocket , and seem to put my aunt away with it . ' now you be a scholar , , ' say . ' you be a fine scholar . you know what a learn man , what a great man , the Doctor be . you know what honou he have always do I . not proud in he wisdom . humble , humble - condescende even to poor , who be simple and know nothing . I have send he name up , on a scrap of paper , to the kite , along the string , when it have be in the sky , among the lark . the kite have be glad to receive it , sir , and the sky have be brighter with it . ' I delighte he by say , most heartily , that the Doctor be deserve of we best respect and highest esteem . ' and he beautiful wife be a star , ' say . 'A shin star . I have see she shine , sir . but ,' bring he chair nearer , and lay one hand upon my knee - ' cloud , sir - cloud . ' I answer the solicitude which he face express , by convey the same expression into my own , and shake my head . ' what cloud ? ' say . he look so wistfully into my face , and be so anxious to understand , that I take great pain to answer he slowly and distinctly , as I might have enter on a explanation to a child . ' there be some unfortunate division between they ,' I reply . '
' some unhappy cause of separation . a secret . it may be inseparable from the discrepancy in they year . it may have grow up out of almost nothing . ' , who have tell off every sentence with a thoughtful nod , pause when I have do , and sit consider , with he eye upon my face , and he hand upon my knee . ' not angry with she , ? ' he say , after some time . ' no . devote to she . ' ' then , I have get it , boy ! ' say . the sudden exultation with which he slap I on the knee , and lean back in he chair , with he eyebrow lift up as high as he could possibly lift they , make I think he farther out of he wit than ever . he become as suddenly grave again , and lean forward as before , say - first respectfully take out he pocket -handkerchief , as if it really do represent my aunt : ' most wonderful woman in the world , . why have she do nothing to set thing right ? ' ' Too delicate and difficul a subject for such interference ,' I reply . ' scholar , ' say , touch I with he finger . ' why have he do nothing ? ' ' for the same reason ,' I return . ' then , I have get it , boy ! ' say . and he stand up before I , more exultingly than before , nodd he head , and strike himself repeatedly upon the breast , until one might have suppose that he have nearly nod and strike all the breath out of he body . 'a poor fellow with a craze , sir , ' say , , a weak - minded person - present company , you know ! ' strike himself again , ' may do what wonderful people may not do . I will bring they together , boy . I will try . they will not blame I . they will not object to I . they will not mind what I do , if it be wrong . I be only . and who mind ? 's nobody ! Whoo ! ' he blow a slight , contemptuous breath , as if he blow himself away . it be fortunate he have proceed so far with he mystery , for we hear the coach stop at the little garden gate , which bring my aunt and home . ' not a word , boy ! ' he pursue in a whisper ; ' leave all the blame with - simple Dick - mad Dick . I have be think , sir , for some time , that I be get it , and now I have get it . after what you have say to I , I be sure I have get it . all right ! ' not another word do utter on the subject ; but he make a very telegraph of himself for the next half - hour ( to the great disturbance of my aunt 's mind ) , to enjoin inviolable secrecy on I . to my surprise , I hear no more about it for some two or three week , though I be sufficiently interested in the result of he endeavour ; descry a strange gleam of good sense - I say nothing of good feeling , for that he always exhibit - in the conclusion to which he have come . at last I begin to believe , that , in the flighty and unsettled state of he mind , he have either forgote he intention or abandon it . one fair evening , when be not inclin to go out , my aunt and I stroll up to the Doctor 's cottage . it be autumn , when there be no debate to vex the evening air ; and I remember how the leave smelt like we garden at as we trod they under foot , and how the old , unhappy feeling , seem to go by , on the sighing wind . it be twilight when we reach the cottage . be just come out of the garden , where yet linger , busy with he knife , help the gardener to point some stake . the Doctor be engage with someone in he study ; but the visitor would be go directly , say , and beg we to remain and see he . we go into the drawing - room with she , and sit down by the darkening window . there be never any ceremony about the visit of such old friend and neighbour as we be . we have not sit here many minute , when , who usually contrive to be in a fuss about something , come bustling in , with she newspaper in she hand , and say , out of breath , ' my goodness gracious , , why do not you tell I there be someone in the study ! ' 'my dear mama , ' she quietly return , ' how could I know that you desire the information ? ' ' desire the information ! ' say , sinke on the sofa . 'I never have such a turn in all my life ! ' ' have you be to the study , then , ? ' ask . ' be to the study , my dear ! ' she return emphatically . ' indeed I have ! I come upon the amiable creature - if you will imagine my feeling , and - in the act of make he will . ' she daughter look round from the window quickly . ' in the act , my dear , ' repeat , spread the newspaper on
on she lap like a table - cloth , and pat she hand upon it , 'or make he last Will and testament . the foresight and affection of the dear ! I must tell you how it be . I really must , in justice to the darling - for he be nothing less ! - tell you how it be . perhaps you know , , that there be never a candle light in this house , until one 's eye be literally fal out of one 's head with be stretch to read the paper . and that there be not a chair in this house , in which a paper can be what I call , read , except one in the study . this take I to the study , where I see a light . I open the door . in company with the dear doctor be two professional people , evidently connect with the law , and they be all three stand at the table : the darling doctor pen in hand . " this simply express then , " say the - , my love , attend to the very word - " this simply express then , gentlemen , the confidence I have in , and give she all unconditionally ? " one of the professional people reply , " and give she all unconditionally . " upon that , with the natural feeling of a mother , I say , " Good , I beg you pardon ! " fall over the door - step , and come away through the little back passage where the pantry be . ' open the window , and go out into the verandah , where she stand lean against a pillar . ' but now be not it , , be not it , , invigorat , ' say , mechanically follow she with she eye , 'to find a man at 's time of life , with the strength of mind to do this kind of thing ? it only show how right I be . I say to , when pay a very flattering visit to myself , and make she the subject of a declaration and a offer , I say , " my dear , there be no doubt whatever , in my opinion , with reference to a suitable provision for you , that will do more than he bind himself to do . "' here the bell ring , and we hear the sound of the visitor 's foot as they go out . ' it be all over , no doubt , ' say the , after listen ; ' the dear creature have sign , seal , and deliver , and he mind 's at rest . well it may be ! what a mind ! , my love , I be go to the study with my paper , for I be a poor creature without news . , , pray come and see the Doctor . ' I be conscious of 's stand in the shadow of the room , shut up he knife , when we accompany she to the study ; and of my aunt 's rub she nose violently , by the way , as a mild vent for she intolerance of we military friend ; but who get first into the study , or how settle herself in a moment in she easy - chair , or how my aunt and I come to be leave together near the door ( unless she eye be quicker than mine , and she hold I back ) , I have forget , if I ever know . but this I know , - that we see the Doctor before he see we , sit at he table , among the folio volume in which he delight , rest he head calmly on he hand . that , in the same moment , we see Strong glide in , pale and trembling . that support she on he arm . that he lay he other hand upon the Doctor 's arm , cause he to look up with a abstracted air . that , as the move he head , he wife drop down on one knee at he foot , and , with she hand imploringly lifte , fix upon he face the memorable look I have never forget . that at this sight drop the newspaper , and star more like a figure - head intend for a ship to be call the Astonishment , than anything else I can think of . the gentleness of the 's manner and surprise , the dignity that mingle with the supplicat attitude of he wife , the amiable concern of , and the earnestness with which my aunt say to herself , ' that man mad ! ' ( triumphantly expressive of the misery from which she have save he ) - I see and hear , rather than remember , as I write about it . ' ! ' say . ' what be it that be amiss ? look here ! ' ! ' cry the Doctor . ' not at my foot , my dear ! ' ' yes ! ' she say . 'I beg and pray that no one will leave the room ! oh , my husband and father , break this long silence . let we both know what it be that have come between we ! ' , by this time recovere the power of speech , and see to swell with family pride and motherly indignation , here exclaim , ' , get up immediately , and do not disgrace everybody belong to you by humbl yourself like that , unless you wish to see I go out of my mind on the spot ! ' ' mama ! ' return . ' waste
waste no word on I , for my appeal be to my husband , and even you be nothing here . ' ' nothing ! ' exclaim . , nothing ! the child have take leave of she sense . please to get I a glass of water ! ' I be too attentive to the and he wife , to give any heed to this request ; and it make no impression on anybody else ; so pante , stare , and fan herself . ' ! ' say the Doctor , tenderly take she in he hand . ' my dear ! if any unavoidable change have come , in the sequence of time , upon we married life , you be not to blame . the fault be mine , and only mine . there be no change in my affection , admiration , and respect . I wish to make you happy . I truly love and honour you . rise , Annie , pray ! ' but she do not rise . after look at he for a little while , she sank down closer to he , lay she arm across he knee , and drop she head upon it , say : ' if I have any friend here , who can speak one word for I , or for my husband in this matter ; if I have any friend here , who can give a voice to any suspicion that my heart have sometimes whisper to I ; if I have any friend here , who honour my husband , or have ever care for I , and have anything within he knowledge , no matter what it be , that may help to mediate between we , I implore that friend to speak ! ' there be a profound silence . after a few moments of painful hesitation , I break the silence . ' ,' I say , ' there be something within my knowledge , which I have be earnestly entreate by to conceal , and have conceal until tonight . but , I believe the time have come when it would be mistaken faith and delicacy to conceal it any longer , and when you appeal absolve I from he injunction . ' she turn she face towards I for a moment , and I know that I be right . I could not have resist its entreaty , if the assurance that it give I have be less convincing . ' we future peace , ' she say , ' may be in you hand . I trust it confidently to you not suppresse anything . I know beforehand that nothing you , or anyone , can tell I , will show my husband 's noble heart in any other light than one . Howsoever it may seem to you to touch I , disregard that . I will speak for myself , before he , and before afterwards . ' thus earnestly besotch , I make no reference to the Doctor for he permission , but , without any other compromise of the truth than a little softening of the coarseness of , relate plainly what have pass in that same room that night . the staring of during the whole narration , and the shrill , sharp interjection with which she occasionally interrupt it , defy description . when I have finish , remain , for some few moment , silent , with she head bend down , as I have describe . then , she take the Doctor 's hand ( he be sit in the same attitude as when we have enter the room ) , and press it to she breast , and kiss it . softly raise she ; and she stand , when she begin to speak , lean on he , and look down upon she husband - from whom she never turn she eye . ' all that have ever be in my mind , since I be married , ' she say in a low , submissive , tender voice , 'I will lay bare before you . I could not live and have one reservation , knowe what I know now . ' ' , , ' say the Doctor , mildly , 'I have never doubt you , my child . there be no need ; indeed there be no need , my dear . ' ' there be great need , ' she answer , in the same way , ' that I should open my whole heart before the soul of generosity and truth , whom , year by year , and day by day , I have love and venerate more and more , as know ! ' ' really , ' interrupt , 'if I have any discretion at all -' ( ' which you have not , you , ' observe my aunt , in a indignant whisper . ) - ' I must be permit to observe that it can not be requisite to enter into these detail . ' ' no one but my husband can judge of that , mama , ' say without remove she eye from he face , ' and he will hear I . if I say anything to give you pain , mama , forgive I . I have borne pain first , often and long , myself . ' ' upon my word ! ' gas . ' when I be very young , ' say , ' quite a little child , my first associations with knowledge of any kind be inseparable from a patient friend and teacher - the friend of my dead father - who be always dear to I . I can remember nothing that I know , without remember he . he store my mind with its first treasure , and stampe he character upon they
they all . they never could have be , I think , as good as they have be to I , if I have take they from any other hand . ' ' make she mother nothing ! ' exclaim . ' not so mama , ' say ; ' but I make he what he be . I must do that . as I grow up , he occupy the same place still . I be proud of he interest : deeply , fondly , gratefully attach to he . I look up to he , I can hardly describe how - as a father , as a guide , as one whose praise be different from all other praise , as one in whom I could have trust and confide , if I have doubt all the world . you know , mama , how young and inexperienc I be , when you present he before I , of a sudden , as a lover . ' 'I have mention the fact , fifty time at least , to everybody here ! ' say . ( ' then hold you tongue , for the 's sake , and do not mention it any more ! ' mutter my aunt . ) ' it be so great a change : so great a loss , I feel it , at first , ' say , still preserve the same look and tone , ' that I be agitate and distress . I be but a girl ; and when so great a change come in the character in which I have so long look up to he , I think I be sorry . but nothing could have make he what he use to be again ; and I be proud that he should think I so worthy , and we be marry . ' ' - at , , ' observ . ( ' Confound the woman ! ' say my aunt , ' she will not be quiet ! ' ) 'I never think , ' proceed , with a heighten colour , 'on any worldly gain that my husband would bring to I . my young heart have no room in it be homage for any such poor reference . mama , forgive I when I say that it be you who first present to my mind the thought that anyone could wrong I , and wrong he , by such a cruel suspicion . ' 'I ! ' cry . ( 'Ah ! you , to be sure ! ' observ my aunt , ' and you can not fan it away , my military friend ! ' ) ' it be the first unhappiness of my new life , ' say . ' it be the first occasion of every unhappy moment I have know . these moments have be more , of late , than I can count ; but not - my generous husband ! - not for the reason you suppose ; for in my heart there be not can think , a recollection , or a hope , that any power could separate from you ! ' she raise she eye , and clasp she hand , and look as beautiful and true , I think , as any Spirit . the look on she , henceforth , as steadfastly as she on he . ' mama be blameless , ' she go on , 'have have ever urge you for herself , and she be blameless in intention every way , I be sure , - but when I see how many importunate claim be press upon you in my name ; how you be trade on in my name ; how generous you be , and how , who have you welfare very much at heart , resent it ; the first sense of my exposure to the mean suspicion that my tenderness be buy - and sell to you , of all man on earth - fell upon I like unmerited disgrace , in which I force you to participate . I can not tell you what it be - mama can not imagine what it be - to have this dread and trouble always on my mind , yet know in my own soul that on my marriage - day I crown the love and honour of my life ! ' 'A specimen of the thanks one get , ' cry , in tear , ' for take care of one 's family ! I wish I be a Turk ! ' ( 'I wish you be , with all my heart - and in you native country ! ' say my aunt . ) ' it be at that time that be most solicitous about my . I have like he ' : she speak softly , but without any hesitation : ' very much . we have be little lover once . if circumstance have not happen otherwise , I might have come to persuade myself that I really love he , and might have marry he , and be most wretch . there can be no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose . ' I ponder on those word , even while I be studiously attend to what follow , as if they have some particular interest , or some strange application that I could not divine . ' there can be no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose ' -'no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose . ' ' there be nothing , ' say , ' that we have in common . I have long find that there be nothing . if I be thankful to my husband for no more , instead of for so much , I should be thankful to he for have save I from the first mistaken impulse
impulse of my undisciplined heart . ' she stand quite still , before the Doctor , and speak with a earnestness that thrill I . yet she voice be just as quiet as before . ' when he be wait to be the object of you munificence , so freely bestow for my sake , and when I be unhappy in the mercenary shape I be make to wear , I think it would have become he better to have work he own way on . I think that if I have be he , I would have try to do it , at the cost of almost any hardship . but I think no worse of he , until the night of he departure for . that night I know he have a false and thankless heart . I see a double meaning , then , in 's scrutiny of I . I perceive , for the first time , the dark suspicion that shadowed my life . ' ' suspicion , ! ' say the Doctor . ' no , no , no ! ' ' in you mind there be none , I know , my husband ! ' she return . ' and when I come to you , that night , to lay down all my load of shame and grief , and know that I have to tell that , underneath you roof , one of my own kindred , to whom you have be a benefactor , for the love of I , have speak to I word that should have find no utterance , even if I have be the weak and mercenary wretch he think I - my mind revolt from the taint the very tale convey . it die upon my lip , and from that hour till now have never pass they . ' , with a short groan , lean back in she easy - chair ; and retire behind she fan , as if she be never come out any more . 'I have never , but in you presence , interchange a word with he from that time ; then , only when it have be necessary for the avoidance of this explanation . Years have pass since he know , from I , what he situation here be . the kindness you have secretly do for he advancement , and then disclose to I , for my surprise and pleasure , have be , you will believe , but aggravations of the unhappiness and burden of my secret . ' she sink down gently at the Doctor 's foot , though he do he utmost to prevent she ; and say , look up , tearfully , into he face : ' do not speak to I yet ! let I say a little more ! right or wrong , if this be to be do again , I think I should do just the same . you never can know what it be to be devote to you , with those old associations ; to find that anyone could be so hard as to suppose that the truth of my heart be barter away , and to be surround by appearances confirm that belief . I be very young , and have no adviser . between mama and I , in all relate to you , there be a wide division . if I shrink into myself , hide the disrespect I have undergone , it be because I honoure you so much , and so much wish that you should honour I ! ' , my pure heart ! ' say the Doctor , 'my dear girl ! ' 'a little more ! a very few word more ! I use to think there be so many whom you might have married , who would not have bring such charge and trouble on you , and who would have make you home a worthier home . I use to be afraid that I have better have remain you pupil , and almost you child . I use to fear that I be so unsuited to you learning and wisdom . if all this make I shrink within myself ( as indeed it do ) , when I have that to tell , it be still because I honoure you so much , and hope that you might one day honour I . ' ' that day have shine this long time , , ' say the Doctor , and can have but one long night , my dear . ' 'Another word ! I afterwards mean - steadfastly mean , and purpose to myself - to bear the whole weight of know the unworthiness of one to whom you have be so good . and now a last word , dearest and best of friend ! the cause of the late change in you , which I have see with so much pain and sorrow , and have sometimes refer to my old apprehension - at other time to linger suppositions nearer to the truth - have be make clear tonight ; and by a accident I have also come to know , tonight , the full measure of you noble trust in I , even under that mistake . I do not hope that any love and duty I may render in return , will ever make I worthy of you priceless confidence ; but with all this knowledge fresh upon I , I can lift my eye to this dear face , rever as a father 's , love as a husband 's , sacr to I in my childhood as a friend 's , and solemnly declare that in my lightest think I have never wronge you ; never wave in the love and the fidelity I owe you ! ' she have she arm around the Doctor 's neck ,
, and he lean he head down over she , mingl he grey hair with she dark brown tress . 'Oh , hold I to you heart , my husband ! never cast I out ! do not think or speak of disparity between we , for there be none , except in all my many imperfection . every succeed year I have know this better , as I have esteem you more and more . oh , take I to you heart , my husband , for my love be found on a rock , and it endure ! ' in the silence that ensue , my aunt walk gravely up to , without at all hurrie herself , and give he a hug and a sounding kiss . and it be very fortunate , with a view to he credit , that she do so ; for I be confident that I detect he at that moment in the act of make preparation to stand on one leg , as a appropriate expression of delight . ' you be a very remarkable man , ! ' say my aunt , with a air of unqualified approbation ; 'and never pretend to be anything else , for I know better ! ' with that , my aunt pull he by the sleeve , and nod to I ; and we three stole quietly out of the room , and come away . ' that be a settler for we military friend , at any rate , ' say my aunt , on the way home . 'I should sleep the better for that , if there be nothing else to be glad of ! ' ' she be quite overcome , I be afraid , ' say , with great commiseration . ' what ! do you ever see a crocodile overcome ? ' inquire my aunt . 'I do not think I ever see a crocodile , ' return , mildly . ' there never would have be anything the matter , if it have not be for that old , ' say my aunt , with strong emphasis . ' it be very much to be wish that some mother would leave they daughter alone after marriage , and not be so violently affectionate . they seem to think the only return that can be make they for bring a unfortunate young woman into the world - bless my soul , as if she ask to be bring , or want to come ! - be full liberty to worry she out of it again . what be you think of , ? ' I be think of all that have be say . my mind be still run on some of the expression use . ' there can be no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose . ' ' the first mistaken impulse of a undisciplined heart . ' 'My love be found on a rock . ' but we be at home ; and the trodden leave be lie under - foot , and the autumn wind be blow . chapter 46 I must have be marry , if I may trust to my imperfect memory for date , about a year or so , when one evening , as I be return from a solitary walk , think of the book I be then write - for my success have steadily increase with my steady application , and I be engage at that time upon my first work of fiction - I come past 's house . I have often pass it before , during my residence in that neighbourhood , though never when I could choose another road . , it do sometimes happen that it be not easy to find another , without make a long circuit ; and so I have pass that way , upon the whole , pretty often . I have never do more than glance at the house , as I go by with a quickened step . it have be uniformly gloomy and dull . none of the best room abut on the road ; and the narrow , heavily - fram old - fashioned window , never cheerful under any circumstance , look very dismal , close shut , and with they blind always draw down . there be a covered way across a little paved court , to a entrance that be never use ; and there be one round staircase window , at odds with all the rest , and the only one unshad by a blind , which have the same unoccupied blank look . I do not remember that I ever see a light in all the house . if I have be a casual passer - by , I should have probably suppose that some childless person lay dead in it . if I have happily possess no knowledge of the place , and have see it often in that changeless state , I should have pleas my fancy with many ingenious speculation , I dare say . as it be , I think as little of it as I might . but my mind could not go by it and leave it , as my body do ; and it usually awaken a long train of meditations . come before I , on this particular evening that I mention , mingl with the childish recollection and later fancie , the ghost of half - form hope , the broken shadow of disappointment dimly see and understood , the blending of experience and imagination , incidental to the occupation with which my thought have be busy , it be more than commonly suggestive . I fall into a brown study as I walk on , and a voice at my side make I start . it be a woman 's voice , too . I be not long
long in recollect 's little parlour-maid , who have formerly worn blue ribbon in she cap . she have take they out now , to adapt herself , I suppose , to the alte character of the house ; and wear but one or two disconsolate bow of sober brown . ' if you please , sir , would you have the goodness to walk in , and speak to ? ' send you for I ? ' I inquire . ' not tonight , sir , but it be just the same . see you pass a night or two ago ; and I be to sit at work on the staircase , and when I see you pass again , to ask you to step in and speak to she . ' I turn back , and inquire of my conductor , as we go along , how be . she say she lady be but poorly , and keep she own room a good deal . when we arrive at the house , I be direct to in the garden , and leave to make my presence know to she myself . she be sit on a seat at one end of a kind of terrace , overlook the great city . it be a sombre evening , with a lurid light in the sky ; and as I see the prospect scowling in the distance , with here and there some larger object start up into the sullen glare , I fancie it be no inapt companion to the memory of this fierce woman . she see I as I advance , and rise for a moment to receive I . I think she , then , still more colourless and thin than when I have see she last ; the flashing eye still brighter , and the scar still plainer . we meeting be not cordial . we have part angrily on the last occasion ; and there be a air of disdain about she , which she take no pain to conceal . 'I be tell you wish to speak to I , , ' say I , stand near she , with my hand upon the back of the seat , and decline she gesture of invitation to sit down . ' if you please , ' say she . ' have this girl be find ? ' ' no . ' ' and yet she have run away ! ' I see she thin lip work while she look at I , as if they be eager to load she with reproach . ' run away ? ' I repeat . ' yes ! from he , ' she say , with a laugh . ' if she be not find , perhaps she never will be find . she may be dead ! ' the vaunting cruelty with which she meet my glance , I never see express in any other face that ever I have see . 'To wish she dead , ' say I , ' may be the kindest wish that one of she own sex could bestow upon she . I be glad that time have soften you so much , . ' she condescende to make no reply , but , turn on I with another scornful laugh , say : ' the friend of this excellent and much - injured young lady be friend of yours . you be they champion , and assert they right . do you wish to know what be know of she ? ' ' yes , ' say I . she rise with a ill - favoured smile , and take a few step towards a wall of hobably that be near at hand , divide the lawn from a kitchen - garden , say , in a louder voice , ' come here ! ' - as if she be call to some unclean beast . ' you will restrain any demonstrative championship or vengeance in this place , of course , Copperfield ? ' say she , look over she shoulder at I with the same expression . I inclin my head , without know what she mean ; and she say , ' come here ! ' again ; and return , follow by the respectable , who , with undiminished respectability , make I a bow , and take up he position behind she . the air of wicked grace : of triumph , in which , strange to say , there be yet something feminine and allur : with which she recline upon the seat between we , and look at I , be worthy of a cruel princess in a legend . ' now , ' say she , imperiously , without glance at he , and touch the old wound as it throb : perhaps , in this instance , with pleasure rather than pain . ' about the flight . ' ' and myself , ma'am -' ' do not address yourself to I ! ' she interrupt with a frown . ' and myself , sir -' ' to I , if you please , ' say I . , without be at all discompose , signify by a slight obeisance , that anything that be most agreeable to we be most agreeable to he ; and begin again . ' and myself have be abroad with the young woman , ever since she leave under 's protection . we have be in a variety of place , and see a deal of foreign country . we have be in , , , in fact , almost all parts . ' he look at the back of the seat , as if he be address himself to that ; and softly play upon it with he hand , as if he be strike chord upon a dumb piano . ' take
take quite uncommonly to the young woman ; and be more settled , for a length of time , than I have know he to be since I have be in he service . the young woman be very improvable , and speak the language ; and would not have be know for the same country - person . I notice that she be much admire wherever we go . ' put she hand upon she side . I see he steal a glance at she , and slightly smile to himself . ' very much admired , indeed , the young woman be . what with she dress ; what with the air and sun ; what with be make so much of ; what with this , that , and the other ; she merit really attract general notice . ' he make a short pause . she eye wander restlessly over the distant prospect , and she bit she nether lip to stop that busy mouth . take he hand from the seat , and place one of they within the other , as he settle himself on one leg , proceed , with he eye cast down , and he respectable head a little advanced , and a little on one side : ' the young woman go on in this manner for some time , be occasionally low in she spirit , until I think she begin to weary by give way to she low spirit and temper of that kind ; and thing be not so comfortable . he begin to be restless again . the more restless he get , the worse she get ; and I must say , for myself , that I have a very difficult time of it indeed between the two . matter be patch up here , and make good there , over and over again ; and altogether last , I be sure , for a longer time than anybody could have expect . ' Recall she eye from the distance , she look at I again now , with she former air . , clear he throat behind he hand with a respectable short cough , change leg , and go on : ' at last , when there have been , upon the whole , a good many word and reproach , he set off one morning , from the neighbourhood of , where we have a villa ( the young woman be very partial to the sea ) , and , under pretence of come back in a day or so , leave it in charge with I to break it out , that , for the general happiness of all concerned , he be ' - here a interruption of the short cough - ' go . but , I must say , certainly do behave extremely honourable ; for he propose that the young woman should marry a very respectable person , who be fully prepared to overlook the past , and who be , at least , as good as anybody the young woman could have aspire to in a regular way : she connexion be very common . ' he change leg again , and wett he lip . I be convince that the scoundrel spoke of himself , and I see my conviction reflect in 's face . ' this I also have it in charge to communicate . I be willing to do anything to relieve from he difficulty , and to restore harmony between himself and a affectionate parent , who have undergone so much on he account . therefore I undertake the commission . the young woman 's violence when she come to , after I break the fact of he departure , be beyond all expectation . she be quite mad , and have to be hold by force ; or , if she could not have get to a knife , or get to the sea , she would have beat she head against the marble floor . ' , lean back upon the seat , with a light of exultation in she face , see almost to caress the sound this fellow have utter . ' but when I come to the second part of what have be entrust to I , ' say , rub he hand uneasily , ' which anybody might have suppose would have be , at all event , appreciate as a kind intention , then the young woman come out in she true colour . a more outrageous person I never do see . she conduct be surprisingly bad . she have no more gratitude , no more feeling , no more patience , no more reason in she , than a stock or a stone . if I have not be upon my guard , I be convince she would have have my blood . ' 'I think the better of she for it , ' say I , indignantly . bend he head , as much as to say , ' indeed , sir ? but you be young ! ' and resume he narrative . ' it be necessary , in short , for a time , to take away everything nigh she , that she could do herself , or anybody else , a injury with , and to shut she up close . Notwithstand which , she get out in the night ; force the lattice of a window , that I have nail up myself ; drop on a vine that be traile below ; and never have be see or hear of , to my knowledge , since . ' ' she be dead , perhaps , ' say , with a smile , as if she could have spur the body of the ruined girl . ' she may have drown herself , miss , ' return , catch
catch at a excuse for address himself to somebody . ' it be very possible . or , she may have have assistance from the boatman , and the boatman 's wife and child . be give to low company , she be very much in the habit of talk to they on the beach , , and sit by they boat . I have know she do it , when have be away , whole day . be far from pleased to find out , once , that she have tell the child she be a boatman 's daughter , and that in she own country , long ago , she have roam about the beach , like they . ' oh , Emily ! unhappy beauty ! what a picture rise before I of she sit on the far - off shore , among the child like herself when she be innocent , listen to little voice such as might have call she mother have she be a poor man 's wife ; and to the great voice of the sea , with its eternal ' never more ! ' ' when it be clear that nothing could be do , -' ' do I tell you not to speak to I ? ' she say , with stern contempt . ' you speak to I , miss ,' he reply . 'I beg you pardon . but it be my service to obey . ' ' do you service , ' she return . ' finish you story , and go ! ' ' when it be clear ,' he say , with infinite respectability and a obedient bow , ' that she be not to be find , I go to , at the place where it have be agree that I should write to he , and inform he of what have occur . word pass between we in consequence , and I feel it due to my character to leave he . I could bear , and I have borne , a great deal from ; but he insult I too far . he hurt I . know the unfortunate difference between himself and he mother , and what she anxiety of mind be likely to be , I take the liberty of come home to , and relate -' ' for money which I pay he , ' say to I . ' just so , ma 'am - and relate what I know . I be not aware , ' say , after a moment 's reflection , ' that there be anything else . I be at present out of employment , and should be happy to meet with a respectable situation . ' glance at I , as though she would inquire if there be anything that I desire to ask . as there be something which have occur to my mind , I say in reply : 'I could wish to know from this - creature ,' I could not bring myself to utter any more conciliatory word , ' whether they intercept a letter that be write to she from home , or whether he suppose that she receive it . ' he remain calm and silent , with he eye fix on the ground , and the tip of every finger of he right hand delicately poise against the tip of every finger of he left . turn she head disdainfully towards he . 'I beg you pardon , miss ,' he say , awaken from he abstraction , ' but , however submissive to you , I have my position , though a servant . and you , miss , be different people . if wish to know anything from I , I take the liberty of reminde that he can put a question to I . I have a character to maintain . ' after a momentary struggle with myself , I turn my eye upon he , and say , ' you have hear my question . consider it address to yourself , if you choose . what answer do you make ? ' ' ,' he rejoin , with a occasional separation and reunion of those delicate tip , 'my answer must be qualified ; because , to betray 's confidence to he mother , and to betray it to you , be two different action . it be not probable , I consider , that would encourage the receipt of letter likely to increase low spirits and unpleasantness ; but further than that , sir , I should wish to avoid go . ' ' be that all ? ' inquire of I . I indicate that I have nothing more to say . ' ,' I add , as I see he move off , ' that I understand this fellow 's part in the wicked story , and that , as I shall make it know to the honest man who have be she father from she childhood , I would recommend he to avoid go too much into public . ' he have stop the moment I begin , and have listen with he usual repose of manner . ' thank you , sir . but you will excuse I if I say , sir , that there be neither slave nor slave -driver in this country , and that people be not allow to take the law into they own hand . if they do , it be more to they own peril , I believe , than to other people 's . consequently speak , I be not at all afraid of go wherever I may wish , sir . ' with that , he make a polite bow ; and , with another to , go away through the arch in the wall of hobably by which he have come . and I regard each other for
for a little while in silence ; she manner be exactly what it be , when she have produce the man . ' he say besides , ' she observe , with a slow curling of she lip , ' that he master , as he hear , be coaste ; and this do , be away to gratify he seafaring taste till he be weary . but this be of no interest to you . between these two proud person , mother and son , there be a wider breach than before , and little hope of its healing , for they be one at heart , and time make each more obstinate and imperious . neither be this of any interest to you ; but it introduce what I wish to say . this devil whom you make a angel of . I mean this low girl whom he pick out of the tide - mud , ' with she black eye full upon I , and she passionate finger up , ' may be alive , - for I believe some common thing be hard to die . if she be , you will desire to have a pearl of such price find and take care of . we desire that , too ; that he may not by any chance be make she prey again . so far , we be united in one interest ; and that be why I , who would do she any mischief that so coarse a wretch be capable of feeling , have send for you to hear what you have hear . ' I see , by the change in she face , that someone be advanc behind I . it be , who give I she hand more coldly than of yore , and with a augmentation of she former stateliness of manner , but still , I perceive - and I be touch by it - with a ineffaceable remembrance of my old love for she son . she be greatly alter . she fine figure be far less upright , she handsome face be deeply mark , and she hair be almost white . but when she sit down on the seat , she be a handsome lady still ; and well I know the bright eye with its lofy look , that have be a light in my very dream at school . 'Is inform of everything , Rosa? ' 'yes . ' ' and have he hear himself ? ' ' yes ; I have tell he why you wish it . ' ' you be a good girl . I have have some slight correspondence with you former friend , sir , ' address I , ' but it have not restore he sense of duty or natural obligation . therefore I have no other object in this , than what have mention . if , by the course which may relieve the mind of the decent man you bring here ( for whom I be sorry - I can say no more ) , my son may be save from again fal into the snare of a designing enemy , well ! ' she draw herself up , and sit look straight before she , far away . ' madam ,' I say respectfully , 'I understand . I assure you I be in no danger of put any strained construction on you motive . but I must say , even to you , have know this injured family from childhood , that if you suppose the girl , so deeply wronge , have not be cruelly delude , and would not rather die a hundred death than take a cup of water from you son 's hand now , you cherish a terrible mistake . ' ' well , , well ! ' say , as the other be about to interpose , ' it be no matter . let it be . you be married , sir , I be tell ? ' I answer that I have be some time marry . ' and be do well ? I hear little in the quiet life I lead , but I understand you be begin to be famous . ' 'I have be very fortunate ,' I say , ' and find my name connect with some praise . ' ' you have no mother ? ' - in a softened voice . ' no . ' ' it be a pity , ' she return . ' she would have be proud of you . good night ! ' I take the hand she hold out with a dignified , unbending air , and it be as calm in mine as if she breast have be at peace . she pride could still it be very puls , it appear , and draw the placid veil before she face , through which she sit look straight before she on the far distance . as I move away from they along the terrace , I could not help observe how steadily they both sit gazing on the prospect , and how it thicken and close around they . here and there , some early lamp be see to twinkle in the distant city ; and in the eastern quarter of the sky the lurid light still hover . but , from the greater part of the broad valley interpose , a mist be rise like a sea , which , mingl with the darkness , make it seem as if the gather water would encompass they . I have reason to remember this , and think of it with awe ; for before I look upon those two again , a stormy sea have risen to they foot . reflect on what have be thus tell I , I feel it right that it should be communicate to . on the
the follow evening I go into in of he . he be always wander about from place to place , with he one object of recovere he niece before he ; but be more in than elsewhere . often and often , now , have I see he in the dead of night pass along the street , search , among the few who loiter out of door at those untimely hour , for what he dread to find . he keep a lodging over the little chandler 's shop in , which I have have occasion to mention more than once , and from which he first go forth upon he errand of mercy . Hither I direct my walk . on make inquiry for he , I learn from the people of the house that he have not go out yet , and I should find he in he room upstairs . he be sit read by a window in which he keep a few plant . the room be very neat and orderly . I see in a moment that it be always keep prepare for she reception , and that he never go out but he think it possible he might bring she home . he have not hear my tap at the door , and only raise he eye when I lay my hand upon he shoulder . ' ! Thankee , sir ! thankee hearty , for this visit ! sit ye down . you be kindly welcome , sir ! ' ' , ' say I , take the chair he hand I , 'do not expect much ! I have hear some news . ' ' of ! ' he put he hand , in a nervous manner , on he mouth , and turn pale , as he fix he eye on mine . ' it give no clue to where she be ; but she be not with he . ' he sit down , look intently at I , and listen in profound silence to all I have to tell . I well remember the sense of dignity , beauty even , with which the patient gravity of he face impress I , when , have gradually remove he eye from mine , he sit look downward , lean he forehead on he hand . he offer no interruption , but remain throughout perfectly still . he seem to pursue she figure through the narrative , and to let every other shape go by he , as if it be nothing . when I have do , he shade he face , and continue silent . I look out of the window for a little while , and occupy myself with the plant . ' how do you fare to feel about it , ? ' he inquire at length . 'I think that she be liive ,' I reply . 'I doe not know . maybe the first shock be too rough , and in the wildness of she art - ! that there blue water as she use to speak on . could she have thowt of ' that so many year , because it be to be she grave ! ' he say this , muse , in a low , frightene voice ; and walk across the little room . ' and yet ,' he add , ' 'r Davy , I have feel so sure as she be liive - I have know ' , awake and sleeping , as it be so trew that I should find she - I have be so lead on by it , and hold up by it - that I doe not believe I can have be deceive . no ! 's alive ! ' he put he hand down firmly on the table , and set he sunbur not face into a resolute expression . ' my niece , , be alive , sir ! ' he say , steadfastly . 'I doe not know wheer it come from , or how ' tis , but I be tell as she be alive ! ' he look almost like a man inspire , as he say it . I wait for a few moment , until he could give I he undivided attention ; and then proceed to explain the precaution , that , it have occur to I last night , it would be wise to take . ' now , my dear friend -'I begin . ' Thankee , thankee , kind sir ,' he say , grasp my hand in both of he . ' if she should make she way to , which be likely - for where could she lose herself so readily as in this vast city ; and what would she wish to do , but lose and hide herself , if she do not go home ? -' ' and she will not go home , ' he interpose , shak he head mournfully . ' if she have leave of she own accord , she might ; not as it be , sir . ' ' if she should come here , ' say I , 'I believe there be one person , here , more likely to discover she than any other in the world . do you remember - hear what I say , with fortitude - think of you great object ! - do you remember ? ' ' of we town ? ' I need no other answer than he face . ' do you know that she be in ? ' 'I have see she in the street ,' he answer , with a shiver . ' but you do not know , ' say I , ' that be charitable to she , with 's help , long before she fle from home . , that , when we meet one night
night , and speak together in the room yonder , over the way , she listen at the door . ' ' ! ' he reply in astonishment . ' that night when it ksnow so hard ? ' ' that night . I have never see she since . I go back , after part from you , to speak to she , but she be go . I be unwilling to mention she to you then , and I be now ; but she be the person of whom I speak , and with whom I think we should communicate . do you understand ? ' ' too well , sir , ' he reply . we have sunk we voice , almost to a whisper , and continue to speak in that tone . ' you say you have see she . do you think that you could find she ? I could only hope to do so by chance . ' 'I think , , I know wheer to look . ' ' it be dark . be together , shall we go out now , and try to find she tonight ? ' he assent , and prepare to accompany I . without appear to observe what he be do , I see how carefully he adjust the little room , put a candle ready and the means of light it , arrange the bed , and finally take out of a drawer one of she dress ( I remember to have see she wear it ) , neatly fold with some other garment , and a bonnet , which he place upon a chair . he make no allusion to these clothes , neither do I . there they have be wait for she , many and many a night , no doubt . ' the time be , Mas 'r Davy , ' he say , as we come downstairs , ' when I thowt this girl , , a'most like the dirt underneath my 's foot . God forgive I , theer be a difference now ! ' as we go along , partly to hold he in conversation , and partly to satisfy myself , I ask he about . he say , almost in the same word as formerly , that be just the same , ' wear away he life with kiender no care nohow for 't ; but never murmur , and like by all ' . I ask he what he think 's state of mind be , in reference to the cause of they misfortune ? whether he believe it be dangerous ? what he suppose , for example , would do , if he and ever should encounter ? 'I doe not know , sir , ' he reply . 'I have thowt of it oftentimes , but I can not awize myself of it , no matters . ' I recall to he remembrance the morning after she departure , when we be all three on the beach . ' do you recollect , ' say I , 'a certain wild way in which he look out to sea , and speak about " the end of it " ? ' ' sure I do ! ' say he . ' what do you suppose he mean ? ' ' , ' he reply , 'I have put the question to myself a mort of ' time , and never find no answer . and theer be one curious thing - that , though he be so pleasant , I would not fare to feel comfortable to try and get he mind upon 't . he never say a wure to I as war not as dootiful as dootiful could be , and it be not likely as he would begin to speak any other way now ; but it be fur from be fleet water in he mind , where they thowt lay . it be deep , sir , and I can not see down . ' ' you be right , ' say I , ' and that have sometimes make I anxious . ' ' and I too , , ' he rejoin . ' even more so , I do assure you , than he ventersome way , though both belong to the alteration in he . I doe not know as he would do violence under any circumstance , but I hope as they two may be kep asunder . ' we have come , through , into the city . Converse no more now , and walk at my side , he yield himself up to the one aim of he devoted life , and go on , with that hush concentration of he faculty which would have make he figure solitary in a multitude . we be not far from , when he turn he head and point to a solitary female figure flitt along the opposite side of the street . I know it , readily , to be the figure that we seek . we cross the road , and be press on towards she , when it occur to I that she might be more disposed to feel a woman 's interest in the lost girl , if we speak to she in a quieter place , aloon from the crowd , and where we should be less observed . I advise my companion , therefore , that we should not address she yet , but follow she ; consult in this , likewise , a indistinct desire I have , to know where she go . he acquiesce , we follow at a distance : never lose sight of she , but never care to come very near , as she frequently look about . once , she stop to listen to a band of music ; and then we stop too .
. she go on a long way . still we go on . it be evident , from the manner in which she hold she course , that she be go to some fix destination ; and this , and she keep in the busy street , and I suppose the strange fascination in the secrecy and mystery of so follow anyone , make I adhere to my first purpose . at length she turn into a dull , dark street , where the noise and crowd be lose ; and I say , ' we may speak to she now ' ; and , mende we pace , we go after she . chapter 47 we be now down in . we have turn back to follow she , have encounter she come towards we ; and be the point at which she pass from the light and noise of the lead street . she proceed so quickly , when she get free of the two current of passengers set towards and from the bridge , that , between this and the advance she have of we when she strike off , we be in the narrow water - side street by before we come up with she . at that moment she cross the road , as if to avoid the footstep that she hear so close behind ; and , without look back , pass on even more rapidly . a glimpse of the river through a dull gateway , where some waggon be house for the night , seem to arrest my foot . I touch my companion without speak , and we both forbore to cross after she , and both follow on that opposite side of the way ; keep as quietly as we could in the shadow of the house , but keep very near she . there be , and be when I write , at the end of that low - lie street , a dilapidate little wooden building , probably a obsolete old ferry - house . it be position be just at that point where the street cease , and the road begin to lie between a row of house and the river . as soon as she come here , and see the water , she stop as if she have come to she destination ; and presently go slowly along by the brink of the river , look intently at it . all the way here , I have suppose that she be go to some house ; indeed , I have vaguly entertaine the hope that the house might be in some way associate with the lost girl . but that one dark glimpse of the river , through the gateway , have instinctively prepare I for she go no farther . the neighbourhood be a dreary one at that time ; as oppressive , sad , and solitary by night , as any about . there be neither wharves nor house on the melancholy waste of road near the great blank prison . a sluggish ditch deposite its mud at the prison wall . Coarse grass and rank weed straggle over all the marshy land in the vicinity . in one part , carcase of house , inauspiciously begin and never finish , rot away . in another , the ground be cumber with rusty iron monster of steam - boiler , wheel , crank , pipe , furnace , paddle , anchor , diving - bell , windmill - sail , and I know not what strange object , accumulate by some speculator , and grovell in the dust , underneath which - have sunk into the soil of they own weight in wet weather - they have the appearance of vainly try to hide themselves . the clash and glare of sundry fiery upon the river - side , arise by night to disturb everything except the heavy and unbroken smoke that pour out of they chimney . slimy gap and causeway , win among old wooden pile , with a sickly substance cling to the latter , like green hair , and the rag of last year 's handbill offer reward for drowned man flutter above high - water mark , lead down through the ooze and slush to the ebb-tide . there be a story that one of the pit dug for the dead in the time of the be hereabout ; and a blighting influence seem to have proceed from it over the whole place . or else it look as if it have gradually decompose into that nightmare condition , out of the overflowing of the pollute stream . as if she be a part of the refuse it have cast out , and leave to corruption and decay , the girl we have follow stray down to the river 's brink , and stand in the midst of this night- picture , lonely and still , look at the water . there be some boat and barge astrand in the mud , and these enable we to come within a few yard of she without be see . I then sign to to remain where he be , and emerge from they shade to speak to she . I do not approach she solitary figure without trembl ; for this gloomy end to she determined walk , and the way in which she stand , almost within the cavernous shadow of the iron bridge , look at the light crookedly reflect in the strong tide , inspire a dread within I . I think she be talk to herself . I be sure , although absorb in gazing at the water , that she shawl be off she shoulders , and that she be muff she hand in it , in a unsettled and bewilder way , more like the action of a sleep - walker than a waking
waking person . I know , and never can forget , that there be that in she wild manner which give I no assurance but that she would sink before my eye , until I have she arm within my grasp . at the same moment I say ' ! ' she utter a terrified scream , and struggle with I with such strength that I doubt if I could have hold she alone . but a stronger hand than mine be laid upon she ; and when she raise she frightened eye and see whose it be , she make but one more effort and drop down between we . we carry she away from the water to where there be some dry stone , and there lay she down , cry and moan . in a little while she sit among the stone , hold she wretch head with both she hand . 'Oh , the river ! ' she cry passionately . 'Oh , the river ! ' ' Hush , hush ! ' say I . ' calm yourself . ' but she still repeat the same word , continually exclaim , , the river ! ' over and over again . 'I know it be like I ! ' she exclaim . 'I know that I belong to it . I know that it be the natural company of such as I be ! it come from country place , where there be once no harm in it - and it creep through the dismal street , defile and miserable - and it go away , like my life , to a great sea , that be always troubled - and I feel that I must go with it ! ' I have never know what despair be , except in the tone of those word . 'I can not keep away from it . I can not forget it . it haunt I day and night . it be the only thing in all the world that I be fit for , or that be fit for I . oh , the dreadful river ! ' the thought pass through my mind that in the face of my companion , as he look upon she without speech or motion , I might have read he niece 's history , if I have know nothing of it . I never see , in any painting or reality , horror and compassion so impressively blend . he shook as if he would have fall ; and he hand - I touch it with my own , for he appearance alarme I - be deadly cold . ' she be in a state of frenzy ,' I whisper to he . ' she will speak differently in a little time . ' I do not know what he would have say in answer . he make some motion with he mouth , and seem to think he have speak ; but he have only point to she with he outstretched hand . a new burst of crying come upon she now , in which she once more hide she face among the stone , and lay before we , a prostrate image of humiliation and ruin . know that this state must pass , before we could speak to she with any hope , I venture to restrain he when he would have raise she , and we stand by in silence until she become more tranquil . ' , ' say I then , lean down , and help she to rise - she seem to want to rise as if with the intention of go away , but she be weak , and lean against a boat . ' do you know who this be , who be with I ? ' she say faintly , ' yes . ' ' do you know that we have follow you a long way tonight ? ' she shook she head . she look neither at he nor at I , but stand in a humble attitude , hold she bonnet and shawl in one hand , without appear conscious of they , and press the other , clench , against she forehead . ' be you compose enough , ' say I , 'to speak on the subject which so interes you - I hope may remember it ! - that snowy night ? ' she sob break out afresh , and she murmure some inarticulate thanks to I for not have drive she away from the door . 'I want to say nothing for myself , ' she say , after a few moment . 'I be bad , I be lose . I have no hope at all . but tell he , sir , ' she have shrunk away from he , ' if you do not feel too hard to I to do it , that I never be in any way the cause of he misfortune . ' ' it have never be attribute to you ,' I return , earnestly respond to she earnestness . ' it be you , if I do not deceive myself , ' she say , in a broken voice , ' that come into the kitchen , the night she take such pity on I ; be so gentle to I ; do not shrink away from I like all the rest , and give I such kind help ! be it you , sir ? ' ' it be , ' say I . 'I should have be in the river long ago , ' she say , glance at it with a terrible expression , ' if any wrong to she have be upon my mind . I never could have keep out of it a single winter 's night , if I have not be free of any share in that !
! ' ' the cause of she flight be too well understood ,' I say . ' you be innocent of any part in it , we thoroughly believe , - we know . ' ' oh , I might have be much the better for she , if I have have a better heart ! ' exclaim the girl , with most forlorn regret ; ' for she be always good to I ! she never speak a word to I but what be pleasant and right . be it likely I would try to make she what I be myself , know what I be myself , so well ? when I lose everything that make life dear , the worst of all my thought be that I be part for ever from she ! ' , stand with one hand on the gunwale of the boat , and he eye cast down , put he disengaged hand before he face . ' and when I hear what have happene before that snowy night , from some belong to we town , ' cry , ' the bitterest think in all my mind be , that the people would remember she once keep company with I , and would say I have corrupt she ! when , know , I would have die to have bring back she good name ! ' Long unused to any self - control , the piercing agony of she remorse and grief be terrible . ' to have die , would not have be much - what can I say ? - I would have live ! ' she cry . 'I would have live to be old , in the wretch street - and to wander about , avoid , in the dark - and to see the day break on the ghastly line of house , and remember how the same sun use to shine into my room , and wake I once - I would have do even that , to save she ! ' sinke on the stone , she take some in each hand , and clench they up , as if she would have ground they . she writh into some new posture constantly : stiffen she arm , twiste they before she face , as though to shut out from she eye the little light there be , and droop she head , as if it be heavy with insupportable recollection . ' what shall I ever do ! ' she say , fight thus with she despair . ' how can I go on as I be , a solitary curse to myself , a liive disgrace to everyone I come near ! ' suddenly she turn to my companion . ' stamp upon I , kill I ! when she be you pride , you would have think I have do she harm if I have brush against she in the street . you can not believe - why should you ? - a syllable that come out of my lip . it would be a burn shame upon you , even now , if she and I exchange a word . I do not complain . I do not say she and I be alike - I know there be a long , long way between we . I only say , with all my guilt and wretchedness upon my head , that I be grateful to she from my soul , and love she . oh , do not think that all the power I have of love anything be quite wear out ! throw I away , as all the world do . kill I for be what I be , and have ever know she ; but do not think that of I ! ' he look upon she , while she make this supplication , in a wild distracted manner ; and , when she be silent , gently raise she . ' , ' say , ' forbid as I should judge you . forbid as I , of all man , should do that , my girl ! you doe not know half the change that be come , in course of time , upon I , when you think it likely . well ! ' he pause a moment , then go on . ' you doe not understand how ' tis that this here gentleman and I have wish to speak to you . you doe not understand what ' tis we have afore we . listen now ! ' he influence upon she be complete . she stand , shrinkingly , before he , as if she be afraid to meet he eye ; but she passionate sorrow be quite hushed and mute . ' if you heered , ' say , 'owt of what pass between and I , th' night when it ksnow so hard , you know as I have be - wheer not - fur to seek my dear niece . my dear niece , ' he repeat steadily . ' yofu she be more dear to I now , , than she be dear afore . ' she put she hand before she face ; but otherwise remain quiet . 'I have heered she tell , ' say , 'as you be early leave fatherless and motherless , with no friend yofu to take , in a rough seafaring - way , they place . maybe you can guess that if you would have such a friend , you would have get into a way of be fond of he in course of time , and that my niece be kiender daughter - like to I . ' as she be silently trembl , he put she shawl carefully about she , take it up from the ground for that purpose . ' Whereby , ' say he ,
, 'I know , both as she would go to the wureld 's furdest end with I , if she could once see I again ; and that she would fly to the wureld 's furdest end to keep off seee I . for though she be not no call to doubt my love , and doe not - and doe not ,' he repeat , with a quiet assurance of the truth of what he say , ' there be shame step in , and keep betwixt we . ' I read , in every word of he plain impressive way of deliver himself , new evidence of he have think of this one topic , in every feature it present . ' accord to we reckoning ,' he proceed , ' 's here , and mine , she be like , one day , to make she own poor solitary course to . we believe - 'r , I , and all of we - that you be as innocent of everything that have befell she , as the unborn child . you have speak of she be pleasant , kind , and gentle to you . she , I know she be ! I know she always be , to all . you be thankful to she , and you love she . help we all you can to find she , and may heaven reward you ! ' she look at he hastily , and for the first time , as if she be doubtful of what he have say . ' will you trust I ? ' she ask , in a low voice of astonishment . ' full and free ! ' say . 'To speak to she , if I should ever find she ; shelter she , if I have any shelter to divide with she ; and then , without she knowledge , come to you , and bring you to she ? ' she ask hurriedly . we both reply together , ' yes ! ' she lift up she eye , and solemnly declare that she would devote herself to this task , fervently and faithfully . that she would never waver in it , never be divert from it , never relinquish it , while there be any chance of hope . if she be not true to it , might the object she now have in life , which bound she to something devoid of evil , in its passing away from she , leave she more forlorn and more despairing , if that be possible , than she have be upon the river 's brink that night ; and then might all help , human and , renounce she evermore ! she do not raise she voice above she breath , or address we , but say this to the night sky ; then stand profoundly quiet , look at the gloomy water . we judge it expedient , now , to tell she all we know ; which I recount at length . she listen with great attention , and with a face that often change , but have the same purpose in all its varying expression . she eye occasionally fill with tear , but those she repress . it seem as if she spirit be quite altered , and she could not be too quiet . she ask , when all be tell , where we be to be communicate with , if occasion should arise . under a dull lamp in the road , I write we two address on a leaf of my pocket - book , which I tore out and give to she , and which she put in she poor bosom . I ask she where she liv herself . she say , after a pause , in no place long . it be better not to know . suggest to I , in a whisper , what have already occur to myself , I take out my purse ; but I could not prevail upon she to accept any money , nor could I exact any promise from she that she would do so at another time . I represent to she that could not be call , for one in he condition , poor ; and that the idea of she engage in this search , while depend on she own resource , shock we both . she continue steadfast . in this particular , he influence upon she be equally powerless with mine . she gratefully thank he but remain inexorable . ' there may be work to be get , ' she say . 'I will try . ' ' at least take some assistance ,' I return , ' until you have try . ' 'I could not do what I have promise , for money , ' she reply . 'I could not take it , if I be starve . to give I money would be to take away you trust , to take away the object that you have give I , to take away the only certain thing that save I from the river . ' ' in the name of the great judge , ' say I , ' before whom you and all of we must stand at he dread time , dismiss that terrible idea ! we can all do some good , if we will . ' she tremble , and she lip shook , and she face be paler , as she answer : ' it have be put into you heart , perhaps , to save a wretch creature for repentance . I be afraid to think so ; it seem too bold . if any good should come of I , I might begin to hope ; for nothing but harm have ever come of my deed yet . I be to be
be trust , for the first time in a long while , with my miserable life , on account of what you have give I to try for . I know no more , and I can say no more . ' again she repress the tear that have begin to flow ; and , put out she trembling hand , and touch , as if there be some healing virtue in he , go away along the desolate road . she have be ill , probably for a long time . I observ , upon that closer opportunity of observation , that she be worn and haggard , and that she sunken eye express privation and endurance . we follow she at a short distance , we way lie in the same direction , until we come back into the lighted and populious street . I have such implicit confidence in she declaration , that I then put it to , whether it would not seem , in the onset , like distrust she , to follow she any farther . he be of the same mind , and equally reliant on she , we suffer she to take she own road , and take ours , which be towards . he accompany I a good part of the way ; and when we part , with a prayer for the success of this fresh effort , there be a new and thoughtful compassion in he that I be at no loss to interpret . it be midnight when I arrive at home . I have reach my own gate , and be stand listening for the deep bell of 's , the sound of which I think have be borne towards I among the multitude of striking clock , when I be rather surprised to see that the door of my aunt 's cottage be open , and that a faint light in the entry be shine out across the road . think that my aunt might have relapse into one of she old alarm , and might be watch the progress of some imaginary conflagration in the distance , I go to speak to she . it be with very great surprise that I see a man stand in she little garden . he have a glass and bottle in he hand , and be in the act of drinking . I stop short , among the thick foliage outside , for the moon be up now , though obscure ; and I recognize the man whom I have once suppose to be a delusion of 's , and have once encounter with my aunt in the street of the city . he be eat as well as drinking , and seem to eat with a hungry appetite . he seem curiious regard the cottage , too , as if it be the first time he have see it . after stoop to put the bottle on the ground , he look up at the window , and look about ; though with a covert and impatient air , as if he be anxious to be gone . the light in the passage be obscure for a moment , and my aunt come out . she be agitate , and tell some money into he hand . I hear it chink . ' what be the use of this ? ' he demand . 'I can spare no more , ' return my aunt . ' then I can not go , ' say he . ' Here ! you may take it back ! ' ' you bad man , ' return my aunt , with great emotion ; ' how can you use I so ? but why do I ask ? it be because you know how weak I be ! what have I to do , to free myself for ever of you visit , but to abandon you to you desert ? ' ' and why do not you abandon I to my desert ? ' say he . ' you ask I why ! ' return my aunt . ' what a heart you must have ! ' he stand moodily ratt the money , and shake he head , until at length he say : ' be this all you mean to give I , then ? ' ' it be all I can give you , ' say my aunt . ' you know I have have loss , and be poorer than I use to be . I have tell you so . have get it , why do you give I the pain of look at you for another moment , and see what you have become ? ' 'I have become shabby enough , if you mean that , ' he say . 'I lead the life of a owl . ' ' you stripp I of the greater part of all I ever have , ' say my aunt . ' you close my heart against the whole world , year and year . you treat I falsely , ungratefully , and cruelly . go , and repent of it . do not add new injury to the long , long list of injury you have do I ! ' ' aye ! ' he return . ' it be all very fine - well ! I must do the best I can , for the present , I suppose . ' in spite of himself , he appear abash by my aunt 's indignant tear , and come slouch out of the garden . take two or three quick step , as if I have just come up , I meet he at the gate , and go in as he come out . we ey one another narrowly in passing , and with no favour . , ' say I , hurriedly . '
' this man alarm you again ! let I speak to he . who be he ? ' ' child , ' return my aunt , take my arm , ' come in , and do not speak to I for ten minute . ' we sit down in she little parlour . my aunt retire behind the round green fan of former day , which be screw on the back of a chair , and occasionally wip she eye , for about a quarter of a hour . then she come out , and take a seat beside I . ' trot , ' say my aunt , calmly , ' it be my husband . ' ' you husband , aunt ? I think he have be dead ! ' ' dead to I , ' return my aunt , ' but liive . ' I sit in silent amazement . ' Betsey Trotwood do not look a likely subject for the tender passion , ' say my aunt , composedly , ' but the time be , , when she believe in that man most entirely . when she love he , , right well . when there be no proof of attachment and affection that she would not have give he . he repay she by break she fortune , and nearly break she heart . so she put all that sort of sentiment , once and for ever , in a grave , and fill it up , and flatten it down . ' 'My dear , good aunt ! ' 'I leave he , ' my aunt proceed , lay she hand as usual on the back of mine , ' generously . I may say at this distance of time , trot , that I leave he generously . he have be so cruel to I , that I might have effect a separation on easy term for myself ; but I do not . he soon make duck and drake of what I give he , sank lower and lower , marry another woman , I believe , become a adventurer , a gambler , and a cheat . what he be now , you see . but he be a fine - look man when I marry he , ' say my aunt , with a echo of she old pride and admiration in she tone ; ' and I believe he - I be a fool ! - to be the soul of honour ! ' she give my hand a squeeze , and shake she head . ' he be nothing to I now , - less than nothing . but , sooner than have he punish for he offence ( as he would be if he prowl about in this country ) , I give he more money than I can afford , at interval when he reappear , to go away . I be a fool when I marry he ; and I be so far a incurable fool on that subject , that , for the sake of what I once believe he to be , I would not have even this shadow of my idle fancy hardly deal with . for I be in earnest , trot , if ever a woman be . ' my aunt dismiss the matter with a heavy sigh , and smoothe she dress . ' there , my dear ! ' she say . ' now you know the beginning , middle , and end , and all about it . we will not mention the subject to one another any more ; neither , of course , will you mention it to anybody else . this be my grumpy , frumpy story , and we will keep it to ourselves , ! ' chapter 48 I laboure hard at my book , without allow it to interfere with the punctual discharge of my newspaper duty ; and it come out and be very successful . I be not stun by the praise which sound in my ear , notwithstand that I be keenly alive to it , and think better of my own performance , I have little doubt , than anybody else do . it have always be in my observation of human nature , that a man who have any good reason to believe in himself never flourish himself before the face of other people in order that they may believe in he . for this reason , I retain my modesty in very self - respect ; and the more praise I get , the more I try to deserve . it be not my purpose , in this record , though in all other essential it be my write memory , to pursue the history of my own fictions . they express themselves , and I leave they to themselves . when I refer to they , incidentally , it be only as a part of my progress . have some foundation for believe , by this time , that nature and accident have make I a author , I pursue my vocation with confidence . without such assurance I should certainly have leave it alone , and bestow my energy on some other endeavour . I should have try to find out what nature and accident really have make I , and to be that , and nothing else . I have be write , in the newspaper and elsewhere , so prosperously , that when my new success be achieve , I consider myself reasonably entitle to escape from the dreary debate . one joyful night , therefore , I note down the music of the parliamentary bagpipe for the last time , and I have never hear it since ; though I still recognize the old drone in the newspaper , without any substantial variation ( except , perhaps , that there
there be more of it ) , all the livelong session . I now write of the time when I have be marry , I suppose , about a year and a half . after several varietie of experiment , we have give up the housekeeping as a bad job . the house keep itself , and we keep a page . the principal function of this retainer be to quarrel with the cook ; in which respect he be a perfect , without he cat , or the remotest chance of be make . he appear to I to have live in a hail of saucepan - lid . he whole existence be a scuffle . he would shriek for help on the most improper occasion , - as when we have a little dinner - party , or a few friend in the evening , - and would come tumbl out of the kitchen , with iron missile fly after he . we want to get rid of he , but he be very much attach to we , and would not go . he be a tearful boy , and break into such deplorable lamentation , when a cessation of we connexion be hint at , that we be oblige to keep he . he have no mother - no anything in the way of a relative , that I could discover , except a sister , who fle to the moment we have take he off she hand ; and he become quarter on we like a horrible young changeling . he have a lively perception of he own unfortunate state , and be always rub he eye with the sleeve of he jacket , or stoop to blow he nose on the extreme corner of a little pocket - handkerchief , which he never would take completely out of he pocket , but always economize and secret . this unlucky page , engage in a evil hour at six pound ten per annum , be a source of continual trouble to I . I watch he as he grow - and he grow like scarlet bean - with painful apprehension of the time when he would begin to shave ; even of the day when he would be bald or grey . I see no prospect of ever get rid of he ; and , project myself into the future , use to think what a inconvenience he would be when he be a old man . I never expect anything less , than this unfortunate 's manner of get I out of my difficulty . he steal 's watch , which , like everything else belong to we , have no particular place of its own ; and , convert it into money , spend the produce ( he be always a weak - minded boy ) in incessantly ride up and down between and outside the coach . he be take to , as well as I remember , on the completion of he fifteenth journey ; when four - and - sixpence , and a second - hand fife which he could not play , be find upon he person . the surprise and its consequence would have be much less disagreeable to I if he have not be penitent . but he be very penitent indeed , and in a peculiar way - not in the lump , but by instalment . for example : the day after that on which I be oblige to appear against he , he make certain revelation touch a hamper in the cellar , which we believe to be full of wine , but which have nothing in it except bottle and corks . we suppose he have now ease he mind , and tell the worst he know of the cook ; but , a day or two afterwards , he conscience sustain a new twinge , and he disclose how she have a little girl , who , early every morning , take away we bread ; and also how he himself have be suborn to maintain the milkman in coal . in two or three day more , I be inform by the authority of he have lead to the discovery of sirloin of beef among the kitchen - stuff , and sheet in the rag -bag . a little while afterwards , he break out in a entirely new direction , and confess to a knowledge of burglarious intention as to we premise , on the part of the pot - boy , who be immediately take up . I get to be so ashamed of be such a victim , that I would have give he any money to hold he tongue , or would have offer a round bribe for he be permit to run away . it be a aggravate circumstance in the case that he have no idea of this , but conceive that he be make I amend in every new discovery : not to say , heap obligation on my head . at last I run away myself , whenever I see a emissary of the police approach with some new intelligence ; and live a stealthy life until he be try and order to be transport . even then he could not be quiet , but be always write we letter ; and want so much to see before he go away , that go to visit he , and faint when she find herself inside the iron bars . in short , I have no peace of my life until he be expatriate , and make ( as I afterwards hear ) a shepherd of , ' up the country ' somewhere ; I have no geographical idea where . all this lead I into some serious reflection , and present we mistakes in a new aspect ; as I could not help communicate
communicate to one evening , in spite of my tenderness for she . ' my love , ' say I , ' it be very painful to I to think that we want of system and management , involve not only ourselves ( which we have get use to ) , but other people . ' ' you have be silent for a long time , and now you be go to be ! ' say . ' no , my dear , indeed ! let I explain to you what I mean . ' 'I think I do not want to know , ' say . ' but I want you to know , my love . put down . ' put he nose to mine , and say ' ! ' to drive my seriousness away ; but , not succeed , order he into he Pagoday , and sit look at I , with she hand fold , and a most resign little expression of countenance . ' the fact be , my dear ,' I begin , ' there be contagion in we . we infect everyone about we . ' I might have go on in this figurative manner , if 's face have not admonish I that she be wonder with all she might whether I be go to propose any new kind of vaccination , or other medical remedy , for this unwholesome state of ours . therefore I check myself , and make my meaning plainer . ' it be not merely , my pet , ' say I , ' that we lose money and comfort , and even temper sometimes , by not learn to be more careful ; but that we incur the serious responsibility of spoiling everyone who come into we service , or have any dealings with we . I begin to be afraid that the fault be not entirely on one side , but that these people all turn out ill because we do not turn out very well ourselves . ' 'Oh , what a accusation , ' exclaim , open she eye wide ; 'too say that you ever see I take gold watch ! oh ! ' ' my dearest ,' I remonstrate , ' do not talk preposterous nonsense ! who have make the least allusion to gold watch ? ' ' you do , ' return . ' you know you do . you say I have not turn out well , and compare I to he . ' 'to whom ? ' I ask . 'to the page , ' sob . 'Oh , you cruel fellow , to compare you affectionate wife to a transport page ! why do not you tell I you opinion of I before we be marry ? why do not you say , you hard - hear thing , that you be convince I be worse than a transport page ? oh , what a dreadful opinion to have of I ! oh , my goodness ! ' ' now , , my love ,' I return , gently try to remove the handkerchief she press to she eye , ' this be not only very ridiculous of you , but very wrong . in the first place , it be not true . ' ' you always say he be a story - teller , ' sob . ' and now you say the same of I ! oh , what shall I do ! what shall I do ! ' ' my darling girl ,' I retort , ' I really must entreat you to be reasonable , and listen to what I do say , and do say . my dear , unless we learn to do we duty to those whom we employ , they will never learn to do they duty to we . I be afraid we present opportunity to people to do wrong , that never ink to be present . even if we be as lax as we be , in all we arrangement , by choice - which we be not - even if we like it , and find it agreeable to be so - which we do not - I be persuade we should have no right to go on in this way . we be positively corrupt people . we be bound to think off that . I can not help think of it , . it be a reflection I be unable to dismiss , and it sometimes make I very uneasy . there , dear , that be all . come now . do not be foolish ! ' would not allow I , for a long time , to remove the handkerchief . she sit sobbing and murmur behind it , that , if I be uneasy , why have I ever be marry ? why have not I say , even the day before we go to church , that I know I should be uneasy , and I would rather not ? if I could not bear she , why do not I send she away to she aunt at , or to in ? would be glad to see she , and would not call she a transport page ; never have call she anything of the sort . in short , be so afflict , and so afflict I by be in that condition , that I feel it be of no use repeat this kind of effort , though never so mildly , and I must take some other course . what other course be leave to take ? to ' form she mind ' ? this be a common phrase of word which have a fair and promising sound , and I resolve to form 's mind . I begin immediately . when be very childish , and I would have infinitely prefer to
to humour she , I try to be grave - and disconcert she , and myself too . I talk to she on the subject which occupy my thought ; and I read to she - and fatigue she to the last degree . I accustom myself to give she , as it be quite casually , little scrap of useful information , or sound opinion - and she start from they when I let they off , as if they have be cracker . no matter how incidentally or naturally I endeavoure to form my little wife 's mind , I could not help see that she always have a instinctive perception of what I be about , and become a prey to the keenest apprehension . in particular , it be clear to I , that she think a terrible fellow . the formation go on very slowly . I press Traddles into the service without he knowledge ; and whenever he come to see we , explode my mine upon he for the edification of at second hand . the amount of practical wisdom I bestow upon Traddle in this manner be immense , and of the best quality ; but it have no other effect upon than to depress she spirits , and make she always nervous with the dread that it would be she turn next . I find myself in the condition of a schoolmaster , a trap , a pitfall ; of always play spider to 's fly , and always pounce out of my hole to she infinite disturbance . still , look forward through this intermediate stage , to the time when there should be a perfect sympathy between and I , and when I should have ' form she mind ' to my entire satisfaction , I persever , even for month . find at last , however , that , although I have be all this time a very porcupine or hedgehog , bristl all over with determination , I have effect nothing , it begin to occur to I that perhaps 's mind be already for . on further consideration this appear so likely , that I abandon my scheme , which have have a more promising appearance in word than in action ; resolve henceforth to be satisfied with my child - wife , and to try to change she into nothing else by any process . I be heartily tired of be sagacious and prudent by myself , and of see my darling under restraint ; so I buy a pretty pair of ear- ring for she , and a collar for , and go home one day to make myself agreeable . be delighted with the little present , and kiss I joyfully ; but there be a shadow between we , however slight , and I have make up my mind that it should not be there . if there must be such a shadow anywhere , I would keep it for the future in my own breast . I sit down by my wife on the sofa , and put the ear- ring in she ear ; and then I tell she that I fear we have not be quite as good company lately , as we use to be , and that the fault be mine . which I sincerely feel , and which indeed it be . ' the truth be , , my life ,' I say ; 'I have be try to be wise . ' ' and to make I wise too , ' say , timidly . ' have not you , ? ' I nod assent to the pretty inquiry of the raise eyebrow , and kiss the parted lip . ' it be of not a bit of use , ' say , shak she head , until the ear-ring ring again . ' you know what a little thing I be , and what I want you to call I from the first . if you can not do so , I be afraid you will never like I . be you sure you do not think , sometimes , it would have be better to have -' ' do what , my dear ? ' for she make no effort to proceed . ' nothing ! ' say . ' nothing ? ' I repeat . she put she arm round my neck , and laugh , and call herself by she favourite name of a goose , and hide she face on my shoulder in such a profusion of curl that it be quite a task to clear they away and see it . ' do not I think it would have be better to have do nothing , than to have try to form my little wife 's mind ? ' say I , laugh at myself . ' be that the question ? yes , indeed , I do . ' ' be that what you have be try ? ' cry . ' oh what a shocke boy ! ' ' but I shall never try any more , ' say I . ' for I love she dearly as she be . ' ' without a story - really ? ' inquire , creep closer to I . ' why should I seek to change , ' say I , ' what have be so precious to I for so long ! you never can show better than as you own natural self , my sweet Dora ; and we will try no conceited experiment , but go back to we old way , and be happy . ' ' and be happy ! ' return . ' yes ! all day ! and you will not mind thing go a tiny morsel wrong , sometimes ? ' 'no , no ,' say I . ' we must do
do the best we can . ' ' and you will not tell I , any more , that we make other people bad , ' coax ; ' will you ? because you know it be so dreadfully cross ! ' 'no , no , ' say I . ' it be better for I to be stupid than uncomfortable , be not it ? ' say . ' better to be naturally than anything else in the world . ' ' in the world ! ah , , it be a large place ! ' she shook she head , turn she delight bright eye up to mine , kiss I , break into a merry laugh , and spring away to put on 's new collar . so end my last attempt to make any change in . I have be unhappy in try it ; I could not endure my own solitary wisdom ; I could not reconcile it with she former appeal to I as my child - wife . I resolve to do what I could , in a quiet way , to improve we proceedings myself , but I foresee that my utmost would be very little , or I must degenerate into the spider again , and be for ever lie in wait . and the shadow I have mention , that be not to be between we any more , but be to rest wholly on my own heart ? how do that fall ? the old unhappy feeling pervad my life . it be deepen , if it be change at all ; but it be as undefined as ever , and address I like a strain of sorrowful music faintly hear in the night . I love my wife dearly , and I be happy ; but the happiness I have vaguly anticipated , once , be not the happiness I enjoy , and there be always something want . in fulfilment of the compact I have make with myself , to reflect my mind on this paper , I again examine it , closely , and bring its secret to the light . what I miss , I still regard - I always regard - as something that have be a dream of my youthful fancy ; that be incapable of realization ; that I be now discover to be so , with some natural pain , as all man do . but that it would have be better for I if my wife could have help I more , and share the many thought in which i have no partner ; and that this might have be ; I know . between these two irreconcilable conclusion : the one , that what I feel be general and unavoidable ; the other , that it be particular to I , and might have be different : I balanc curiously , with no distinct sense of they opposition to each other . when I think of the airy dream of youth that be incapable of realization , I think of the better state precede manhood that I have outgrown ; and then the contented day with , in the dear old house , arise before I , like spectre of the dead , that might have some renewal in another world , but never more could be reanimate here . sometimes , the speculation come into my thought , what might have happen , or what would have happen , if and I have never know each other ? but she be so incorporate with my existence , that it be the idlest of all fancie , and would soon rise out of my reach and sight , like gossamer float in the air . I always love she . what I be describe , slumber , and half awoke , and sleep again , in the innermost recess of my mind . there be no evidence of it in I ; I know of no influence it have in anything I say or do . I bear the weight of all we little care , and all my project ; hold the pens ; and we both feel that we share be adjust as the case require . she be truly fond of I , and proud of I ; and when write a few earnest word in she letter to , of the pride and interest with which my old friend heard of my grow reputation , and read my book as if they hear I speak its contents , read they out to I with tear of joy in she bright eye , and say I be a dear old clever , famous boy . ' the first mistaken impulse of a undisciplined heart . ' those word of 's be constantly recurr to I , at this time ; be almost always present to my mind . I awoke with they , often , in the night ; I remember to have even read they , in dream , inscribe upon the wall of house . for I know , now , that my own heart be undisciplined when it first love ; and that if it have be disciplin , it never could have feel , when we be marry , what it have felt in its secret experience . ' there can be no disparity in marriage , like unsuitability of mind and purpose . ' those word I remembe too . I have endeavoure to adapt to myself , and find it impracticable . it remain for I to adapt myself to ; to share with she what I could , and be happy ; to bear on my own shoulders what I must , and be happy still . this be the discipline to which i try to bring my heart , when I begin to think . it make my second
second year much happier than my first ; and , what be better still , make 's life all sunshine . but , as that year wear on , be not strong . I have hope that lighter hand than mine would help to mould she character , and that a baby - smile upon she breast might change my child - wife to a woman . it be not to be . the spirit flutter for a moment on the threshold of its little prison , and , unconscious of captivity , take wing . ' when I can run about again , as I use to do , aunt , ' say , 'I shall make race . he be get quite slow and lazy . ' 'I suspect , my dear , ' say my aunt quietly work by she side , ' he have a worse disorder than that . , . ' ' do you think he be old ? ' say , astonished . 'Oh , how strange it seem that should be old ! ' ' it be a complaint we be all liable to , one , as we get on in life , ' say my aunt , cheerfully ; 'I do not feel more free from it than I use to be , I assure you . ' ' but , ' say , look at he with compassion , ' even little ! oh , poor fellow ! ' 'I dare say he will last a long time yet , , ' say my aunt , pat on the cheek , as she lean out of she couch to look at , who responde by stand on he hind leg , and baulk himself in various asthmatic attempt to scramble up by the head and shoulders . ' he must have a piece of flannel in he house this winter , and I should not wonder if he come out quite fresh again , with the flower in the spring . bless the little dog ! ' exclaim my aunt , ' if he have as many life as a cat , and be on the point of lose 'em all , he would bark at I with he last breath , I believe ! ' have help he up on the sofa ; where he really be defy my aunt to such a furious extent , that he could not keep straight , but bark himself sideway . the more my aunt look at he , the more he reproach she ; for she have lately take to spectacle , and for some inscrutable reason he consider the glass personal . make he lie down by she , with a good deal of persuasion ; and when he be quiet , draw one of he long ear through and through she hand , repeat thoughtfully , ' even little ! oh , poor fellow ! ' ' he lung be good enough , ' say my aunt , gaily , ' and he dislike be not at all feeble . he have a good many year before he , no doubt . but if you want a dog to race with , , he have liv too well for that , and I will give you one . ' ' thank you , aunt , ' say , faintly . ' but do not , please ! ' 'no ? ' say my aunt , take off she spectacle . 'I could not have any other dog but , ' say . ' it would be so unkind to ! besides , I could not be such friend with any other dog but Jip ; because he would not have know I before I be married , and would not have bark at when he first come to we house . I could not care for any other dog but Jip , I be afraid , aunt . ' 'To be sure ! ' say my aunt , pat she cheek again . ' you be right . ' ' you be not offend , ' say . ' be you ? ' ' why , what a sensitive pet it be ! ' cry my aunt , bend over she affectionately . 'To think that I could be offended ! ' ' no , no , I do not really think so , ' return ; ' but I be a little tired , and it make I silly for a moment - I be always a silly little thing , you know , but it make I more silly - to talk about . he have know I in all that have happene to I , have not you , ? and I could not bear to slight he , because he be a little altered - could I , ? ' Jip nestle closer to he mistress , and lazily licke she hand . ' you be not so old , , be you , that you will leave you mistress yet ? ' say . ' we may keep one another company a little longer ! ' my pretty Dora ! when she come down to dinner on the ensuing , and be so glad to see old Traddles ( who always dine with we on ) , we think she would be ' run about as she use to do ' , in a few day . but they say , wait a few day more ; and then , wait a few day more ; and still she neither run nor walk . she look very pretty , and be very merry ; but the little foot that use to be so nimble when they dance round , be dull and motionless . I begin to carry she downstair every morning , and upstairs every night . she would clasp I round the
the neck and laugh , the while , as if I do it for a wager . Jip would bark and caper round we , and go on before , and look back on the landing , breathing short , to see that we be come . my aunt , the best and most cheerful of nurse , would trudge after we , a move mass of shawl and pillow . would not have relinquish he post of candle - bearer to anyone alive . Traddle would be often at the bottom of the staircase , look on , and take charge of sportive message from to the dearest girl in the world . we make quite a gay procession of it , and my child - wife be the gayest there . but , sometimes , when I take she up , and feel that she be lighter in my arm , a dead blank feeling come upon I , as if I be approach to some freeze region yet unseen , that numb my life . I avoid the recognition of this feel by any name , or by any communing with myself ; until one night , when it be very strong upon I , and my aunt have leave she with a part cry of ' good night , ,' I sit down at my desk alone , and cry to think , oh what a fatal name it be , and how the blossom wither in its bloom upon the tree ! chapter 49 I be involve in mystery I receive one morning by the post , the follow letter , date , and address to I at 's Commons ; which I read with some surprise : 'my , ' circumstance beyond my individual control have , for a considerable lapse of time , effect a severance of that intimacy which , in the limited opportunity conced to I in the midst of my professional duty , of contemplate the scene and event of the past , tinge by the prismatic hue of memory , have ever afford I , as it ever must continue to afford , gratify emotions of no common description . this fact , my dear sir , combine with the distinguished elevation to which you talents have raise you , deter I from presuming to aspire to the liberty of address the companion of my youth , by the familiar appellation of ! it be sufficient to know that the name to which i do myself the honour to refer , will ever be treasure among the muniment of we house ( I allude to the archive connect with we former lodger , preserve by ) , with sentiment of personal esteem amount to affection . ' it be not for one , situate , through he original error and a fortuitous combination of unpropitious event , as be the founder ( if he may be allow to assume so maritime a denomination ) , who now take up the pen to address you - it be not , I repeat , for one so circumstanced , to adopt the language of compliment , or of congratulation . that he leave to abler and to purer hand . ' if you more important avocation should admit of you ever trace these imperfect character thus far - which may be , or may not be , as circumstance arise - you will naturally inquire by what object be I influence , then , in indit the present missive ? allow I to say that I fully defer to the reasonable character of that inquiry , and proceed to develop it ; premise that it be not a object of a pecuniary nature . ' without more directly refer to any latent ability that may possibly exist on my part , of wield the thunderbolt , or direct the devouring and avenge flame in any quarter , I may be permit to observe , in passing , that my brightest vision be for ever dispell - that my peace be shatte and my power of enjoyment destroy - that my heart be no longer in the right place - and that I no more walk erect before my fellow man . the canker be in the flower . the cup be bitter to the brim . the worm be at he work , and will soon dispose of he victim . the sooner the better . but I will not digress . ' place in a mental position of peculiar painfulness , beyond the assuage reach even of 's influence , though exercise in the tripartite character of woman , wife , and mother , it be my intention to fly from myself for a short period , and devote a respite of eight - and - forty hour to revisit some metropolitan scene of past enjoyment . among other haven of domestic tranquillity and peace of mind , my foot will naturally tend towards the 's . in stating that I shall be ( ) on the outside of the south wall of that place of incarceration on civil process , the day after tomorrow , at seven in the evening , precisely , my object in this epistolary communication be accomplish . 'I do not feel warrant in solicite my former friend , or my former friend of the , if that gentleman be still existent and forthcoming , to condescmend to meet I , and renew ( so far as may be ) we past relation of the olden time . I confine myself to throw out the observation , that , at the hour and place I have indicate , may be find such ruined vestige as ' , ' , . ' P. . it may be advisable to superadd to the above , the statement that be not in confidential possession of my intentions . '
' I read the letter over several time . make due allowance for 's lofty style of composition , and for the extraordinary relish with which he sit down and write long letter on all possible and impossible occasion , I still believe that something important lay hidden at the bottom of this roundabout communication . I put it down , to think about it ; and take it up again , to read it once more ; and be still pursue it , when Traddles find I in the height of my perplexity . ' my dear fellow , ' say I , never be better pleased to see you . you come to give I the benefit of you sober judgement at a most opportune time . I have receive a very singular letter , Traddle , from . ' ' no ? ' cry Traddles . ' you do not say so ? and I have receive one from ! ' with that , , who be flush with walking , and whose hair , under the combine effect of exercise and excitement , stand on end as if he see a cheerful ghost , produce he letter and make a exchange with I . I watch he into the heart of 's letter , and return the elevation of eyebrow with which he say " ' wield the thunderbolt , or direct the devouring and avenge flame ! " bless I , ! '- and then enter on the perusal of 's epistle . it run thus : ' my best regards to , and if he should still remember one who formerly have the happiness of be well acquaint with he , may I beg a few moment of he leisure time ? I assure that I would not intrude upon he kindness , be I in any other position than on the confines of distraction . ' though harrow to myself to mention , the alienation of ( formerly so domesticate ) from he wife and family , be the cause of my address my unhappy appeal to , and solicite he best indulgence . can form no adequate idea of the change in 's conduct , of he wildness , of he violence . it have gradually augment , until it assume the appearance of aberration of intellect . Scarcely a day pass , I assure , on which some paroxysm do not take place . will not require I to depict my feeling , when I inform he that I have become accustomed to hear assert that he have sell himself to the mystery and secrecy have long be he principal characteristic , have long replace unlimited confidence . the slightest provocation , even be ask if there be anything he would prefer for dinner , cause he to express a wish for a separation . last night , on be childishly solicit for twopence , to buy ' lemon - stunner ' - a local sweetmeat - he present a oyster - knife at the twin ! 'I entreat to bear with I in enter into these detail . without they , would indeed find it difficult to form the faintest conception of my heart - rende situation . ' may I now venture to confide to the purport of my letter ? will he now allow I to throw myself on he friendly consideration ? oh yes , for I know he heart ! ' the quick eye of affection be not easily blind , when of the female sex . be go to . though he studiously conceal he hand , this morning before breakfast , in write the direction - card which he attach to the little brown valise of happier day , the eagle - glance of matrimonial anxiety detect , , of , and , distinctly trace . the - destination of the coach , be the . dare I fervently implore to see my misguided husband , and to reason with he ? I ask to endeaavor to step in between and he agonize family ? oh no , for that would be too much ! ' if Copperfield should yet remember one unknown to fame , will take charge of my unalterable regards and similar entreaty ? in any case , he will have the benevolence to consider this communication strictly private , and on no account whatever to be allude to , however distantly , in the presence of . if should ever reply to it ( which I can not but feel to be most improbable ) , a letter address to , , , will be fraught with less painful consequence than any address immediately to one , who subscribe herself , in extreme distress , ' 's respectful friend and suppliant , ' . ' ' what do you think of that letter ? ' say Traddles , cast he eye upon I , when I have read it twice . ' what do you think of the other ? ' say I . for he be still read it with knit brows . 'I think that the two together , , ' reply Traddles , ' mean more than and usually mean in they correspondence - but I do not know what . they be both write in good faith , I have no doubt , and without any collusion . poor thing ! ' he be now allud to 's letter , and we be stand side by side compare the two ; ' it will be a charity to write to she , at all event , and tell she that we will not fail to see . ' I acced to this the more readily , because I now reproach myself with have treat she former letter rather lightly . it have set I think a good deal at the time , as I have mention in
in its place ; but my absorption in my own affair , my experience of the family , and my hear nothing more , have gradually end in my dismiss the subject . I have often thought of the , but chiefly to wonder what ' pecuniary liability ' they be establish in , and to recall how shy be of I when he become clerk to . however , I now write a comforting letter to , in we jous not name , and we both sign it . as we walk into town to post it , Traddles and I hold a long conference , and launch into a number of speculation , which I need not repeat . we take my aunt into we counsels in the afternoon ; but we only decide conclusion be , that we would be very punctual in keep 's appointment . although we appear at the stipulated place a quarter of a hour before the time , we find already there . he be stand with he arm fold , over against the wall , look at the spike on the top , with a sentimental expression , as if they be the interlacing bough of tree that have shade he in he youth . when we accost he , he manner be something more confused , and something less genteel , than of yore . he have relinquish he legal suit of black for the purpose of this excursion , and wear the old surtout and tight , but not quite with the old air . he gradually pick up more and more of it as we converse with he ; but , he very eye - glass seem to hang less easily , and he shirt - collar , though still of the old formidable dimension , rather droop . ' ! ' say , after the first salutation , ' you be friend in need , and friend indeed . allow I to offer my inquirie with reference to the physical welfare of Copperfield in esse , and Traddles in posse , - presum , that be to say , that my friend be not yet unit to the object of he affections , for weal and for woe . ' we acknowledge he politeness , and make suitable reply . he then direct we attention to the wall , and be begin , ' I assure you , gentlemen , ' when I venture to object to that ceremonious form of address , and to beg that he would speak to we in the old way . ' my dear Copperfield ,' he return , press my hand , ' you cordiality overpower I . this reception of a shattered fragment of the once call man - if I may be permit so to express myself - bespeak a heart that be a honour to we common nature . I be about to observe that I again behold the serene spot where some of the happiest hour of my existence fleete by . ' ' Made so , I be sure , by , ' say I . 'I hope she be well ? ' ' thank you , ' return , whose face cloude at this reference , ' she be but so - so . and this , ' say , nodd he head sorrowfully , ' be the bench ! where , for the first time in many revolve year , the overwhelming pressure of pecuniary liability be not proclaim , from day to day , by importune voice decline to vacate the passage ; where there be no knocker on the door for any creditor to appeal to ; where personal service of process be not require , and detainee be merely lod at the gate ! , ' say , ' when the shadow of that iron - work on the summit of the brick structure have be reflecte on the gravel of the parade , I have see my child thread the maze of the intricate pattern , avoid the dark marnks . I have be familiar with every stone in the place . if I betray weakness , you will know how to excuse I . ' ' we have all get on in life since then , , ' say I . ' , ' return , bitterly , ' when I be a inmate of that retreat I could look my fellow - man in the face , and punch he head if he offend I . my fellow - man and myself be no longer on those glorious term ! ' turn from the building in a downcast manner , accept my proffer arm on one side , and the proffer arm of Traddle on the other , and walk away between we . ' there be some landmarks , ' observe , look fondly back over he shoulder , 'on the road to the tomb , which , but for the impiety of the aspiration , a man would wish never to have pass . be the bench in my chequered career . ' 'Oh , you be in low spirit , , ' say Traddles . am , sir , ' interpose . 'i hope , ' say , ' it be not because you have conceive a dislike to the law - for I be a lawyer myself , you know . ' answer not a word . ' how be we friend , ? ' say I , after a silence . ' my dear , ' return , burst into a state of much excitement , and turn pale , ' if you ask after my employer as you friend , I be sorry for it ; if you ask after he as my friend , I sardonically smile at it . in whatever capacity you ask after my employer , I beg
beg , without offence to you , to limit my reply to this - that whatever he state of health may be , he appearance be foxy : not to say diabolical . you will allow I , as a private individual , to decline pursue a subject which have lash I to the utmost verge of desperation in my professional capacity . ' I express my regret for have innocently touch upon a theme that rouse he so much . ' may I ask , ' say I , ' without any hazard of repea the mistake , how my old friend and be ? ' ' , ' say , now turn red , 'is , as she always be , a pattern , and a bright example . my dear Copperfield , she be the only starry spot in a miserable existence . my respect for that young lady , my admiration of she character , my devotion to she for she love and truth , and goodness ! - take I , ' say , ' down a turning , for , upon my soul , in my present state of mind I be not equal to this ! ' we wheel he off into a narrow street , where he take out he pocket - handkerchief , and stand with he back to a wall . if I look as gravely at he as do , he must have find we company by no means inspirit . ' it be my fate , ' say , unfeignedly sobb , but do even that , with a shadow of the old expression of do something genteel ; ' it be my fate , gentlemen , that the finer feeling of we nature have become reproach to I . my homage to , be a flight of arrow in my bosom . you have better leave I , if you please , to walk the earth as a vagabond . the worm will settle my business in double - quick time . ' without attend to this invocation , we stand by , until he put up he pocket - handkerchief , pull up he shirt - collar , and , to delude any person in the neighbourhood who might have be observe he , hum a tune with he hat very much on one side . I then mention - not know what might be lose if we lose sight of he yet - that it would give I great pleasure to introduce he to my aunt , if he would ride out to , where a bed be at he service . ' you shall make we a glass of you own punch , , ' say I , ' and forget whatever you have on you mind , in pleasanter reminiscence . ' 'Or , if confid anything to friend will be more likely to relieve you , you shall impart it to we , , ' say Traddles , prudently . ' , ' return , 'due with I as you will ! I be a straw upon the surface of the deep , and be toss in all direction by the elephants - I beg you pardon ; I should have say the element . ' we walk on , arm -in - arm , again ; find the coach in the act of start ; and arrive at without encounter any difficulty by the way . I be very uneasy and very uncertain in my mind what to say or do for the best - so be Traddles , evidently . be for the most part plunge into deep gloom . he occasionally make a attempt to smarten himself , and hum the fag - end of a tune ; but he relapse into profound melancholy be only make the more impressive by the mockery of a hat exceedingly on one side , and a shirt - collar pull up to he eye . we go to my aunt 's house rather than to mine , because of 's not be well . my aunt present herself on be send for , and welcome with gracious cordiality . kiss she hand , retire to the window , and pull out he pocket - handkerchief , have a mental wrestle with himself . be at home . he be by nature so exceedingly compassionate of anyone who seem to be ill at ease , and be so quick to find any such person out , that he shook hands with , at least half - a - dozen time in five minute . to , in he trouble , this warmth , on the part of a stranger , be so extremely touche , that he could only say , on the occasion of each successive shake , ' my dear sir , you overpower I ! ' which gratify so much , that he go at it again with greater vigour than before . ' the friendliness of this gentleman , ' say to my aunt , ' if you will allow I , ma 'am , to cull a figure of speech from the vocabulary of we coarser national sport - floor I . to a man who be struggle with a complicated burden of perplexity and disquiet , such a reception be try , I assure you . ' ' my friend , ' reply my aunt proudly , not a common man . ' ' that I be convinced of , ' say . ' my dear sir ! ' for be shak hand with he again ; 'I be deeply sensible of you cordiality ! ' ' how do you find yourself ? ' say , with a anxious look . ' indifferent , my dear sir , ' return , sigh . ' you must keep up you spirit , ' say , ' and make yourself
yourself as comfortable as possible . ' be quite overcome by these friendly word , and by find 's hand again within he own . ' it have be my lot ,' he observ , 'to meet , in the diversified panorama of human existence , with a occasional oasis , but never with one so green , so gushing , as the present ! ' at another time I should have be amuse by this ; but I feel that we be all constrained and uneasy , and I watch so anxiously , in he vacillation between a evident disposition to reveal something , and a counter-disposition to reveal nothing , that I be in a perfect fever . Traddle , sit on the edge of he chair , with he eye wide open , and he hair more emphatically erect than ever , star by turn at the ground and at , without so much as attempt to put in a word . my aunt , though I see that she shrewdest observation be concentrate on she new guest , have more useful possession of she wit than either of we ; for she hold he in conversation , and make it necessary for he to talk , whether he like it or not . ' you be a very old friend of my nephew 's , , ' say my aunt . 'i wish I have have the pleasure of see you before . ' ' madam , ' return , 'i wish I have have the honour of know you at a earlier period . I be not always the wreck you at present behold . ' 'I hope and you family be well , sir , ' say my aunt . inclin he head . ' they be as well , ma 'am ,' he desperately observ after a pause , 'as and can ever hope to be . ' ' bless you , sir ! ' exclaim my aunt , in she abrupt way . ' what be you talk about ? ' ' the subsistence of my family , ma 'am , ' return , ' tremble in the balance . my employer -' Here provokingly leave off ; and begin to peel the lemon that have be under my direction set before he , together with all the other appliance he use in make punch . ' you employer , you know , ' say , jogge he arm as a gentle reminder . ' my good sir , ' return , ' you recall I , I be oblige to you . ' they shook hand again . ' my employer , ma 'am - - once do I the favour to observe to I , that if I be not in the receipt of the stipendiary emolument appertain to my engagement with he , I should probably be a mountebank about the country , swallow a sword - blade , and eat the devouring element . for anything that I can perceive to the contrary , it be still probable that my child may be reduce to seek a livelihood by personal contortion , while abet they unnatural feat by play the barrel - organ . ' , with a random but expressive flourish of he knife , signify that these performance might be expect to take place after he be no more ; then resume he peeling with a desperate air . my aunt lean she elbow on the little round table that she usually keep beside she , and eye he attentively . Notwithstand the aversion with which I regard the idea of entrapp he into any disclosure he be not prepare to make voluntarily , I should have take he up at this point , but for the strange proceedings in which I see he engage ; whereor he put the lemon - peel into the kettle , the sugar into the snuffer - tray , the spirit into the empty jug , and confidently attempt to pour boiling water out of a candlestick , be among the most remarkable . I see that a crisis be at hand , and it come . he clatter all he mean and implement together , rise from he chair , pull out he pocket - handkerchief , and burst into tear . ' my dear , ' say , behind he handkerchief , ' this be a occupation , of all other , require a untroubled mind , and self - respect . I can not perform it . it be out of the question . ' ' , ' say I , ' what be the matter ? pray speak out . you be among friend . ' ' among friend , sir ! ' repeat ; and all he have reserve come break out of he . ' good heaven , it be principally because I be among friend that my state of mind be what it be . what be the matter , gentlemen ? what be not the matter ? be the matter ; baseness be the matter ; deception , fraud , conspiracy , be the matter ; and the name of the whole atrocious mass be - ! ' my aunt clap she hand , and we all start up as if we be possess . ' the struggle be over ! ' say violently gesticulat with he pocket - handkerchief , and fairly strike out from time to time with both arm , as if he be swim under superhuman difficulty . 'I will lead this life no longer . I be a wretched being , cut off from everything that make life tolerable . I have be under a in that infernal scoundrel 's service . give I back my wife , give I back my family , substitute for the petty wretch who walk about in the boot at present on
on my foot , and call upon I to swallow a sword tomorrow , and I will do it . with a appetite ! ' I never see a man so hot in my life . I try to calm he , that we might come to something rational ; but he get hotter and hotter , and would not hear a word . 'I will put my hand in no man 's hand , ' say , gas , puffe , and sobb , to that degree that he be like a man fight with cold water , ' until I have - blow to fragment - the - a - detestable - serpent - Heep ! I will partake of no one 's hospitality , until I have - a - move - to eruption - on - a - the abandon rascal - Heep ! refreshment - a - underneath this roof - particularly punch - would - a - choke I - unless - I have - previously - chok the eye - out of the head - a - of - interminable cheat , and liar - Heep ! I - a - I will know nobody - and - a - say nothing - and - a - live nowhere - until I have crush - to - a - undiscoverable atom - the - transcendent and immortal hypocrite and perjurer - Heep ! ' I really have some fear of 's dying on the spot . the manner in which he struggl through these inarticulate sentence , and , whenever he find himself get near the name of , fight he way on to it , dash at it in a fainting state , and bring it out with a vehemence little less than , be frightful ; but now , when he sank into a chair , steam , and look at we , with every possible colour in he face that have no business there , and a endless procession of lump follow one another in hot haste up he throat , whence they seem to shoot into he forehead , he have the appearance of be in the last extremity . I would have go to he assistance , but he wave I off , and would not hear a word . 'no , ! - no communication - a - until - - a - redress from wrong inflict by consummate scoundrel - Heep ! ' ( I be quite convince he could not have utter three word , but for the amazing energy with which this word inspire he when he feel it come . ) ' Inviolable secret - a - from the whole world - a - no exception - this day week - a - at breakfast - time - a - everybody present - include aunt - a - and extremely friendly gentleman - to be at the hotel at - a - where - and myself - Syne in chorus - and - a - will expose intolerable ruffian - Heep ! no more to say - a - or listen to persuasion - go immediately - not capable - a - bear society - upon the track of devoted and doom traitor - Heep ! ' with this last repetition of the magic word that have keep he go at all , and in which he surpass all he previous effort , rush out of the house ; leave we in a state of excitement , hope , and , that reduce we to a condition little better than he own . but even then he passion for writing letter be too strong to be resist ; for while we be yet in the height of we excitement , hope , and , the follow pastoral note be bring to I from a neighbour tavern , at which he have call to write it : - ' Most secret and confidential . , beg to be allow to convey , through you , my apology to you excellent aunt for my late excitement . a explosion of a smoulder volcano long suppress , be the result of a internal contest more easily conceive than describe . 'I trust I render tolerably intelligible my appointment for the morning of this day week , at the house of public entertainment at , where and myself have once the honour of uniting we voice to yours , in the well - know strain of the Immortal exciseman nurture beyond the . ' the duty do , and act of reparation perform , which can alone enable I to contemplate my fellow mortal , I shall be know no more . I shall simply require to be deposit in that place of universal resort , where each in he narrow cell for ever laid , the rude forefather of the hamlet sleep , ' - with the plain Inscription , . ' 50 's by this time , some months have pass since we interview on the bank of the river with . I have never see she since , but she have communicate with on several occasion . nothing have come of she zealous intervention ; nor could I infer , from what he tell I , that any clue have be obtain , for a moment , to 's fate . I confess that I begin to despair of she recovery , and gradually to sink deeper and deeper into the belief that she be dead . he conviction remain unchanged . so far as I know - and I believe he honest heart be transparent to I - he never wave again , in he solemn certainty of find she . he patience never tire . and , although I tremble for the agony it might one day be to he to have he strong assurance shiver at a blow , there be something
something so religious in it , so affectingly expressive of its anchor be in the purest depth of he fine nature , that the respect and honour in which I hold he be exalt every day . he be not a lazy trustfulness that hope , and do no more . he have be a man of sturdy action all he life , and he know that in all thing wherein he want help he must do he own part faithfully , and help himself . I have know he set out in the night , on a misgiving that the light might not be , by some accident , in the window of the old boat , and walk to . I have know he , on read something in the newspaper that might apply to she , take up he stick , and go forth on a journey of three - or four - score mile . he make he way by sea to , and back , after hear the narrative to which have assist I . all he journey be ruggedly perform ; for he be always steadfast in a purpose of save money for 's sake , when she should be find . in all this long pursuit , I never hear he repine ; I never hear he say he be fatigue , or out of heart . have often see he since we marriage , and be quite fond of he . I fancy he figure before I now , stand near she sofa , with he rough cap in he hand , and the blue eye of my child - wife raise , with a timid wonder , to he face . sometimes of a evening , about twilight , when he come to talk with I , I would induce he to smoke he pipe in the garden , as we slowly pace to and for together ; and then , the picture of he desert home , and the comfortable air it use to have in my childish eye of a evening when the fire be burn , and the wind moan round it , come most vividly into my mind . one evening , at this hour , he tell I that he have find wait near he lodging on the preceding night when he come out , and that she have ask he not to leave on any account , until he should have see she again . ' do she tell you why ? ' I inquire . 'I ask she , , ' he reply , ' but it be but few word as she ever say , and she on 'y get my promise and so go away . ' ' do she say when you might expect to see she again ? ' I demand . 'no , ,' he return , draw he hand thoughtfully down he face . 'I ask that too ; but it be more ( she say ) than she could tell . ' as I have long forborne to encourage he with hope that hang on thread , I make no other comment on this information than that I suppose he would see she soon . such speculation as it engender within I I keep to myself , and those be faint enough . I be walk alone in the garden , one evening , about a fortnight afterwards . I remember that even well . it be the second in 's week of suspense . there have be rain all day , and there be a damp feeling in the air . the leave be thick upon the tree , and heavy with wet ; but the rain have cease , though the sky be still dark ; and the hopeful bird be singe cheerfully . as I walk to and for in the garden , and the twilight begin to close around I , they little voice be hush ; and that peculiar silence which belong to such a evening in the country when the lightest tree be quite still , save for the occasional droppings from they bough , prevail . there be a little green perspective of trellis - work and ivy at the side of we cottage , through which I could see , from the garden where I be walk , into the road before the house . I happen to turn my eye towards this place , as I be think of many thing ; and I see a figure beyond , dress in a plain cloak . it be bend eagerly towards I , and beckon . ' ! ' say I , go to it . ' can you come with I ? ' she inquire , in a agitated whisper . 'I have be to he , and he be not at home . I write down where he be to come , and leave it on he table with my own hand . they say he would not be out long . I have tiding for he . can you come directly ? ' my answer be , to pass out at the gate immediately . she make a hasty gesture with she hand , as if to entreat my patience and my silence , and turn towards , whence , as she dress betoken , she have come expeditiously on foot . I ask she if that be not we destination ? on she motioning yes , with the same hasty gesture as before , I stop a empty coach that be come by , and we get into it . when I ask she where the coachman be to drive , she answer , ' anywhere near ! and quick ! ' - then shrink into a corner , with one trembl hand before she face , and the other make the former gesture , as
as if she could not bear a voice . now much disturbed , and dazzl with conflict gleam of hope and dread , I look at she for some explanation . but see how strongly she desire to remain quiet , and feel that it be my own natural inclination too , at such a time , I do not attempt to break the silence . we proceed without a word be speak . sometimes she glance out of the window , as though she think we be go slowly , though indeed we be go fast ; but otherwise remain exactly as at first . we alight at one of the entrance to the she have mention , where I direct the coach to wait , not know but that we might have some occasion for it . she lay she hand on my arm , and hurrie I on to one of the sombre street , of which there be several in that part , where the house be once fair dwelling in the occupation of single family , but have , and have , long degenerat into poor lodging let off in room . enter at the open door of one of these , and release my arm , she beckon I to follow she up the common staircase , which be like a tributary channel to the street . the house swarm with inmate . as we go up , door of room be open and people 's head put out ; and we pass other people on the stair , who be come down . in glancing up from the outside , before we enter , I have see woman and child lol at the window over flower - pots ; and we seem to have attract they curiosity , for these be principally the observers who look out of they door . it be a broad panel staircase , with massive balustrade of some dark wood ; cornice above the door , ornament with carved fruit and flower ; and broad seat in the window . but all these token of past grandeur be miserably decayed and dirty ; rot , damp , and age , have weaken the flooring , which in many place be unsound and even unsafe . some attempt have be make , I notice , to infuse new blood into this dwindling frame , by repair the costly old wood - work here and there with common deal ; but it be like the marriage of a reduce old noble to a plebeian pauper , and each party to the ill - assort union shrunk away from the other . of the back window on the staircase have be darken or wholly block up . in those that remain , there be scarcely any glass ; and , through the crumble frame by which the bad air seem always to come in , and never to go out , I see , through other glassless window , into other house in a similar condition , and look giddily down into a wretched yard , which be the common dust -heap of the mansion . we proceed to the top - storey of the house . two or three time , by the way , I think I observe in the indistinct light the skirt of a female figure go up before we . as we turn to ascend the last flight of stair between we and the roof , we catch a full view of this figure pause for a moment , at a door . then it turn the handle , and go in . ' what be this ! ' say , in a whisper . ' she have go into my room . I do not know she ! ' I know she . I have recognize she with amazement , for . I say something to the effect that it be a lady whom I have see before , in a few word , to my conductress ; and have scarcely do so , when we hear she voice in the room , though not , from where we stand , what she be say . , with a astonished look , repeat she former action , and softly lead I up the stair ; and then , by a little back - door which seem to have no lock , and which she push open with a touch , into a small empty garret with a low sloping roof , little better than a cupboard . between this , and the room she have call hers , there be a small door of communication , stand partly open . here we stop , breathless with we ascent , and she place she hand lightly on my lip . I could only see , of the room beyond , that it be pretty large ; that there be a bed in it ; and that there be some common picture of ship upon the wall . I could not see , or the person whom we have hear she address . certainly , my companion could not , for my position be the best . a dead silence prevail for some moment . keep one hand on my lip , and raise the other in a listening attitude . ' it matter little to I she not be at home , ' say haughtily , 'I know nothing of she . it be you I come to see . ' 'Me ? ' reply a soft voice . at the sound of it , a thrill go through my frame . for it be 's ! ' yes , ' return , 'I have come to look at you . what ? you be not asham of the face that have do so much ? ' the resolute and unrelenting hatred of she tone , it
it be cold stern sharpness , and its master rage , present she before I , as if I have see she stand in the light . I see the flashing black eye , and the passion - waste figure ; and I see the scar , with its white track cut through she lip , quiver and throbb as she speak . 'I have come to see , ' she say , ' 's fancy ; the girl who run away with he , and be the town - talk of the commonest people of she native place ; the bold , flaunt , practise companion of person like . I want to know what such a thing be like . ' there be a rustle , as if the unhappy girl , on whom she heape these taunt , run towards the door , and the speaker swiftly interpose herself before it . it be succeed by a moment 's pause . when speak again , it be through she set tooth , and with a stamp upon the ground . ' stay there ! ' she say , 'or I will proclaim you to the house , and the whole street ! if you try to evade I , I will stop you , if it be by the hair , and raise the very stone against you ! ' a frightened murmur be the only reply that reach my ear . a silence succeed . I do not know what to do . much as I desire to put a end to the interview , I feel that I have no right to present myself ; that it be for alone to see she and recover she . would he never come ? I think impatiently . 'So ! ' say , with a contemptuous laugh , 'I see she at last ! why , he be a poor creature to be take by that delicate mock - modesty , and that hang head ! ' 'Oh , for 's sake , spare I ! ' exclaim Emily . ' whoever you be , you know my pitiable story , and for 's sake spare I , if you would be spare yourself ! ' ' if I would be spare ! ' return the other fiercely ; ' what be there in common between , do you think ! ' ' nothing but we sex , ' say Emily , with a burst of tear . ' and that , ' say , so strong a claim , prefer by one so infamous , that if I have any feeling in my breast but scorn and abhorrence of you , it would freeze it up . we sex ! you be a honour to we sex ! ' 'I have deserve this , ' say , ' but it be dreadful ! dear , dear lady , think what I have suffer , and how I be fall ! oh , , come back ! oh , home , home ! ' place herself in a chair , within view of the door , and look downward , as if be crouch on the floor before she . be now between I and the light , I could see she curled lip , and she cruel eye intently fix on one place , with a greedy triumph . ' listen to what I say ! ' she say ; 'and reserve you false art for you dupe . do you hope to move I by you tear ? no more than you could charm I by you smile , you purchase slave . ' 'Oh , have some mercy on I ! ' cry Emily . ' show I some compassion , or I shall die mad ! ' ' it would be no great penance , ' say , ' for you crime . do you know what you have do ? do you ever think of the home you have laid waste ? ' 'Oh , be there ever night or day , when I do not think of it ! ' cry ; and now I could just see she , on she knee , with she head throw back , she pale face look upward , she hand wildly clasp and hold out , and she hair stream about she . ' have there ever be a single minute , wake or sleep , when it have not be before I , just as it use to be in the lost day when I turn my back upon it for ever and for ever ! oh , home , home ! oh dear , dear uncle , if you ever could have know the agony you love would cause I when I fall away from good , you never would have show it to I so constant , much as you feel it ; but would have be angry to I , at least once in my life , that I might have have some comfort ! I have none , none , no comfort upon earth , for all of they be always fond of I ! ' she drop on she face , before the imperious figure in the chair , with a imploring effort to clasp the skirt of she dress . sit look down upon she , as inflexible as a figure of brass . she lip be tightly compress , as if she know that she must keep a strong constraint upon herself - I write what I sincerely believe - or she would be temp to strike the beautiful form with she foot . I see she , distinctly , and the whole power of she face and character seem force into that expression . - would he never come ? ' the miserable vanity of these earth - worm ! ' she say , when
when she have so far control the angry heaving of she breast , that she could trust herself to speak . ' you home ! do you imagine that I bestow a thought on it , or suppose you could do any harm to that low place , which money would not pay for , and handsomely ? you home ! you be a part of the trade of you home , and be buy and sell like any other vendible thing you people deal in . ' 'Oh , not that ! ' cry Emily . ' say anything of I ; but do not visit my disgrace and shame , more than I have do , on folk who be as honourable as you ! have some respect for they , as you be a lady , if you have no mercy for I . ' 'i speak , ' she say , not deign to take any heed of this appeal , and draw away she dress from the contamination of 's touch , ' I speak of he home - where I live . here , ' she say , stretch out she hand with she contemptuous laugh , and look down upon the prostrate girl , 'is a worthy cause of division between lady - mother and gentleman - son ; of grief in a house where she would not have be admit as a kitchen - girl ; of anger , and repin , and reproach . this piece of pollution , pick up from the water - side , to be make much of for a hour , and then toss back to she original place ! ' ' no ! no ! ' cry Emily , clasp she hand together . ' when he first come into my way - that the day have never dawn upon I , and he have meet I be carry to my grave ! - I have be bring up as virtuous as you or any lady , and be go to be the wife of as good a man as you or any lady in the world can ever marry . if you live in he home and know he , you know , perhaps , what he power with a weak , vain girl might be . I do not defend myself , but I know well , and he know well , or he will know when he come to die , and he mind be trouble with it , that he use all he power to deceive I , and that I believe he , trust he , and love he ! ' spring up from she seat ; recoil ; and in recoiling struck at she , with a face of such malignity , so darken and disfigure by passion , that I have almost throw myself between they . the blow , which have no aim , fell upon the air . as she now stand panting , look at she with the utmost detestation that she be capable of expressing , and trembl from head to foot with rage and scorn , I think I have never see such a sight , and never could see such another . ' you love he ? you ? ' she cry , with she clench hand , quiver as if it only want a weapon to stab the object of she wrath . Emily have shrink out of my view . there be no reply . ' and tell that to I , ' she add , ' with you shameful lip ? why do not they whip these creature ? if I could order it to be do , I would have this girl whip to death . ' and so she would , I have no doubt . I would not have trust she with the rack itself , while that furious look last . she slowly , very slowly , break into a laugh , and point at with she hand , as if she be a sight of shame for god and man . ' she love ! ' she say . 'that carrion ! and he ever care for she , she would tell I . , ha ! the liar that these trader be ! ' she mockery be worse than she undisguised rage . of the two , I would have much prefer to be the object of the latter . but , when she suffer it to break loose , it be only for a moment . she have chain it up again , and however it might tear she within , she subdue it to herself . 'I come here , you pure fountain of love , ' she say , 'to see - as I begin by tell you - what such a thing as you be like . I be curious . I be satisfied . also to tell you , that you have best seek that home of yours , with all speed , and hide you head among those excellent people who be expect you , and whom you money will conseal . when it be all gone , you can believe , and trust , and love again , you know ! I think you a break toy that have last its time ; a worthless spangle that be tarnish , and throw away . but , find you true gold , a very lady , and a ill - use innocent , with a fresh heart full of love and trustfulness - which you look like , and be quite consistent with you story ! - I have something more to say . attend to it ; for what I say I will do . do you hear I , you fairy spirit ? what I say , I mean to do ! ' she rage get
get the better of she again , for a moment ; but it pass over she face like a spasm , and leave she smile . ' hide yourself , ' she pursue , ' if not at home , somewhere . let it be somewhere beyond reach ; in some obscure life - or , better still , in some obscure death . I wonder , if you loving heart will not break , you have find no way of help it to be still ! I have hear of such mean sometimes . I believe they may be easily find . ' a low cry , on the part of , interrupt she here . she stop , and listen to it as if it be music . 'I be of a strange nature , perhaps , ' go on ; ' but I can not breathe freely in the air you breathe . I find it sickly . therefore , I will have it clear ; I will have it purify of you . if you live here tomorrow , I will have you story and you character proclaim on the common stair . there be decent woman in the house , I be tell ; and it be a pity such a light as you should be among they , and conceal . if , leave here , you seek any refuge in this town in any character but you true one ( which you be welcome to bear , without molestation from I ) , the same service shall be do you , if I hear of you retreat . be assist by a gentleman who not long ago aspire to the favour of you hand , I be sanguine as to that . ' would he never , never come ? how long be I to bear this ? how long could I bear it ? ' oh I , oh I ! ' exclaim the wretched Emily , in a tone that might have touch the hardest heart , I should have think ; but there be no relenting in 's smile . ' what , what , shall I do ! ' ' do ? ' return the other . ' happy in you own reflection ! Consecrate you existence to the recollection of 's tenderness - he would have make you he serve - man 's wife , would he not ? - or to feel grateful to the upright and deserve creature who would have take you as he gift . or , if those proud remembrance , and the consciousness of you own virtue , and the honourable position to which they have raise you in the eyes of everything that wear the human shape , will not sustain you , marry that good man , and be happy in he condescension . if this will not do either , die ! there be doorway and dust - heap for such death , and such despair - find one , and take you flight to ! ' I hear a distant foot upon the stair . I know it , I be certain . it be he , thank ! she move slowly from before the door when she say this , and pass out of my sight . ' but ! ' she add , slowly and sternly , open the other door to go away , 'I be resolve , for reason that I have a hatred that I entertain , to cast you out , unless you withdraw from my reach altogether , or drop you pretty mask . this be what I have to say ; and what I say , I mean to do ! ' the foot upon the stair come nearer - nearer - pass she as she go down - rush into the room ! ' uncle ! ' a fearful cry follow the word . I pause a moment , and look in , see he support she insensible figure in he arm . he gaze for a few seconds in the face ; then stoop to kiss it - oh , how tenderly ! - and draw a handkerchief before it . ' , ' he say , in a low tremulous voice , when it be cover , 'I thank my as my dream 's come true ! I thank hearty for have guided of I , in he own way , to my darling ! ' with those word he take she up in he arm ; and , with the veile face lie on he bosom , and address towards he own , carry she , motionless and unconscious , down the stair . chapter 51 the beginning of a it be yet early in the morning of the follow day , when , as I be walk in my garden with my aunt ( who take little other exercise now , be so much in attendance on my dear Dora ) , I be tell that desire to speak with I . he come into the garden to meet I half - way , on my go towards the gate ; and ba he head , as it be always he custom to do when he see my aunt , for whom he have a high respect . I have be tell she all that have happen overnight . without say a word , she walk up with a cordial face , shook hand with he , and pat he on the arm . it be so expressively do , that she have no need to say a word . understand she quite as well as if she have say a thousand . 'I will go in now , , ' say my aunt , ' and look after , who will be get up presently . ' ' not along of my be heer ,
, ma 'am , I hope ? ' say . ' unless my wit be go a bahd 's neezing ' - by which mean to say , bird 's - nesting - ' this morning , ' ti along of I as you be a - go to quit we ? ' ' you have something to say , my good friend , ' return my aunt , ' and will do better without I . ' ' by you leave , ma 'am , ' return , 'I should take it kind , pervise you doe not mind my clicketten , if you would bide heer . ' ' would you ? ' say my aunt , with short good - nature . ' then I be sure I will ! ' so , she draw she arm through 's , and walk with he to a leafy little summer - house there be at the bottom of the garden , where she sit down on a bench , and I beside she . there be a seat for too , but he prefer to stand , lean he hand on the small rustic table . as he stand , look at he cap for a little while before begin to speak , I could not help observe what power and force of character he sinewy hand express , and what a good and trusty companion it be to he honest brow and iron - grey hair . 'I take my dear child away last night , ' begin , as he raise he eye to ours , 'to my lodging , wheer I have a long time be expect of she and prepare fur she . it be hour afore she know I right ; and when she do , she knee down at my foot , and kiender say to I , as if it be she prayer , how it all come to be . you may believe I , when I heered she voice , as I have heerd at home so playful - and see she humble , as it might be in the dust we Saviou write in with he bless hand - I feel a wownd go to my ' art , in the midst of all its thankfulness . ' he draw he sleeve across he face , without any pretence of concealing why ; and then clear he voice . ' it war not for long as I feel that ; for she be find . I have o and 'y to think as she be find , and it be gone . I doe not know why I do so much as mention of it now , I be sure . I do not have it in my mind a minute ago , to say a word about myself ; but it come up so nat'ral , that I yield to it afore I be aweer . ' ' you be a self - deny soul , ' say my aunt , ' and will have you reward . ' , with the shadows of the leave play athwart he face , make a surprised inclination of the head towards my aunt , as a acknowledgement of she good opinion ; then take up the thread he have relinquish . ' when my 'ly take flight ,' he say , in stern wrath for the moment , ' from the house wheer she be make a prisoner by that theer spot snake as see , - and he story 's trew , and may confound he ! - she take flight in the night . it be a dark night , with a many star a - shining . she be wild . she run along the sea beach , believe the old boat be theer ; and call out to we to turn away we face , for she be a - come by . she heered herself a - cry out , like as if it be another person ; and cut herself on they sharp - pinted stone and rock , and feel it no more than if she have be rock herself . ever so fur she run , and there be fire afore she eye , and roaring in she ear . of a sudden - or so she thowt , you unnerstand - the day break , wet and windy , and she be lie b'low a heap of stone upon the shore , and a woman be a - speak to she , say , in the language of that country , what be it as have go so much amiss ? ' he see everything he relate . it pass before he , as he speak , so vividly , that , in the intensity of he earnestness , he present what he describe to I , with greater distinctness than I can express . I can hardly believe , write now long afterwards , but that I be actually present in these scene ; they be impress upon I with such a astonish air of fidelity . 'As 's eye - which be heavy - see this woman better , ' go on , ' she know ' as she be one of they as she have often talk to on the beach . , though she have run ( as I have say ) ever so fur in the night , she have oftentimes wander long way , partly afoot , partly in boat and carriage , and know would all that country , ' long the coast , mile and mile . she have not no child of she own , this woman , be a young wife ; but she be a - look to have one afore long . and may my prayer go up to that 'twill be a happiness to she , and a
a comfort , and a honour , all she life ! may it love she and be dootiful to she , in she old age ; helpful of she at the last ; a angel to she heer , and heerafter ! ' 'Amen ! ' say my aunt . ' she have be summat timorous and down , ' say , and have sat , at first , a little way off , at she spinning , or such work as it be , when 'ly talk to the child . but 'ly have take notice of she , and have go and speak to she ; and as the young woman be partial to the child herself , they have soon make friend . , that when 'ly go that way , she always hagive 'ly flower . this be she as now ask what it be that have go so much amiss . 'ly tell she , and she - take she home . she do indeed . she take she home , ' say , cover he face . he be more affect by this act of kindness , than I have ever see he affect by anything since the night she go away . my aunt and I do not attempt to disturb he . ' it be a little cottage , you may suppose ,' he say , presently , ' but she find space for 'ly in it , - she husband be away at sea , - and she kep it secret , and prevail upon such neighbour as she have ( they be not many near ) to keep it secret too . 'ly be take bad with fever , and , what be very strange to I be , - maybe ' tis not so strange to scholar , - the language of that country go out of she head , and she could only speak she own , that no one unnerstood . she recollect , as if she have dream it , that she lay there always a - talk she own tongue , always believe as the old boat be round the next pint in the bay , and begge and implor of th'ey to send theer and tell how she be die , and bring back a message of forgiveness , if it be on 'y a wured . A'most the whole time , she thowt , - now , that he as i make mention on just now be lurk for she unnerneath the winder ; now that he as have bring she to this be in the room , - and cry to the good young woman not to give she up , and know ' , at the same time , that she could not unnerstand , and dread that she must be take away . likewise the fire be afore she eye , and the roaring in she ear ; and theer be no today , nor yesterday , nor yet tomorrow ; but everything in she life as ever have been , or as ever could be , and everything as never have be , and as never could be , be a crowding on she all at once , and nothing clear nor welcome , and yet she sang and laugh about it ! how long this last , I doe not know ; but then theer come a sleep ; and in that sleep , from be a many time stronger than she own self , she fall into the weakness of the littlest child . ' here he stop , as if for relief from the terror of he own description . after be silent for a few moment , he pursue he story . ' it be a pleasant arternoon when she awoke ; and so quiet , that there war not a sound but the rippling of that blue sea without a tide , upon the shore . it be she belief , at first , that she be at home upon a morning ; but the vine leave as she see at the winder , and the hill beyond , war not home , and contradict of she . then , come in she friend to watch alongside of she bed ; and then she know ' as the old boat war not round that next pint in the bay no more , but be fur off ; and know ' where she be , and why ; and break out a - cry on that good young woman 's bosom , wheer I hope she baby be a - lie now , a - cheering of she with its pretty eye ! ' he could not speak of this good friend of 's without a flow of tear . it be in vain to try . he break down again , endeavour to bless she ! ' that do my 'ly good , ' he resume , after such emotion as I could not behold without share in ; and as to my aunt , she weep with all she heart ; ' that do 'ly good , and she begin to mmend . but , the language of that country be quite go from she , and she be force to make sign . so she go on , get better from day to day , slow , but sure , and try to learn the name of common thing - nam as she see never to have heerd in all she life - till one evening come , when she be a - set at she window , look at a little girl at play upon the beach . and of a sudden this child hold out she hand , and say , what would be in , " 's daughter , here be a shell ! " - for you be to
to unnerstand that they use at first to call she " pretty lady " , as the general way in that country be , and that she have teach th'ey to call she " 's daughter " instead . the child say of a sudden , " 's daughter , here be a shell ! " then 'ly unnerstand she ; and she answer , burst out a - crying ; and it all come back ! ' when 'ly get strong again , ' say , after another short interval of silence , ' she cast about to leave that good young creetur , and get to she own country . the husband be come home , then ; and the two together put she aboard a small trader bound to , and from that to . she have a little money , but it be less than little as they would take for all they do . I be a'most glad on it , though they be so poor ! what they do , be lay up wheer neither moth or rust doth corrupt , and wheer thief do not break through nor steal . , it will outlast all the treasure in the wureld . ' 'ly get to , and take service to wait on travel ladie at a inn in the port . Theer , theer come , one day , that snake . - let he never come nigh I . I doe not know what hurt I might do he ! - as she see he , without he see she , all she fear and wildness return upon she , and she fle afore the very breath he draw ' . she come to , and be set ashore at Dover . 'I doe not know , ' say , ' for sure , when she ' art begin to fail she ; but all the way to she have thowt to come to she dear home . as she get to she turn she face tow'rd it . but , fear of not be forgi v , fear of be pin at , fear of some of we be dead along of she , fear of many thing , turn she from it , kiender by force , upon the road : " uncle , uncle , " she say to I , " the fear of not be worthy to do what my torn and bleed breast so longed to do , be the most fright' ne fear of all ! I turn back , when my ' art be full of prayer that I might crawl to the old door - step , in the night , kiss it , lay my wicked face upon it , and theer be find dead in the morning . " ' she come , ' say , drop he voice to a awe - stricken whisper , 'to . she - as have never see it in she life - alone - without a penny - young - so pretty - come to . A'most the moment as she light heer , all so desolate , she find ( as she believe ) a friend ; a decent woman as speak to she about the needle - work as she have be bring up to do , about find plenty of it fur she , about a lodging fur the night , and make secret inquiration concern of I and all at home , tomorrow . when my child ,' he say aloud , and with a energy of gratitude that shook he from head to foot , ' stand upon the brink of more than I can say or think on - , trow to she promise , save she . ' I could not repress a cry of joy . ' ! ' say he , grip my hand in that strong hand of he , ' it be you as first make mention of she to I . I thankee , sir ! she be arnest . she have know ' of she bitter knowledge wheer to watch and what to do . she have do it . and the be above all ! she come , white and hurrie , upon 'ly in she sleep . she say to she , " rise up from worse than death , and come with I ! " they belong to the house would have stop she , but they might as soon have stop the sea . " away from I , " she say , " I be a ghost that call she from beside she open grave ! " she tell 'ly she have see I , and know would I love she , and forgive she . she wrap she , hasty , in she clothes . she take she , faint and trembl , on she arm . she heede no more what they say , than if she have have no ear . she walk among 'em with my child , mind only she ; and bring she safe out , in the dead of the night , from that black pit of ruin ! ' she attend on 'ly , ' say , who have release my hand , and put he own hand on he heaving chest ; ' she attend to my , lie weary out , and wander betwixt whiles , till late next day . then she go in search of I ; then in search of you , . she do not tell they 'ly what she come out fur , lest she ' art should fail , and she should think of hiding of herself . how the cruel lady know ' of she be theer , I can not say . whether he as I have spoke so much of , chance to see them go theer ,
, or whether ( which be most like , to my thinking ) he have heered it from the woman , I doe not greatly ask myself . my niece be find . ' all night long , ' say , 'we have be together , 'ly and I . ' tTis little ( consider the time ) as she have say , in wured , through they break - heart tear ; ' tis less as I have see of she dear face , as grow would into a woman 's at my hearth . but , all night long , she arm have be about my neck ; and she head have laid heer ; and we know full well , as we can put we trust in one another , ever more . ' he cease to speak , and he hand upon the table rest there in perfect repose , with a resolution in it that might have conquer lion . ' it be a gleam of light upon I , , ' say my aunt , dry she eye , ' when I form the resolution of be godmother to you sister , who disappoint I ; but , next to that , hardly anything would have give I greater pleasure , than to be godmother to that good young creature 's baby ! ' nod he understanding of my aunt 's feeling , but could not trust himself with any verbal reference to the subject of she commendation . we all remain silent , and occupy with we own reflection ( my aunt dry she eye , and now sobb convulsively , and now laugh and call herself a fool ) ; until I speak . ' you have quite make up you mind , ' say I to , 'as to the future , good friend ? I need scarcely ask you . ' ' , ,' he return ; 'and tell Em'ly . 's mighty country , fur from heer . we future life lay over the sea . ' ' they will emigrate together , aunt , ' say I . ' yes ! ' say , with a hopeful smile . ' no one can not reproach my darling in . we will begin a new life over theer ! ' I ask he if he yet propose to himself any time for go away . 'I be down at the early this morning , sir ,' he return , 'to get information concerning of they ship . in about six week or two month from now , there will be one sailing - I see she this morning - go aboard - and we shall take we passage in she . ' ' quite alone ? ' I ask . ' aye , ! ' he return . ' my sister , you see , she be that fond of you and yourn , and that accustom to think of and 'y of she own country , that it would not be hardly fair to let she go . besides which , theer be one she have in caharge , , as doe not ink to be forgot . ' ' poor ! ' say I . ' my good sister take care of he house , you see , ma 'am , and he take kindly to she ,' explain for my aunt 's better information . ' he will set and talk to she , with a calm spirit , we it be like he could not bring himself to open he lip to another . poor fellow ! ' say , shak he head , ' theer be not so much leave he , that he could spare the little as he have ! ' ' and ? ' say I . ' well , I have have a mort of consideration , I do tell you , ' return , with a perplexed look which gradually clear as he go on , ' concern of . you see , we fall a - thinking of the old 'un , she a not what you may call good company . Betwixt you and I , - and you , ma 'am - we take to wimick , ' - we old country word for crying , - ' she be liable to be consider to be , by they as do not know the old 'un , peevish - like . now I do know the old 'un , ' say , ' and I know would he merit , so I unnerstan ' she ; but not entirely so , you see , with other - nat'rally can not be ! ' my aunt and I both acquiesce . ' , ' say , 'my sister might - I doe not say she would , but might - find give she a leetle trouble now - and - again . yoTheerfu 'ta not my intentions to moor ' long with they , but to find a ' fur she wheer she can fisherate for herself . ' ( a 's signify , in that dialect , a home , and to fisherate be to provide . ) ' fur which purpose , ' say , mean to make she a ' lowance afore I go , as will leave she pretty comfort'ble . she be the faithfullest of creetur . ' not to be expect , of course , at she time of life , and be lone and lorn , as the good old Mawther be to be knock about aboardship , and in the wood and wilds of a new and fur - away country . so that be what I be a - go to do with she . ' he forget nobody . he think of everybody 's claim and striving , but he own . ' 'ly ,' he continue ,
, ' will keep along with I - poor child , she be sore in need of peace and rest ! - until such time as we go upon we voyage . she will work at they clothes , as must be make ; and I hope she trouble will begin to seem longer ago than they be , wen she find herself once more by she rough but loving uncle . ' my aunt nod confirmation of this hope , and impart great satisfaction to . ' 's one thing furder , , ' say he , put he hand in he breast - pocket , and gravely take out the little paper bundle I have see before , which he unroll on the table . ' Theer be these here banknote - fifty pound , and ten . to they I wish to add the money as she come away with . I have ask she about that ( but not say why ) , and have add of it up . I can not a scholar . would you be so kind as see how ' tis ? ' he hand I , apologetically for he scholarship , a piece of paper , and observe I while I look it over . it be quite right . ' Thankee , sir ,' he say , take it back . ' this money , if you doe not see objection , , I shall put up jest afore I go , in a cover direct to he ; and put that up in another , direct to he mother . I shall tell she , in no more wured than I speak to you , what it be the price on ; and that I be gone , and past receive of it back . ' I tell he that I think it would be right to do so - that I be thoroughly convinced it would be , since he feel it to be right . 'I say that theer be on 'y one thing furder ,' he proceed with a grave smile , when he have make up he little bundle again , and put it in he pocket ; ' but theer be two . I war not sure in my mind , we I come out this morning , as I could go and break to , of my own self , what have so thankfully happen . so I writ a letter while I be out , and put it in the post-office , tell of th'ey how all be as ' tis ; and that I should come down tomorrow to unload my mind of what little need a - do of down theer , and , most - like , take my farewell leave of . ' ' and do you wish I to go with you ? ' say I , see that he leave something unsaid . ' if you could do I that kind favour , Mas 'r Davy , ' he reply . 'I know the sight on you would cheer th'ey up a bit . ' my little Dora be in good spirit , and very desirous that I should go - as I find on talk it over with she - I readily pledge myself to accompany he in accordance with he wish . next morning , consequently , we be on the coach , and again travel over the old ground . as we pass along the familiar street at night - , in despite of all my remonstrance , carry my bag - I glance into and 's shop , and see my old friend there , smoke he pipe . I feel reluctant to be present , when first meet he sister and ; and make Omer my excuse for linger behind . ' how be , after this long time ? ' say I , go in . he fan away the smoke of he pipe , that he might get a better view of I , and soon recognize I with great delight . 'I should get up , sir , to acknowledge such a honour as this visit , ' say he , ' only my limb be rather out of sort , and I be wheele about . with the exception of my limb and my breath , howsoever , I be as hearty as a man can be , I be thankful to say . ' I congratulate he on he contented look and he good spirit , and see , now , that he easy - chair go on wheel . ' it be a ingenious thing , be not it ? ' he inquire , follow the direction of my glance , and polish the elbow with he arm . ' it run as light as a feather , and track as true as a mail - coach . bless you , my little - my grand - daughter you know , 's child - put she little strength against the back , give it a shove , and away we go , as clever and merry as ever you see anything ! and I tell you what - it be a most uncommon chair to smoke a pipe in . ' I never see such a good old fellow to make the best of a thing , and find out the enjoyment of it , as . he be as radiant , as if he chair , he asthma , and the failure of he limb , be the various branch of a great invention for enhance the luxury of a pipe . 'I see more of the world , I can assure you , ' say , 'in this chair , than ever I see out of it . you would be surprised at the number of people that look in of a day
day to have a chat . you really would ! there be twice as much in the newspaper , since I have take to this chair , as there use to be . as to general reading , dear I , what a lot of it I do get through ! that be what I feel so strong , you know ! if it have be my eye , what should I have do ? if it have be my ears , what should I have do ? be my limb , what do it signify ? why , my limb only make my breath shorter when I use th'ey . and now , if I want to go out into the street or down to the sand , I have only get to call , 's youngest ' prentice , and away I go in my own carriage , like the of . ' he half suffocate himself with laugh here . ' bless you ! ' say , resum he pipe , 'a man must take the fat with the lean ; that be what he must make up he mind to , in this life . do a fine business . Ex- cellent business ! ' 'I be very glad to hear it , ' say I . 'I know you would be , ' say . ' and and be like Valentines . what more can a man expect ? what be he limb to that ! ' he supreme contempt for he own limb , as he sit smoking , be one of the pleasantest oddity I have ever encounter . ' and since I have take to general reading , you have take to general writing , eh , sir ? ' say , survey I admiringly . ' what a lovely work that be of yours ! what expressions in it ! I read it every word - every word . and as to feel sleepy ! not at all ! ' I laughingly express my satisfaction , but I must confess that I think this association of idea significant . 'I give you my word and honour , sir , ' say , ' that when I lay that book upon the table , and look at it outside ; compact in three separate and indiwidual wollume - one , two , three ; I be as proud as to think that I once have the honour of be connect with you family . and dear I , it be a long time ago , now , be not it ? over at . with a pretty little party lay along with the other party . and you quite a small party then , yourself . dear , dear ! ' I change the subject by refer to . after assure he that I do not forget how interested he have always be in she , and how kindly he have always treat she , I give he a general account of she restoration to she uncle by the aid of ; which I know would please the old man . he listen with the utmost attention , and say , feelingly , when I have do : 'I be rejoice at it , sir ! it be the best news I have hear for many a day . dear , dear , dear ! and what be go to be undertook for that unfortunate young woman , , now ? ' ' you touch a point that my thought have be dwell on since yesterday , ' say I , ' but on which I can give you no information yet , . have not allude to it , and I have a delicacy in do so . I be sure he have not forget it . he forget nothing that be disinterested and good . ' ' because you know , ' say , take himself up , where he have leave off , ' whatever be do , I should wish to be a member of . put I down for anything you may consider right , and let I know . I never could think the girl all bad , and I be glad to find she be not . so will my daughter . young woman be contradictory creature in some thing - she mother be just the same as she - but they heart be soft and kind . it be all show with , about . why she should consider it necessary to make any show , I do not undertake to tell you . but it be all show , bless you . she would do she any kindness in private . so , put I down for whatever you may consider right , will you be so good ? and drop I a line where to forward it . dear I ! ' say , ' when a man be draw on to a time of life , where the two end of life meet ; when he find himself , however hearty he be , be wheel about for the second time , in a speech of go - cart ; he should be over-rejoiced to do a kindness if he can . he want plenty . and I do not speak of myself , particular , ' say , ' because , sir , the way I look at it be , that we be all draw on to the bottom of the hill , whatever age we be , on account of time never stand still for a single moment . so let we always do a kindness , and be over-rejoiced . to be sure ! ' he knock the ash out of he pipe , and put it on a ledge in the back of he chair , expressly make for its reception . ' there be 's cousin
cousin , he that she be to have be marry to , ' say , rub he hand feebly , 'as fine a fellow as there be in ! he will come and talk or read to I , in the evening , for a hour together sometimes . that be a kindness , I should call it ! all he life be a kindness . ' 'I be go to see he now , ' say I . ' be you ? ' say . ' tell he I be hearty , and send my respects . and be at a ball . they would be as proud to see you as I be , if they be at home . will not hardly go out at all , you see , " on account of father " , as she say . so I swore tonight , that if she do not go , I would go to be at six . in consequence of which , ' shook himself and he chair with laughter at the success of he device , ' she and be at a ball . ' I shook hand with he , and wish he good night . ' half a minute , sir , ' say . ' if you be to go without see my little elephant , you would lose the best of sight . you never see such a sight ! ! ' a musical little voice answer , from somewhere upstairs , 'I be come , grandfather ! ' and a pretty little girl with long , flaxen , curling hair , soon come run into the shop . ' this be my little elephant , sir , ' say , fond the child . ' Siamese breed , sir . now , little elephant ! ' the little elephant set the door of the parlour open , enable I to see that , in these latter day , it be convert into a bedroom for who could not be easily convey upstairs ; and then hide she pretty forehead , and tumble she long hair , against the back of 's chair . ' the elephant butt , you know , sir , ' say , wink , ' when he go at a object . once , elephant . twice . three time ! ' at this signal , the little elephant , with a dexterity that be next to marvellous in so small a animal , whisk the chair round with in it , and rattle it off , pell -mell , into the parlour , without touch the door - post : indescribably enjoy the performance , and look back at I on the road as if it be the triumphant issue of he life 's exertion . after a stroll about the town I go to 's house . have now remove here for good ; and have let she own house to the successor of in the carry business , who have pay she very well for the good - will , cart , and horse . I believe the very same slow horse that drive be still at work . I find they in the neat kitchen , accompany by , who have be fetch from the old boat by himself . I doubt if she could have be induce to desert she post , by anyone else . he have evidently tell they all . both and have they apron to they eye , and have just step out 'to take a turn on the beach ' . he presently come home , very glad to see I ; and I hope they be all the better for my be there . we speak , with some approach to cheerfulness , of 's grow rich in a new country , and of the wonder he would describe in he letter . we say nothing of Emily by name , but distantly refer to she more than once . be the serenest of the party . but , tell I , when she light I to a little chamber where the Crocodile book be lie ready for I on the table , that he always be the same . she believe ( she tell I , cry ) that he be break - heart ; though he be as full of courage as of sweetness , and work harder and better than any boat - builder in any yard in all that part . there be time , she say , of a evening , when he talk of they old life in the boat - house ; and then he mention Emily as a child . but , he never mention she as a woman . I think I have read in he face that he would like to speak to I alone . I therefore resolve to put myself in he way next evening , as he come home from he work . have settle this with myself , I fall asleep . that night , for the first time in all those many night , the candle be take out of the window , swing in he old hammock in the old boat , and the wind murmure with the old sound round he head . all next day , he be occupy in disposing of he fishing - boat and tackle ; in pack up , and send to by , such of he little domestic possession as he think would be useful to he ; and in part with the rest , or bestow they on . she be with he all day . as I have a sorrowful wish to see the old place once more , before it be lock up , I engage to meet they there in the evening . but I so arrange it , as that I should meet first .
. it be easy to come in he way , as I know where he work . I meet he at a retired part of the sand , which I know he would cross , and turn back with he , that he might have leisure to speak to I if he really wish . I have not mistaken the expression of he face . we have walk but a little way together , when he say , without look at I : ' , have you see she ? ' 'Only for a moment , when she be in a swoon ,' I softly answer . we walk a little farther , and he say : ' , shall you see she , would 'ye think ? ' ' it would be too painful to she , perhaps , ' say I . 'I have thowt of that , ' he reply . ' so ' twould , sir , so ' twould . ' ' but , , ' say I , gently , ' if there be anything that I could write to she , for you , in case I could not tell it ; if there be anything you would wish to make know to she through I ; I should consider it a sacr trust . ' 'I be sure of not . I thankee , sir , most kind ! I think theer be something I could wish say or write . ' ' what be it ? ' we walk a little farther in silence , and then he speak . ' not that I forgive she . ' not that so much . ' Tis more as I beg of she to forgive I , for have press my affections upon she . odd time , I think that if I have not have she promise fur to marry I , sir , she be that trustful of I , in a friendly way , that she would have tell I what be struggle in she mind , and would have counsel with I , and I might have save she . ' I press he hand . ' be that all ? ' ' 's yet a something else , ' he return , ' if I can say it , . ' we walk on , farther than we have walk yet , before he speak again . he be not cry when he make the pause I shall express by line . he be merely collect himself to speak very plainly . 'I love she - and I love the mem 'ry of she - too deep - to be able to lead she to believe of my own self as I be a happy man . I could only be happy - by forgetting of she - and I be afeerd I could not hardly bear as she should be tell I do that . but if you , be so full of learning , , could think of anything to say as might bring she to believe I be not greatly hurt : still love of she , and mourn for she : anything as might bring she to believe as I be not tired of my life , and yet be hope yofu to see she without blame , wheer the wicked cease from troubling and the weary be at rest - anything as would ease she sorrowful mind , and yet not make she think as I could ever marry , or as ' twa possible that anyone could ever be to I what she be - I should ask of you to say that - with my prayer for she - that be so dear . ' I press he manly hand again , and tell he I would charge myself to do this as well as I could . thankee , sir , ' he answer . ''Tbe kind of you to meet I . ' Twas kind of you to bear he company down . , I unnerstan ' very well , though my aunt will come to Lon'on afore they sail , and they will unite once more , that I be not like to see he agen . I fare to feel sure o not . we doe not say so , but so 'twill be , and better so . the last you see on he - the very last - will you give he the lovingest duty and thanks of the orphan , as he be ever more than a father to ? ' this I also promise , faithfully . 'i thankee agen , sir ,' he say , heartily shak hand . 'I know wheer you be a - go . good - bye ! ' with a slight wave of he hand , as though to explain to I that he could not enter the old place , he turn away . as I look after he figure , cross the waste in the moonlight , I see he turn he face towards a strip of silvery light upon the sea , and pass on , look at it , until he be a shadow in the distance . the door of the boat - house stand open when I approach ; and , on entering , I find it empty of all its furniture , save one of the old locker , on which , with a basket on she knee , be seat , look at . he lean he elbow on the rough chimney - piece , and gaze upon a few expiring ember in the grate ; but he raise he head , hopefully , on my come in , and speak in a cheery manner . ' come , accord to promise , to bid farewell to 't , eh , ? ' he say , take up the candle
candle . ' bare enough , now , a not it ? ' ' indeed you have make good use of the time , ' say I . ' why , we have not be idle , sir . have work like a - I doe not know what a not work like , ' say , look at she , at a loss for a sufficiently approve simile . , lean on she basket , make no observation . ' Theer be the very locker that you use to sit on , ' long with ! ' say , in a whisper . 'I be a - go to carry it away with I , last of all . and heer be you old little bedroom , see , ! A'most as bleak tonight , as ' art could wish ! ' in truth , the wind , though it be low , have a solemn sound , and crept around the desert house with a whispered wailing that be very mournful . everything be gone , down to the little mirror with the oyster - shell frame . I think of myself , lie here , when that first great change be be wrotch at home . I think of the blue - eyed child who have enchant I . I think of : and a foolish , fearful fancy come upon I of he be near at hand , and liable to be meet at any turn . ''Tis like to be long , ' say , in a low voice , ' afore the boat find new tenant . they look upon 't , down beer , as be unfortunate now ! ' ' do it belong to anybody in the neighbourhood ? ' I ask . 'to a mast - maker up town , ' say . 'I be a - go to give the key to he tonight . ' we look into the other little room , and come back to , sit on the locker , whom , put the light on the chimney - piece , request to rise , that he might carry it outside the door before extinguish the candle . ' , ' say , suddenly desert she basket , and cling to he arm 'my dear , the parting word I speak in this house be , I must not be leave behind . not ye think of leave I behind , ! oh , doe not ye ever do it ! ' , take aback , look from to I , and from I to , as if he have be awaken from a sleep . ' not ye , dearest n'l , doe not ye ! ' cry , fervently . ' take I ' long with you , n'l , take I ' long with you and Em'ly ! I will be you servant , constant and trew . if there be slave in they part where you be a - go , I will be bound to you for one , and happy , but doe not ye leave I behind , n'l , that be a deary dear ! ' 'My good soul , ' say , shak he head , ' you doe not know what a long voyage , and what a hard life ' tis ! ' ' yes , I do , ! I can guess ! ' cry . ' but my part words under this roof be , I shall go into the house and die , if I be not take . I can dig , . I can work . I can live hard . I can be love and patiend now - more than you think , n'l , if you will on 'y try I . I would not touch the ' lowance , not if I be die of want , ; but I will go with you and Em'ly , if you will of and 'y let I , to the world 's end ! I know how ' tis ; I know you think that I be lone and lorn ; but , deary love , not so no more ! I be not sit here , so long , a - watch , and a - thinking of you trial , without some good be do I . , speak to he for I ! I know he way , and 's , and I know they sorrow , and can be a comfort to th'ey , some odd time , and labour for 'em allus ! n'l , deary n'l , let I go ' long with you ! ' and take he hand , and kiss it with a homely patho and affection , in a homely rapture of devotion and gratitude , that he well deserve . we bring the locker out , extinguish the candle , fasten the door on the outside , and leave the old boat close shut up , a dark speck in the cloudy night . next day , when we be return to outside the coach , and she basket be on the seat behind , and be happy . chapter 52 I assist at a Explosion when the time have appoint so mysteriously , be within four - and - twenty hour of be come , my aunt and I consult how we should proceed ; for my aunt be very unwilling to leave . ! how easily I carry up and down stair , now ! we be dispose , notwithstand 's stipulation for my aunt 's attendance , to arrange that she should stay at home , and be represent by and I . in short , we have resolve to take this course , when again unsettle we by declare that she never would forgive herself , and never would forgive she bad boy , if
if my aunt remain behind , on any pretence . 'I will not speak to you , ' say , shak she curl at my aunt . 'I will be disagreeable ! I will make bark at you all day . I shall be sure that you really be a cross old thing , if you do not go ! ' ' , ! ' laugh my aunt . ' you know you can not do without I ! ' ' yes , I can , ' say . ' you be no use to I at all . you never run up and down stair for I , all day long . you never sit and tell I story about , when he shoe be wear out , and he be cover with dust - oh , what a poor little mite of a fellow ! you never do anything at all to please I , do you , dear ? ' make haste to kiss my aunt , and say , ' yes , you do ! I be only joke ! '- lest my aunt should think she really mean it . ' but , aunt , ' say , coaxingly , ' now listen . you must go . I shall tease you , ' till you let I have my own way about it . I shall lead my naughty boy such a life , if he do not make you go . I shall make myself so disagreeable - and so will Jip ! you will wish you have go , like a good thing , for ever and ever so long , if you do not go . besides , ' say , put back she hair , and look wonderingly at my aunt and I , ' why should not you both go ? I be not very ill indeed . be I ? ' ' why , what a question ! ' cry my aunt . ' what a fancy ! ' say I . ' yes ! I know I be a silly little thing ! ' say , slowly look from one of we to the other , and then put up she pretty lip to kiss we as she lay upon she couch . 'Well , then , you must both go , or I shall not believe you ; and then I shall cry ! ' I see , in my aunt 's face , that she begin to give way now , and brighten again , as she see it too . ' you will come back with so much to tell I , that it will take at least a week to make I understand ! ' say . ' because I know I sha not understand , for a length of time , if there be any business in it . and there be sure to be some business in it ! if there be anything to add up , beside , I do not know when I shall make it out ; and my bad boy will look so miserable all the time . there ! now you will go , will not you ? you will only be gone one night , and will take care of I while you be gone . Doady will carry I upstairs before you go , and I will not come down again till you come back ; and you shall take Agnes a dreadfully scolding letter from I , because she have never be to see we ! ' we agree , without any more consultation , that we would both go , and that be a little Impostor , who feign to be rather unwell , because she like to be pet . she be greatly pleased , and very merry ; and we four , that be to say , my aunt , , , and I , go down to Canterbury by the Dover mail that night . at the hotel where have request we to await he , which we get into , with some trouble , in the middle of the night , I find a letter , import that he would appear in the morning punctually at half past nine . after which , we go shiver , at that uncomfortable hour , to we respective bed , through various close passage ; which smelt as if they have be steep , for ag , in a solution of soup and stable . Early in the morning , I saunter through the dear old tranquil street , and again mingl with the shadows of the venerable gateway and church . the rook be sail about the cathedral towers ; and the towers themselves , overlook many a long unaltered mile of the rich country and its pleasant stream , be cut the bright morning air , as if there be no such thing as change on earth . yet the bell , when they sound , tell I sorrowfully of change in everything ; tell I of they own age , and my pretty 's youth ; and of the many , never old , who have liv and love and die , while the reverberation of the bell have hum through the rusty armour of the hang up within , and , mote upon the deep of , have lose themselves in air , as circle do in water . I look at the old house from the corner of the street , but do not go nearer to it , lest , be observe , I might unwittingly do any harm to the design I have come to aid . the early sun be strik edgewise on its gable and lattice - window , touch they with gold ; and some beam of its old peace seem to touch my heart . I stroll into the country for
for a hour or so , and then return by the main street , which in the interval have shake off it be last night 's sleep . among those who be stirr in the shop , I see my ancient enemy the butcher , now advanced to top - boot and a baby , and in business for himself . he be nurse the baby , and appear to be a benignant member of society . we all become very anxious and impatient , when we sit down to breakfast . as it approach nearer and nearer to half past nine o'clock , we restless expectation of increase . at last we make no more pretence of attend to the meal , which , except with , have be a mere form from the first ; but my aunt walk up and down the room , Traddles sit upon the sofa affect to read the paper with he eye on the ceiling ; and I look out of the window to give early notice of 's come . have I long to watch , for , at the first chime of the half hour , he appear in the street . ' here he be , ' say I , 'and not in he legal attire ! ' my aunt tie the string of she bonnet ( she have come down to breakfast in it ) , and put on she shawl , as if she be ready for anything that be resolute and uncompromising . Traddle button he coat with a determined air . , disturb by these formidable appearance , but feel it necessary to imitate they , pull he hat , with both hand , as firmly over he ear as he possibly could ; and instantly take it off again , to welcome . ' gentlemen , and madam , ' say , ' good morning ! my dear sir , ' to , who shook hand with he violently , ' you be extremely good . ' ' have you breakfaste ? ' say . ' have a chop ! ' ' not for the world , my good sir ! ' cry , stop he on he way to the bell ; ' appetite and myself , , have long be stranger . ' be so well please with he new name , and appear to think it so oblige in to confer it upon he , that he shook hand with he again , and laugh rather childishly . ' , ' say my aunt , ' attention ! ' recovere himself , with a blush . ' now , sir , ' say my aunt to , as she put on she glove , 'we be ready for , or anything else , as soon as you please . ' ' madam , ' return , 'I trust you will shortly witness a eruption . , I have you permission , I believe , to mention here that we have be in communication together ? ' ' it be undoubtedly the fact , , ' say Traddles , to whom I look in surprise . ' have consult I in reference to what he have in contemplation ; and I have advise he to the best of my judgement . ' ' unless I deceive myself , , ' pursue , ' what I contemplate be a disclosure of a important nature . ' ' highly so , ' say Traddles . ' perhaps , under such circumstance , madam and gentleman , ' say , ' you will do I the favour to submit yourselves , for the moment , to the direction of one who , however unworthy to be regard in any other light but as a and upon the shore of human nature , be still you fellow-man , though crush out of he original form by individual error , and the accumulative force of a combination of circumstance ? ' ' we have perfect confidence in you , , ' say I , ' and will do what you please . ' ' , ' return , ' you confidence be not , at the exist juncture , ill - bestow . I would beg to be allow a start of five minute by the clock ; and then to receive the present company , inquire for , at the office of and , whose I be . ' my aunt and I look at , who nod he approval . 'I have no more , ' observe , 'too say at present . ' with which , to my infinite surprise , he include we all in a comprehensive bow , and disappear ; he manner be extremely distant , and he face extremely pale . Traddle only smile , and shake he head ( with he hair stand upright on the top of it ) , when I look to he for a explanation ; so I take out my watch , and , as a last resource , count off the five minute . my aunt , with she own watch in she hand , do the like . when the time be expired , Traddles give she he arm ; and we all go out together to the old house , without say one word on the way . we find at he desk , in the turret office on the ground floor , either write , or pretend to write , hard . the large office - ruler be stuck into he waistcoat , and be not so well conceal but that a foot or more of that instrument protrude from he bosom , like a new kind of shirt -frill . as it appear to I that I be expect to speak , I say aloud : ' how do you do , ? ' ' , ' say , gravely
gravely , 'i hope I see you well ? ' 'Is at home ? ' say I . ' be unwell in bed , sir , of a rheumatic fever ,' he return ; ' but , I have no doubt , will be happy to see old friend . will you walk in , sir ? ' he proceed we to the dining - room - the first room I have enter in that house - and flinge open the door of 's former office , say , in a sonorous voice : ' , , , and ! ' I have not see since the time of the blow . we visit astonish he , evidently ; not the less , I dare say , because it astonished ourselves . he do not gather he eyebrow together , for he have none worth mention ; but he frown to that degree that he almost close he small eye , while the hurried raising of he grisly hand to he ching betraye some trepidation or surprise . this be only when we be in the act of enter he room , and when I catch a glance at he over my aunt 's shoulder . a moment afterwards , he be as fawning and as humble as ever . ' well , I be sure , ' he say . ' this be indeed a unexpected pleasure ! to have , as I may say , all friend round 's at once , be a treat unlook for ! , I hope I see you well , and - if I may umbly express myself so - friendly towards they as be ever you friend , whether or not . , sir , I hope she be get on . we have be make quite uneasy by the poor account we have have of she state , lately , I do assure you . ' I feel asham to let he take my hand , but I do not know yet what else to do . ' thing be change in this office , , since I be a umble clerk , and hold you pony ; be not they ? ' say , with he sickliest smile . ' but I be not change , . ' ' well , sir , ' return my aunt , 'to tell you the truth , I think you be pretty constant to the promise of you youth ; if that be any satisfaction to you . ' ' thank you , , ' say , writh in he ungainly manner , ' for you good opinion ! , tell them to let know - and mother . mother will be quite in a state , when she see the present company ! ' say , set chair . ' you be not busy , ? ' say Traddles , whose eye the cunning red eye accidentally catch , as it at once scrutinize and evad we . ' no , , ' reply , resum he official seat , and squeeze he bony hand , laid palm to palm between he bony knee . ' not so much so as I could wish . but lawyer , shark , and leech , be not easily satisfied , you know ! not but what myself and have we hand pretty full , in general , on account of be be hardly fit for any occupation , sir . but it be a pleasure as well as a duty , I be sure , to work for he . you have not be intimate with , I think , ? I believe I have only have the honour of see you once myself ? ' ' no , I have not be intimate with , ' return Traddle ; 'or I might perhaps have wait on you long ago , . ' there be something in the tone of this reply , which make look at the speaker again , with a very sinister and suspicious expression . but , see only Traddle , with he good - natured face , simple manner , and hair on end , he dismiss it as he reply , with a jerk of he whole body , but especially he throat : 'I be sorry for that , . you would have admire he as much as we all do . he little failings would only have endear he to you the more . but if you would like to hear my fellow - partner eloquently speak of , I should refer you to . the family be a subject he be very strong upon , if you never hear he . ' I be prevent from disclaim the compliment ( if I should have do so , in any case ) , by the entrance of , now usher in by . she be not quite so self - possess as usual , I think ; and have evidently undergone anxiety and fatigue . but she earnest cordiality , and she quiet beauty , shone with the gentler lustre for it . I see watch she while she greet we ; and he remind I of a ugly and rebellious genies watch a good spirit . in the meanwhile , some slight sign pass between and ; and Traddles , unobserve except by I , go out . ' do not wait , , ' say . , with he hand upon the ruler in he breast , stand erect before the door , most unmistakably contemplate one of he fellow- man , and that man he employer . ' what be you wait for ? ' say . ' ! do you hear I tell you not to wait ? ' ' yes ! ' reply the immovable . ' then why do you wait ? ' say . ' because I - in
in short , choose , ' reply , with a burst . 's cheek lose colour , and a unwholesome paleness , still faintly tinge by he pervading red , overspread they . he look at attentively , with he whole face breathing short and quick in every feature . ' you be a dissipate fellow , as all the world know ,' he say , with a effort at a smile , ' and I be afraid you will oblige I to get rid of you . go along ! I will talk to you presently . ' ' if there be a scoundrel on this earth , ' say , suddenly break out again with the utmost vehemence , ' with whom I have already talk too much , that scoundrel 's name be - ! ' fall back , as if he have be struck or stung . look slowly round upon we with the darkest and wickedest expression that he face could wear , he say , in a lower voice : ' Oho ! this be a conspiracy ! you have meet here by appointment ! you be play with my clerk , be you , ? now , take care . you will make nothing of this . we understand each other , you and I . there be no love between we . you be always a puppy with a proud stomach , from you first come here ; and you envy I my rise , do you ? none of you plot against I ; I will counterplot you ! , you be off . I will talk to you presently . ' ' , ' say I , ' there be a sudden change in this fellow . in more respects than the extraordinary one of he speak the truth in one particular , which assure I that he be bring to bay . deal with he as he deserve ! ' ' you be a precious set of people , be not you ? ' say , in the same low voice , and break out into a clammy heat , which he wip from he forehead , with he long lean hand , 'to buy over my clerk , who be the very scum of society , - as you yourself be , , you know it , before anyone have charity on you , - to defame I with he lie ? , you have better stop this ; or I will stop you husband shorter than will be pleasant to you . I will not know you story professionally , for nothing , old lady ! , if you have any love for you father , you have better not join that gang . I will ruin he , if you do . now , come ! I have get some of you under the harrow . think twice , before it go over you . think twice , you , , if you do not want to be crush . I recommend you to take yourself off , and be talk to presently , you fool ! while there be time to retreat . where be mother ? ' he say , suddenly appear to notice , with alarm , the absence of Traddle , and pull down the bell - rope . ' Fine doings in a person 's own house ! ' ' Mr . Heep be here , sir , ' say Traddles , return with that worthy mother of a worthy son . 'I have take the liberty of make myself know to she . ' ' who be you to make yourself know ? ' retort . ' and what do you want here ? ' 'I be the agent and friend of , sir , ' say Traddles , in a composed and business - like way . ' and I have a power of attorney from he in my pocket , to act for he in all matters . ' ' the old ass have drink himself into a state of dotage , ' say , turn uglier than before , ' and it have be get from he by fraud ! ' ' something have be get from he by fraud , I know , ' return Traddles quietly ; ' and so do you , . we will refer that question , if you please , to . ' ' Ury -! ' begin , with a anxious gesture . ' you hold you tongue , mother ,' he return ; ' least say , soonest mende . ' ' but , my -' ' will you hold you tongue , mother , and leave it to I ? ' though I have long know that he servility be false , and all he pretence knavish and hollow , I have have no adequate conception of the extent of he hypocrisy , until I now see he with he mask off . the suddenness with which he drop it , when he perceive that it be useless to he ; the malice , insolence , and hatre , he reveal ; the leer with which he exult , even at this moment , in the evil he have do - all this time be desperate too , and at he wit 's end for the means of get the better of we - though perfectly consistent with the experience I have of he , at first take even I by surprise , who have know he so long , and dislike he so heartily . I say nothing of the look he confer on I , as he stand eye we , one after another ; for I have always understood that he hate I , and I remember the mark of my hand upon he cheek . but when he eye pass on to , and I
I see the rage with which he feel he power over she slipp away , and the exhibition , in they disappointment , of the odious passion that have lead he to aspire to one whose virtue he could never appreciate or care for , I be shocke by the mere think of she have liv , a hour , within sight of such a man . after some rubbing of the lower part of he face , and some look at we with those bad eye , over he grisly finger , he make one more address to I , half whin , and half abusive . ' you think it justifiable , do you , , you who pride yourself so much on you honour and all the rest of it , to sneak about my place , eave - drop with my clerk ? if it have be I , I should not have wonder ; for I do not make myself out a gentleman ( though I never be in the street either , as you be , accord to ) , but be you ! - and you be not afraid of do this , either ? you do not think at all of what I shall do , in return ; or of get yourself into trouble for conspiracy and so forth ? very well . we shall see ! what be - you - name , you be go to refer some question to . there be you referee . why do not you make he speak ? he have lear not he lesson , I see . ' see that what he say have no effect on I or any of we , he sit on the edge of he table with he hand in he pocket , and one of he splay foot twiste round the other leg , wait doggedly for what might follow . , whose impetuosity I have restrain thus far with the greatest difficulty , and who have repeatedly interposed with the first syllable of - ! without get to the second , now burst forward , draw the ruler from he breast ( apparently as a defensive weapon ) , and produce from he pocket a foolscap document , fold in the form of a large letter . open this packet , with he old flourish , and glance at the contents , as if he cherish a artistic admiration of they style of composition , he begin to read as follow : ' " dear miss Trotwood and gentleman -" ' ' and save the man ! ' exclaim my aunt in a low voice . ' he would write letter by the ream , if it be a capital offence ! ' , without hear she , go on . ' " in appear before you to denounce probably the most consummate Villain that have ever exist , " ' , without look off the letter , point the ruler , like a ghostly truncheon , at , ' " I ask no consideration for myself . the victim , from my cradle , of pecuniary liability to which I have be unable to respond , I have ever be the sport and toy of debasing circumstance . , , , and , have , collectively or separately , be the attendant of my career . " ' the relish with which describe himself as a prey to these dismal calamity , be only to be equall by the emphasis with which he read he letter ; and the kind of homage he render to it with a roll of he head , when he think he have hit a sentence very hard indeed . ' " in a accumulation of , , , and Madness , I enter the office - or , as we lively neighbour the would term it , the - of the firm , nominally conduct under the appellation of and - Heep , but in reality , wield by - Heep alone . Heep , and only Heep , be the mainspring of that machine . Heep , and only Heep , be the forger and the Cheat . " ' Uriah , more blue than white at these word , make a dart at the letter , as if to tear it in piece . , with a perfect miracle of dexterity or luck , catch he advancing knuckle with the ruler , and disable he right hand . it drop at the wrist , as if it be break . the blow sound as if it have fall on wood . ' the take you ! ' say , writh in a new way with pain . 'I will be even with you . ' ' approach I again , you - you - you Heep of infamy , ' gas , ' and if you head be human , I will break it . come on , come on ! ' I think I never see anything more ridiculous - I be sensible of it , even at the time - than make broad - sword guard with the ruler , and cry , ' come on ! ' while Traddles and I push he back into a corner , from which , as often as we get he into it , he persist in emerge again . he enemy , mutter to himself , after wringe he wounded hand for sometime , slowly draw off he neck - kerchief and bound it up ; then hold it in he other hand , and sit upon he table with he sullen face look down . , when he be sufficientely cool , proceed with he letter . ' " the stipendiary emolument in consideration of which I enter into the service of - Heep , " ' always pause before that word and uttere it with
with astonishing vigour , ' " be not define , beyond the pittance of twenty - two shilling and six per week . the rest be leave contingent on the value of my professional exertion ; in other and more expressive word , on the baseness of my nature , the cupidity of my motive , the poverty of my family , the general moral ( or rather immoral ) resemblance between myself and - . need I say , that it soon become necessary for I to solicit from - Heep - pecuniary advance towards the support of , and we blight but rise family ? need I say that this necessity have be foresee by - ? that those advance be secure by 's and other similar acknowledgement , know to the legal institution of this country ? and that I thus become immeshed in the web he have spun for my reception ? " ' 's enjoyment of he epistolary power , in describe this unfortunate state of thing , really seem to outweigh any pain or anxiety that the reality could have cause he . he read on : ' " then it be that - Heep - begin to favour I with just so much of he confidence , as be necessary to the discharge of he infernal business . then it be that I begin , if I may so Shakespearianly express myself , to dwindle , peak , and pine . I find that my service be constantly call into requisition for the falsification of business , and the mystification of a individual whom I will designate as that be impos upon , keep in ignorance , and delude , in every possible way ; yet , that all this while , the ruffian - Heep - be professe unbounded gratitude to , and unbounded friendship for , that much - abuse gentleman . this be bad enough ; but , as the obserf , with that universal applicability which distinguish the illustrious ornament of the , worse remain behind ! " ' be so very much struck by this happy round off with a quotation , that he indulge himself , and we , with a second reading of the sentence , under pretence of have lose he place . ' " it be not my intention , "' he continue read on , ' " to enter on a detailed list , within the compass of the present epistle ( though it be ready elsewhere ) , of the various malpractice of a minor nature , affect the individual whom I have denominate , to which I have be a tacitly consent party . my object , when the contest within myself between stipend and no stipend , baker and no baker , existence and non-existence , cease , be to take advantage of my opportunity to discover and expose the major malpractice commit , to that gentleman 's grievous wrong and injury , by - . Stimulate by the silent monitor within , and by a no less touching and appeal monitor without - to whom I will briefly refer as - I enter on a not unlaborious task of clandestine investigation , protract - now , to the best of my knowledge , information , and belief , over a period exceed twelve calendar month . " ' he read this passage as if it be from a act of parliament ; and appear majestically refresh by the sound of the word . ' " my charge against - Heep , " ' he read on , glance at he , and draw the ruler into a convenient position under he left arm , in case of need , ' " be as follow . " ' we all hold we breath , I think . I be sure hold he . ' " first , " ' say , ' " when . 's faculty and memory for business become , through cause into which it be not necessary or expedient for I to enter , weaken and confuse , - Heep - designedly perplex and complicat the whole of the official transaction . when be least fit to enter on business , - be always at hand to force he to enter on it . he obtain W.'s signature under such circumstance to document of importance , represent they to be other document of no importance . he induce to empower he to draw out , thus , one particular sum of trust - money , amount to twelve six fourteen , two and nine , and employ it to meet pretend business charge and deficiency which be either already provide for , or have never really exist . he give this proceeding , throughout , the appearance of have originate in W.'s own dishonest intention , and of have be accomplish by W.'s own dishonest act ; and have use it , ever since , to torture and constrain he . "' ' you shall prove this , you Copperfield ! ' say , with a threaten shake of the head . ' all in good time ! ' ' ask - HEEP - Traddle , who live in he house after he , ' say , break off from the letter ; ' will you ? ' ' the fool himself - and live there now , ' say , disdainfully . ' ask - Heep - if he ever keep a pocket - book in that house , ' say ; ' will you ? ' I see 's lank hand stop , involuntarily , in the scraping of he ching . 'or ask he , ' say , 'if he ever bur not one there . if he say yes , and ask you where the ash be , refer he to , and he will hear of something not at all to he
he advantage ! ' the triumphant flourish with which deliver himself of these word , have a powerful effect in alarme the mother ; who cry out , in much agitation : ' Ury , ! be umble , and make term , my dear ! ' ' mother ! ' he retort , ' will you keep quiet ? you be in a fright , and do not know what you say or mean . Umble ! ' he repeat , look at I , with a snarl ; 'I have umble some of 'em for a pretty long time back , umble as I be ! ' , genteelly adjust he ching in he cravat , presently proceed with he composition . ' " . Heep have , on several occasion , to the best of my knowledge , information , and belief -" ' ' but that will not do , ' mutter , relieve . ' mother , you keep quiet . ' ' we will endeaavor to provide something that will do , and do for you finally , sir , very shortly , ' reply . ' " . Heep have , on several occasion , to the best of my knowledge , information , and belief , systematically for , to various entry , book , and document , the signature of ; and have distinctly do so in one instance , capable of proof by I . to wit , in manner follow , that be to say : " ' again , have a relish in this formal piling up of word , which , however ludicrously display in he case , be , I must say , not at all peculiar to he . I have observ it , in the course of my life , in number of man . it seem to I to be a general rule . in the taking of legal oath , for instance , deponent seem to enjoy themselves mightily when they come to several good word in succession , for the expression of one idea ; as , that they utterly detest , abominate , and abjure , or so forth ; and the old anathema be make relishing on the same principle . we talk about the tyranny of word , but we like to tyrannize over they too ; we be fond of have a large superfluous establishment of word to wait upon we on great occasion ; we think it look important , and sound well . as we be not particular about the meaning of we livery on state occasion , if they be but fine and numerous enough , so , the meaning or necessity of we word be a secondary consideration , if there be but a great parade of they . and as individual get into trouble by make too great a show of livery , or as slave when they be too numerous rise against they master , so I think I could mention a nation that have get into many great difficulty , and will get into many greater , from maintain too large a retinue of word . read on , almost smack he lip : ' " to wit , in manner follow , that be to say . be infirm , and it be within the bounds of probability that he decease might lead to some discoveries , and to the downfall of - Heep ' - power over the family , - as I , , the undersigned , assume - unless the filial affection of he daughter could be secretly influence from allow any investigation of the partnership affair to be ever make , the say - HEEP - deem it expedient to have a bond ready by he , as from , for the before - mention sum of twelve six fourteen , two and nine , with interest , state therein to have be advanc by - HEEP - to to save from dishonour ; though really the sum be never advanc by he , and have long be replace . the signature to this instrument purport to be execute by and attest by , be forgery by - . I have , in my possession , in he hand and pocket - book , several similar imitation of . 's signature , here and there deface by fire , but legible to anyone . I never attest any such document . and I have the document itself , in my possession . " ' Uriah Heep , with a start , take out of he pocket a bunch of key , and open a certain drawer ; then , suddenly bethotch himself of what he be about , and turn again towards we , without look in it . ' " and I have the document , " ' read again , look about as if it be the text of a sermon , ' " in my possession , - that be to say , I have , early this morning , when this be write , but have since relinquish it to . " ' ' it be quite true , ' assent Traddles . ' Ury , Ury ! ' cry the mother , ' be umble and make term . I know my son will be umble , gentleman , if you will give he time to think . , I be sure you know that he be always very umble , sir ! ' it be singular to see how the mother still hold to the old trick , when the son have abandon it as useless . ' mother ,' he say , with a impatient bite at the handkerchief in which he hand be wrap , ' you have better take and fire a load gun at I . ' ' but I love you , Ury , '
' cry . and I have no doubt she do ; or that he love she , however strange it may appear ; though , to be sure , they be a congenial couple . ' and I can not bear to hear you provoke the gentleman , and endanger of yourself more . I tell the gentleman at first , when he tell I upstairs it be come to light , that I would answer for you be umble , and make amend . oh , see how umble I be , gentleman , and do not mind he ! ' ' why , there be , mother ,' he angrily retort , point he lean finger at I , against whom all he animosity be level , as the prime mover in the discovery ; and I do not undeceive he ; ' there be , would have give you a hundred pound to say less than you have blur out ! ' 'I can not help it , , ' cry he mother . 'I can not see you run into danger , through carry you head so high . better be umble , as you always be . ' he remain for a little , bite the handkerchief , and then say to I with a scowl : ' what more have you get to bring forward ? if anything , go on with it . what do you look at I for ? ' promptly resume he letter , glad to revert to a performance with which he be so highly satisfied . ' " . and last . I be now in a condition to show , by - Heep ' - false book , and - Heep ' - real memoranda , begin with the partially destroy pocket - book ( which I be unable to comprehend , at the time of its accidental discovery by , on we take possession of we present abode , in the locker or devote to the reception of the ash calcin on we domestic hearth ) , that the weakness , the fault , the very virtue , the parental affections , and the sense of honour , of the unhappy have be for year act on by , and warp to the base purpose of - . that have be for year delude and plunder , in every conceivable manner , to the pecuniary aggrandisement of the avaricious , false , and grasp - HEEP . that the engrossing object of - - be , next to gain , to subdue and ( of he ulterior view in reference to the latter I say nothing ) entirely to himself . that he last act , complete but a few month since , be to induce to execute a relinquishment of he share in the partnership , and even a bill of sale on the very furniture of he house , in consideration of a certain annuity , to be well and truly pay by - HEEP - on the four common quarter - day in each and every year . that these mesh ; begin with alarming and falsify account of the estate of which be the receiver , at a period when have launch into imprudent and ill - judge speculation , and may not have have the money , for which he be morally and legally responsible , in hand ; go on with pretended borrowing of money at enormous interest , really come from - - and by - Heep - fraudulently obtained or withheld from himself , on pretence of such speculation or otherwise ; perpetuate by a miscellaneous catalogue of unscrupulous chicanery - gradually thicken , until the unhappy could see no world beyond . , as he believe , alike in circumstance , in all other hope , and in honour , he sole reliance be upon the monster in the garb of man , " ' - make a good deal of this , as a new turn of expression , - ' " who , by make himself necessary to he , have achieve he destruction . all this I undertake to show . probably much more ! " ' I whisper a few word to , who be weep , half joyfully , half sorrowfully , at my side ; and there be a movement among we , as if have finish . he say , with exceed gravity , ' pardon I , ' and proceed , with a mixture of the lowest spirit and the most intense enjoyment , to the peroration of he letter . ' " I have now conclude . it merely remain for I to substantiate these accusation ; and then , with my ill - starr family , to disappear from the landscape on which we appear to be a encumbrance . that be soon done . it may be reasonably infer that we baby will first expire of inanition , as be the frailest member of we circle ; and that we twin will follow next in order . so be it ! for myself , my have do much ; imprisonment on civil process , and want , will soon do more . I trust that the labour and hazard of a investigation - of which the smallest result have be slowly piece together , in the pressure of arduous avocation , under grinding penurious apprehension , at rise of morn , at dewy eve , in the shadows of night , under the watchful eye of one whom it be superfluous to call - combine with the struggle of parental Poverty to turn it , when complete , to the right account , may be as the sprinkling of a few drop of sweet water on my funeral pyre . I ask no more . let it be , in justice , merely say of I ,
, as of a gallant and eminent naval hero , with whom I have no pretension to cope , that what I have do , I do , in despite of mercenary and selfish object , for , home , and . ' " remain always , & c . & c. , . " ' much affecte , but still intensely enjoy himself , fold up he letter , and hand it with a bow to my aunt , as something she might like to keep . there be , as I have notice on my first visit long ago , a iron safe in the room . the key be in it . a hasty suspicion seem to strike ; and , with a glance at , he go to it , and throw the door clank open . it be empty . ' where be the book ? ' he cry , with a frightful face . ' some thief have steal the book ! ' tap himself with the ruler . 'I do , when I get the key from you as usual - but a little earlier - and open it this morning . ' ' do not be uneasy , ' say Traddles . ' they have come into my possession . I will take care of they , under the authority I mention . ' ' you receive steal goods , do you ? ' cry . ' under such circumstance , ' answer Traddles , ' yes . ' what be my astonishment when I beheld my aunt , who have be profoundly quiet and attentive , make a dart at , and seize he by the collar with both hand ! ' you know what I want ? ' say my aunt . 'A strait -waistcoat , ' say he . ' no . my property ! ' return my aunt . ' Agne , my dear , as long as I believe it have be really make away with by you father , I would not - and , my dear , I do not , even to , as he know - breathe a syllable of it be have be place here for investment . but , now I know this fellow 's answerable for it , and I will have it ! trot , come and take it away from he ! ' whether my aunt suppose , for the moment , that he keep she property in he neck - kerchief , I be sure I do not know ; but she certainly pull at it as if she think so . I hasten to put myself between they , and to assure she that we would all take care that he should make the utmost restitution of everything he have wrongly get . this , and a few moment ' reflection , pacify she ; but she be not at all disconcert by what she have do ( though I can not say as much for she bonnet ) and resume she seat composedly . during the last few minute , . Heep have be clamour to she son to be 's umble ' ; and have be go down on she knee to all of we in succession , and make the wildest promise . she son sit she down in he chair ; and , stand sulkily by she , hold she arm with he hand , but not rudely , say to I , with a ferocious look : ' what do you want done ? ' 'I will tell you what must be do , ' say Traddles . ' have that Copperfield no tongue ? ' mutter , ' I would do a good deal for you if you could tell I , without lie , that somebody have cut it out . ' ' my mean to be umble ! ' cry he mother . ' do not mind what he say , good gentleman ! ' ' what must be do , ' say Traddles , 'i this . first , the deed of relinquishment , that we have hear of , must be give over to I now - here . ' ' suppose I have not get it , ' he interrupt . ' but you have , ' say Traddle ; 'therefore , you know , we will not suppose so . ' and I can not help avow that this be the first occasion on which I really do justice to the clear head , and the plain , patient , practical good sense , of my old schoolfellow . ' then , ' say , ' you must prepare to disgorge all that you rapacity have become possessed of , and to make restoration to the last farthing . all the partnership book and papers must remain in we possession ; all you book and papers ; all money account and securitie , of both kind . in short , everything here . ' ' must it ? I do not know that , ' say . 'I must have time to think about that . ' ' certainly , ' reply Traddle ; ' but , in the meanwhile , and until everything be do to we satisfaction , we shall maintain possession of these thing ; and beg you - in short , compel you - to keep to you own room , and hold no communication with anyone . ' 'I will not do it ! ' say , with a oath . ' Maidstone jail be a safer place of detention , ' observ Traddles ; ' and though the law may be longer in righte we , and may not be able to right we so completely as you can , there be no doubt of its punish you . dear I , you know that quite as well as
as I ! , will you go round to the Guildhall , and bring a couple of officer ? ' here , . break out again , cry on she knee to Agnes to interfere in they behalf , exclaim that he be very humble , and it be all true , and if he do not do what we want , she would , and much more to the same purpose ; be half frantic with fear for she darling . to inquire what he might have do , if he have have any boldness , would be like inquire what a mongrel yocu might do , if it have the spirit of a tiger . he be a coward , from head to foot ; and show he dastardly nature through he sullenness and mortification , as much as at any time of he mean life . ' stop ! ' he grow to I ; and wip he hot face with he hand . ' mother , hold you noise . well ! let them have that deed . go and fetch it ! ' ' do you help she , , ' say , ' if you please . ' proud of he commission , and understand it , accompany she as a shepherd 's dog might accompany a sheep . but , . give he little trouble ; for she not only return with the deed , but with the box in which it be , where we find a banker 's book and some other papers that be afterwards serviceable . ' good ! ' say Traddles , when this be bring . ' now , , you can retire to think : particularly observe , if you please , that I declare to you , on the part of all present , that there be only one thing to be do ; that it be what I have explain ; and that it must be do without delay . ' Uriah , without lift he eye from the ground , shuffle across the room with he hand to he ching , and pause at the door , say : ' , I have always hate you . you have always be a upstart , and you have always be against I . ' 'as I think I tell you once before , ' say I , ' it be you who have be , in you greed and cunning , against all the world . it may be profitable to you to reflect , in future , that there never be greed and cunn in the world yet , that do not do too much , and overreach themselves . it be as certain as death . ' 'or as certain as they use to teach at school ( the same school where I pick up so much umbleness ) , from nine o'clock to eleven , that labou be a curse ; and from eleven o'clock to one , that it be a blessing and a cheerfulness , and a dignity , and I do not know what all , eh ? ' say he with a sneer . ' you preach , about as consistent as they do . will not umbleness go down ? I should not have get round my gentleman fellow - partner without it , I think . - , you old bully , I will pay you ! ' , supremely defiant of he and he extend finger , and make a great deal of he chest until he have slink out at the door , then address himself to I , and proffer I the satisfaction of ' witnesse the re-establishment of mutual confidence between himself and ' . after which , he invite the company generally to the contemplation of that affect spectacle . ' the veil that have long be interpose between and myself , be now withdrawn , ' say ; 'and my child and the author of they be can once more come in contact on equal term . ' as we be all very grateful to he , and all desirous to show that we be , as well as the hurry and disorder of we spirit would permit , I dare say we should all have go , but that it be necessary for Agnes to return to she father , as yet unable to bear more than the dawn of hope ; and for someone else to hold in safe keeping . so , remain for the latter purpose , to be presently relieve by ; and , my aunt , and I , go home with . as I parte hurriedly from the dear girl to whom I owed so much , and think from what she have be save , perhaps , that morning - she better resolution notwithstanding - I feel devoutly thankful for the misery of my younger day which have bring I to the knowledge of . he house be not far off ; and as the street door open into the sitting - room , and he bolt in with a precipitation quite he own , we find ourselves at once in the bosom of the family . exclaim , ' ! my life ! ' rush into 's arm . shriek , and fold in she embrace . , nurse the unconscious stranger of 's last letter to I , be sensibly affect . the stranger leape . the twin testify they joy by several inconvenient but innocent demonstration . master , whose disposition appear to have be sour by early disappointment , and whose aspect have become morose , yield to he better feeling , and blubber . ' ! ' say . ' the cloud be past from my mind . mutual confidence , so long preserve between we once , be restore , to know no further interruption .
. now , welcome poverty ! ' cry , shed tear . ' welcome misery , welcome houselessness , welcome hunger , rag , tempest , and beggary ! mutual confidence will sustain we to the end ! ' with these expressions , place in a chair , and embrace the family all round ; welcome a variety of bleak prospect , which appear , to the best of my judgement , to be anything but welcome to they ; and call upon they to come out into and s a chorus , as nothing else be left for they support . but have , in the strength of she emotion , faint away , the first thing to be do , even before the chorus could be consider complete , be to recover she . this my aunt and do ; and then my aunt be introduced , and recognize I . ' excuse I , dear , ' say the poor lady , give I she hand , ' but I be not strong ; and the removal of the late misunderstanding between and myself be at first too much for I . ' ' be this all you family , ma 'am ? ' say my aunt . ' there be no more at present , ' return . ' Good gracious , I do not mean that , ma 'am , ' say my aunt . 'I mean , be all these yours ? ' ' madam , ' reply , ' it be a true bill . ' ' and that eldest young gentleman , now , ' say my aunt , musing , ' what have he be bring up to ? ' ' it be my hope when I come here , ' say , 'to have get Wilkins into the Church : or perhaps I shall express my mean more strictly , if I say the choir . but there be no vacancy for a tenor in the venerable pile for which this city be so justly eminent ; and he have - in short , he have contract a habit of singing in public - house , rather than in sacred edifice . ' ' but he mean well , ' say , tenderly . 'I dare say , my love , ' rejoin , ' that he mean particularly well ; but I have not yet find that he carry out he meaning , in any give direction whatsoever . ' 's moroseness of aspect return upon he again , and he demand , with some temper , what he be to do ? whether he have be bear a carpenter , or a coach - painter , any more than he have be bear a bird ? whether he could go into the next street , and open a chemist 's shop ? whether he could rush to the next assize , and proclaim himself a lawyer ? whether he could come out by force at the opera , and succeed by violence ? whether he could do anything , without be bring up to something ? my aunt muse a little while , and then say : ' . , I wonder you have never turn you thought to emigration . ' ' madam , ' return , ' it be the dream of my youth , and the fallacious aspiration of my riper year . ' I be thoroughly persuade , by the by , that he have never think of it in he life . ' aye ? ' say my aunt , with a glance at I . ' why , what a thing it would be for yourselves and you family , and , if you be to emigrate now . ' ' Capital , madam , capital , ' urge , gloomily . ' that be the principal , I may say the only difficulty , my dear , ' assent he wife . ' ? ' cry my aunt . ' but you be do we a great service - have do we a great service , I may say , for surely much will come out of the fire - and what could we do for you , that would be half so good as to find the capital ? ' 'I could not receive it as a gift , ' say , full of fire and animation , ' but if a sufficient sum could be advanced , say at five per cent interest , per annum , upon my personal liability - say my note of hand , at twelve , eighteen , and twenty - four month , respectively , to allow time for something to turn up -' ' could be ? can be and shall be , on you own term , ' return my aunt , ' if you say the word . think of this now , both of you . here be some people know , go out to shortly . if you decide to go , why should not you go in the same ship ? you may help each other . think of this now , and . take you time , and weigh it well . ' ' there be but one question , my dear ma 'am , I could wish to ask , ' say . ' the climate , I believe , be healthy ? ' ' finest in the world ! ' say my aunt . ' just so , ' return . ' then my question arise . now , be the circumstance of the country such , that a man of 's abilitie would have a fair chance of rising in the social scale ? I will not say , at present , might he aspire to be , or anything of that sort ; but would there be a reasonable opening for he talents
talents to develop themselves - that would be amply sufficient - and find they own expansion ? ' ' no better open anywhere , ' say my aunt , ' for a man who conduct himself well , and be industrious . ' ' for a man who conduct himself well , ' repeat , with she clearest business manner , 'and be industrious . precisely . it be evident to I that be the legitimate sphere of action for ! ' 'I entertain the conviction , my dear madam , ' say , ' that it be , under exist circumstance , the land , the only land , for myself and family ; and that something of a extraordinary nature will turn up on that shore . it be no distance - comparatively speak ; and though consideration be due to the kindness of you proposal , I assure you that be a mere matter of form . ' shall I ever forget how , in a moment , he be the most sanguine of man , look on to fortune ; or how presently discourse about the habits of the kangaroo ! shall I ever recall that street of on a market - day , without recalle he , as he walk back with we ; express , in the hardy roving manner he assume , the unsettled habits of a temporary sojourner in the land ; and look at the bullock , as they come by , with the eye of a australian farmer ! chapter 53 I must pause yet once again . o , my child - wife , there be a figure in the move crowd before my memory , quiet and still , say in its innocent love and childish beauty , stop to think of I - turn to look upon the , as it flutter to the ground ! I do . all else grow dim , and fade away . I be again with , in we cottage . I do not know how long she have be ill . I be so use to it in feeling , that I can not count the time . it be not really long , in week or month ; but , in my usage and experience , it be a weary , weary while . they have leave off tell I to ' wait a few day more ' . I have begin to fear , remotely , that the day may never shine , when I shall see my child - wife run in the sunlight with she old friend . he be , as it be suddenly , grow very old . it may be that he miss in he mistress , something that enliven he and make he younger ; but he mope , and he sight be weak , and he limb be feeble , and my aunt be sorry that he object to she no more , but creep near she as he lie on 's bed - she sit at the bedside - and mildly lick she hand . lie smile on we , and be beautiful , and utter no hasty or complain word . she say that we be very good to she ; that she dear old careful boy be ti himself out , she know ; that my aunt have no sleep , yet be always wakeful , active , and kind . sometimes , the little bird - like lady come to see she ; and then we talk about we wedding - day , and all that happy time . what a strange rest and pause in my life there seem to be - and in all life , within door and without - when I sit in the quiet , shade , orderly room , with the blue eye of my child - wife turn towards I , and she little finger twine round my hand ! many and many a hour I sit thus ; but , of all those time , three time come the freshest on my mind . it be morning ; and , make so trim by my aunt 's hand , show I how she pretty hair will curl upon the pillow yet , a how long and bright it be , and how she like to have it loosely gather in that net she wear . ' not that I be vain of it , now , you mock boy , ' she say , when I smile ; ' but because you use to say you think it so beautiful ; and because , when I first begin to think about you , I use to peep in the glass , and wonder whether you would like very much to have a lock of it . oh what a foolish fellow you be , , when I give you one ! ' ' that be on the day when you be paint the flower I have give you , , and when I tell you how much in love I be . ' 'Ah ! but I do not like to tell you , ' say , ' then , how I have cry over they , because I believe you really like I ! when I can run about again as I use to do , Doady , let we go and see those place where we be such a silly couple , shall we ? and take some of the old walk ? and not forget poor papa ? ' 'yes , we will , and have some happy day . so you must make haste to get well , my dear . ' ' oh , I shall soon do that ! I be so much better , you do not know ! ' it be evening ; and I sit in the same chair , by
by the same bed , with the same face turn towards I . we have be silent , and there be a smile upon she face . I have cease to carry my light bure up and down stairs now . she lie here all the day . ' Doady ! ' 'my dear ! ' ' you will not think what I be go to say , unreasonable , after what you tell I , such a little while ago , of be not be well ? I want to see Agnes . very much I want to see she . ' 'I will write to she , my dear . ' ' will you ? ' ' directly . ' ' what a good , kind boy ! Doady , take I on you arm . indeed , my dear , it be not a whim . it be not a foolish fancy . I want , very much indeed , to see she ! ' 'I be certain of it . I have only to tell she so , and she be sure to come . ' ' you be very lonely when you go downstairs , now ? ' whisper , with she arm about my neck . ' how can I be otherwise , my own love , when I see you empty chair ? ' 'My empty chair ! ' she cling to I for a little while , in silence . ' and you really miss I , ? ' look up , and brightly smile . ' even poor , giddy , stupid I ? ' ' my heart , who be there upon earth that I could miss so much ? ' 'Oh , husband ! I be so glad , yet so sorry ! ' creep closer to I , and fold I in both she arm . she laugh and sob , and then be quiet , and quite happy . ' quite ! ' she say . ' only give my dear love , and tell she that I want very , very , much to see she ; and I have nothing leave to wish for . ' ' except to get well again , . ' 'Ah , ! sometimes I think - you know I always be a silly little thing ! - that that will never be ! ' ' do not say so , ! Dearest love , do not think so ! ' 'I will not , if I can help it , . but I be very happy ; though my dear boy be so lonely by himself , before he child - wife 's empty chair ! ' it be night ; and I be with she still . Agnes have arrive ; have be among we for a whole day and a evening . she , my aunt , and I , have sit with since the morning , all together . we have not talk much , but have be perfectly contente and cheerful . we be now alone . do I know , now , that my child - wife will soon leave I ? they have tell I so ; they have tell I nothing new to my thought - but I be far from sure that I have take that truth to heart . I can not master it . I have withdraw by myself , many time today , to weep . I have remembe who weep for a parting between the living and the dead . I have bethotch I of all that gracious and compassionate history . I have try to resign myself , and to conseal myself ; and that , I hope , I may have do imperfectly ; but what I can not firmly settle in my mind be , that the end will absolutely come . I hold she hand in mine , I hold she heart in mine , I see she love for I , alive in all its strength . I can not shut out a pale lingering shadow of belief that she will be spare . 'I be go to speak to you , . I be go to say something I have often think of say , lately . you will not mind ? ' with a gentle look . ' mind , my darling ? ' ' because I do not know what you will think , or what you may have think sometimes . perhaps you have often think the same . Doady , dear , I be afraid I be too young . ' I lay my face upon the pillow by she , and she look into my eye , and speak very softly . gradually , as she go on , I feel , with a stricken heart , that she be speak of herself as past . 'I be afraid , dear , I be too young . I do not mean in year only , but in experience , and thought , and everything . I be such a silly little creature ! I be afraid it would have be better , if we have only love each other as a boy and girl , and forget it . I have begin to think I be not fit to be a wife . ' I try to stay my tear , and to reply , , , love , as fit as I to be a husband ! ' 'I do not know , ' with the old shake of she curl . ' perhaps ! but if I have be more fit to be marry I might have make you more so , too . besides , you be very clever , and I never be . ' ' we have be very happy , my sweet Dora. ' 'I be very happy , very .
. but , as year go on , my dear boy would have weary of he child - wife . she would have be less and less a companion for he . he would have be more and more sensible of what be want in he home . she would not have improve . it be better as it be . ' 'Oh , , dearest , dearest , do not speak to I so . every word seem a reproach ! ' 'no , not a syllable ! ' she answer , kiss I . ' oh , my dear , you never deserve it , and I love you far too well to say a reproachful word to you , in earnest - it be all the merit I have , except be pretty - or you think I so . be it lonely , down - stair , ? ' ' very ! very ! ' ' do not cry ! be my chair there ? ' ' in it be old place . ' 'Oh , how my poor boy cry ! Hush , hush ! now , make I one promise . I want to speak to Agnes . when you go downstairs , tell Agnes so , and send she up to I ; and while I speak to she , let no one come - not even aunt . I want to speak to Agnes by herself . I want to speak to , quite alone . ' I promise that she shall , immediately ; but I can not leave she , for my grief . 'I say that it be better as it be ! ' she whisper , as she hold I in she arm . 'Oh , Doady , after more year , you never could have love you child - wife better than you do ; and , after more year , she would so have try and disappoint you , that you might not have be able to love she half so well ! I know I be too young and foolish . it be much better as it be ! ' Agnes be downstairs , when I go into the parlour ; and I give she the message . she disappear , leave I alone with . he chinese house be by the fire ; and he lie within it , on he bed of flannel , querulously try to sleep . the bright moon be high and clear . as I look out on the night , my tear fall fast , and my undisciplined heart be chasten heavily - heavily . I sit down by the fire , think with a blind remorse of all those secret feeling I have nourished since my marriage . I think of every little trifle between I and , and feel the truth , that trifle make the sum of life . ever rise from the sea of my remembrance , be the image of the dear child as I know she first , grac by my young love , and by she own , with every fascination wherein such love be rich . would it , indeed , have be better if we have love each other as a boy and a girl , and forget it ? Undisciplin heart , reply ! how the time wear , I know not ; until I be recall by my child - wife 's old companion . more restless than he be , he crawl out of he house , and look at I , and wander to the door , and whine to go upstairs . ' not tonight , ! not tonight ! ' he come very slowly back to I , lick my hand , and lift he dim eye to my face . 'Oh , ! it may be , never again ! ' he lie down at my foot , stretch himself out as if to sleep , and with a plaintive cry , be dead . 'Oh , ! look , look , here ! ' - that face , so full of pity , and of grief , that rain of tear , that awful mute appeal to I , that solemn hand upraise towards ! ' Agnes ? ' it be over . darkness come before my eye ; and , for a time , all thing be blot out of my remembrance . chapter 54 's this be not the time at which I be to enter on the state of my mind beneath its load of sorrow . I come to think that the be wall up before I , that the energy and action of my life be at a end , that I never could find any refuge but in the grave . I come to think so , I say , but not in the first shock of my grief . it slowly grow to that . if the events I go on to relate , have not thicken around I , in the beginning to confuse , and in the end to augment , my affliction , it be possible ( though I think not probable ) , that I might have fall at once into this condition . as it be , a interval occur before I fully know my own distress ; a interval , in which I even suppose that it be sharpest pang be past ; and when my mind could soothe itself by rest on all that be most innocent and beautiful , in the tender story that be close for ever . when it be first propose that I should go abroad , or how it come to be agree among we that I be to seek the restoration of my peace in change and travel , I do not , even now , distinctly know . the spirit of
of so pervad all we think , and say , and do , in that time of sorrow , that I assume I may refer the project to she influence . but she influence be so quiet that I know no more . and now , indeed , I begin to think that in my old association of she with the stain - glass window in the church , a prophetic foreshadowing of what she would be to I , in the calamity that be to happen in the fullness of time , have find a way into my mind . in all that sorrow , from the moment , never to be forget , when she stand before I with she upraised hand , she be like a sacred presence in my lonely house . when the of alight there , my child - wife fell asleep - they tell I so when I could bear to hear it - on she bosom , with a smile . from my swoon , I first awoke to a consciousness of she compassionate tear , she word of hope and peace , she gentle face bend down as from a purer region nearer , over my undisciplined heart , and soften its pain . let I go on . I be to go abroad . that seem to have be determine among we from the first . the ground now cover all that could perish of my departed wife , I wait only for what call the ' final pulverization of Heep ' ; and for the departure of the emigrant . at the request of Traddles , most affectionate and devote of friend in my trouble , we return to : I mean my aunt , Agnes , and I . we proceed by appointment straight to 's house ; where , and at 's , my friend have be labour ever since we explosive meeting . when poor see I come in , in my black clothes , she be sensibly affect . there be a great deal of good in 's heart , which have not be dun out of it in all those many year . ' well , and , ' be my aunt 's first salutation after we be seat . ' pray , have you think about that emigration proposal of mine ? ' 'my dear madam , ' return , ' perhaps I can not better express the conclusion at which , you humble servant , and I may add we child , have jointly and severally arrive , than by borrowe the language of a illustrious poet , to reply that we boat be on the shore , and we bark be on the sea . ' ' that be right , ' say my aunt . 'I augur all sort of good from you sensible decision . ' ' madam , you do we a great deal of honour ,' he rejoin . he then refer to a memorandum . ' with respect to the pecuniary assistance enable we to launch we frail canoe on the ocean of enterprise , I have reconsider that important business - point ; and would beg to propose my note of hand - draw , it be needless to stipulate , on stamp of the amount respectively require by the various act of parliament apply to such security - at eighteen , twenty - four , and thirty month . the proposition I originally submit , be twelve , eighteen , and twenty - four ; but I be apprehensive that such a arrangement might not allow sufficient time for the requisite amount of - - to turn up . we might not , ' say , look round the room as if it represent several hundred acre of highly cultivate land , 'on the first responsibility become due , have be successful in we harvest , or we might not have get we harvest in . , I believe , be sometimes difficult to obtain in that portion of we colonial possession where it will be we lot to combat with the teeming soil . ' ' arrange it in any way you please , sir , ' say my aunt . ' madam ,' he reply , ' . and myself be deeply sensible of the very considerate kindness of we friend and patron . what I wish be , to be perfectly business - like , and perfectly punctual . turn over , as we be about to turn over , a entirely new leaf ; and fall back , as we be now in the act of fall back , for a spring of no common magnitude ; it be important to my sense of self - respect , besides be a example to my son , that these arrangement should be conclude as between man and man . ' I do not know that attach any meaning to this last phrase ; I do not know that anybody ever do , or do ; but he appear to relish it uncommonly , and repeat , with a impressive cough , 'a between man and man ' . 'I propose , ' say , ' - a convenience to the mercantile world , for which , I believe , we be originally indebt to the , who appear to I to have have a devilish deal too much to do with they ever since - because they be negotiable . but if a bond , or any other description of security , would be prefer , I should be happy to execute any such instrument . as between man and man . ' my aunt observ , that in a case where both party be willing to agree to anything , she take it for grant there would be no difficulty in settle this point . be of she opinion . '
' in reference to we domestic preparation , madam , ' say , with some pride , ' for meet the destiny to which we be now understand to be self - devote , I beg to report they . my eldest daughter attend at five every morning in a neighbour establishment , to acquire the process - if process it may be call - of milking cow . my younger child be instruct to observe , as closely as circumstance will permit , the habits of the pig and poultry maintain in the poorer part of this city : a pursuit from which they have , on two occasion , be bring home , within a inch of be run over . I have myself direct some attention , during the past week , to the art of baking ; and my son have issue forth with a walking - stick and drive cattle , when permit , by the rugged hireling who have they in charge , to render any voluntary service in that direction - which I regret to say , for the credit of we nature , be not often ; he be generally warn , with imprecation , to desist . ' ' all very right indeed , ' say my aunt , encouragingly . ' . have be busy , too , I have no doubt . ' 'my dear madam , ' return , with she business - like air . 'I be free to confess that I have not be actively engage in pursuit immediately connect with cultivation or with stock , though well aware that both will claim my attention on a foreign shore . such opportunity as I have be enable to alienate from my domestic duty , I have devote to correspond at some length with my family . for I own it seem to I , my dear , ' say , who always fall back on I , I suppose from old habit , to whomsoever else she might address she discourse at start , ' that the time be come when the past should be bury in ; when my family should take by the hand , and should take my family by the hand ; when the lion should lie down with the lamb , and my family be on term with . ' I say I think so too . ' this , at least , be the light , my dear , ' pursue , 'in which I view the subject . when I live at home with my papa and mama , my papa be accustom to ask , when any point be under discussion in we limited circle , " in what light do my view the subject ? " that my papa be too partial , I know ; still , on such a point as the frigid coldness which have ever subsist between and my family , I necessarily have form a opinion , delusive though it may be . ' ' no doubt . of course you have , ma 'am , ' say my aunt . ' precisely so , ' assent . ' now , I may be wrong in my conclusion ; it be very likely that I be , but my individual impression be , that the gulf between my family and may be trace to a apprehension , on the part of my family , that would require pecuniary accommodation . I can not help think , ' say , with a air of deep sagacity , ' that there be member of my family who have be apprehensive that would solicit they for they name . - I do not mean to be confer in upon we child , but to be inscribe on bills of , and negotiate in the . ' the look of penetration with which . announce this discovery , as if no one have ever think of it before , seem rather to astonish my aunt ; who abruptly reply , ' well , ma 'am , upon the whole , I should not wonder if you be right ! ' ' . be now on the eve of casting off the pecuniary shackle that have so long enthrall he , ' say , ' and of commence a new career in a country where there be sufficient range for he ability , - which , in my opinion , be exceedingly important ; 's ability peculiarly require space , - it seem to I that my family should signalize the occasion by come forward . what I could wish to see , would be a meeting between and my family at a festive entertainment , to be give at my family 's expense ; where 's health and prosperity be propose , by some lead member of my family , might have a opportunity of develop he view . ' 'My dear , ' say , with some heat , ' it may be better for I to state distinctly , at once , that if I be to develop my view to that assemble group , they would possibly be find of a offensive nature : my impression be that you family be , in the aggregate , impertinent Snob ; and , in detail , unmitigated . ' ' , ' say , shak she head , 'no ! you have never understand they , and they have never understand you . ' cough . ' they have never understand you , , ' say he wife . ' they may be incapable of it . if so , that be they misfortune . I can pity they misfortune . ' 'I be extremely sorry , my dear , ' say , relent , 'to have be betraye into any expression that might , even remotely , have the appearance of be strong expression .
. all I would say be , that I can go abroad without you family come forward to favour I , - in short , with a part Shove of they cold shoulders ; and that , upon the whole , I would rather leave with such impetus as I possess , than derive any acceleration of it from that quarter . at the same time , my dear , if they should condescmend to reply to you communication - which we joint experience render most improbable - far be it from I to be a barrier to you wish . ' the matter be thus amicably settled , give he arm , and glance at the heap of book and papers lie before Traddles on the table , say they would leave we to ourselve ; which they ceremoniously do . ' my dear , ' say Traddles , lean back in he chair when they be go , and look at I with a affection that make he eye red , and he hair all kind of shape , 'I do not make any excuse for trouble you with business , because I know you be deeply interested in it , and it may divert you thought . my dear boy , I hope you be not wear out ? ' 'I be quite myself , ' say I , after a pause . ' we have more cause to think of my aunt than of anyone . you know how much she have do . ' ' surely , surely , ' answer Traddles . ' who can forget it ! ' ' but even that be not all , ' say I . ' during the last fortnight , some new trouble have vex she ; and she have be in and out of every day . several time she have go out early , and be absent until evening . last night , Traddles , with this journey before she , it be almost midnight before she come home . you know what she consideration for other be . she will not tell I what have happen to distress she . ' my aunt , very pale , and with deep line in she face , sit immovable until I have finish ; when some stray tear find they way to she cheek , and she put she hand on mine . ' it be nothing , ; it be nothing . there will be no more of it . you shall know by and by . now Agnes , my dear , let we attend to these affair . ' 'I must do the justice to say ,' Traddle begin , ' that although he would appear not to have work to any good account for himself , he be a most untiring man when he work for other people . I never see such a fellow . if he always go on in the same way , he must be , virtually , about two hundred year old , at present . the heat into which he have be continually put himself ; and the distracted and impetuous manner in which he have be diive , day and night , among papers and book ; to say nothing of the immense number of letter he have write I between this house and 's , and often across the table when he have be sit opposite , and might much more easily have speak ; be quite extraordinary . ' ' letter ! ' cry my aunt . 'I believe he dream in letter ! ' ' there be , too , ' say Traddles , 'have be do wonder ! as soon as he be release from overlook , whom he keep in such charge as I never see exceed , he begin to devote himself to . and really he anxiety to be of use in the investigation we have be make , and he real usefulness in extracting , and copy , and fetch , and carry , have be quite stimulate to we . ' ' be a very remarkable man , ' exclaim my aunt ; ' and I always say he be . trot , you know it . ' 'I be happy to say , , ' pursue Traddles , at once with great delicacy and with great earnestness , ' that in you absence have considerably improve . relieve of the incubus that have fasten upon he for so long a time , and of the dreadful apprehension under which he have liv , he be hardly the same person . at time , even he impaired power of concentrate he memory and attention on particular point of business , have recover itself very much ; and he have be able to assist we in make some thing clear , that we should have find very difficult indeed , if not hopeless , without he . but what I have to do be to come to result ; which be short enough ; not to gossip on all the hopeful circumstance I have observe , or I shall never have do . ' he natural manner and agreeable simplicity make it transparent that he say this to put we in good heart , and to enable Agnes to hear she father mention with greater confidence ; but it be not the less pleasant for that . ' now , let I see , ' say Traddles , look among the papers on the table . ' have count we fund , and reduce to order a great mass of unintentional confusion in the first place , and of wilful confusion and falsification in the second , we take it to be clear that might now wind up he business , and he agency - trust , and exhibit no deficiency or defalcation whatever . ' 'Oh ,
, thank ! ' cry Agnes , fervently . ' but , ' say , ' the surplus that would be leave as he means of support - and I suppose the house to be sell , even in say this - would be so small , not exceed in all probability some hundred of pound , that perhaps , , it would be best to consider whether he might not retain he agency of the estate to which he have so long be receiver . he friend might advise he , you know ; now he be free . you yourself , - - I -' 'I have consider it , , ' say , look to I , ' and I feel that it ought not to be , and must not be ; even on the recommendation of a friend to whom I be so grateful , and owe so much . ' 'I will not say that I recommend it , ' observe Traddles . 'I think it right to suggest it . no more . ' 'I be happy to hear you say so , ' answer , steadily , ' for it give I hope , almost assurance , that we think alike . dear and dear Trotwood , papa once free with honour , what could I wish for ! I have always aspire , if I could have release he from the toil in which he be hold , to render back some little portion of the love and care I owe he , and to devote my life to he . it have be , for year , the utmost height of my hope . to take we future on myself , will be the next great happiness - the next to he release from all trust and responsibility - that I can know . ' ' have you think how , ? ' ' often ! I be not afraid , dear Trotwood . I be certain of success . so many people know I here , and think kindly of I , that I be certain . do not mistrust I . we want be not many . if I rent the dear old house , and keep a school , I shall be useful and happy . ' the calm fervour of she cheerful voice bring back so vividly , first the dear old house itself , and then my solitary home , that my heart be too full for speech . Traddle pretend for a little while to be busily look among the papers . ' next , , ' say , ' that property of yours . ' ' well , sir , ' sigh my aunt . ' all I have get to say about it be , that if it be go , I can bear it ; and if it be not go , I shall be glad to get it back . ' ' it be originally , I think , eight thousand pound , Consols ? ' say Traddles . ' right ! ' reply my aunt . 'I can not account for more than five , ' say Traddles , with a air of perplexity . ' - thousand , do you mean ? ' inquire my aunt , with uncommon composure , 'or pound ? ' ' five thousand pound , ' say Traddles . ' it be all there be , ' return my aunt . 'I sell three , myself . one , I pay for you article , , my dear ; and the other two I have by I . when I lose the rest , I think it wise to say nothing about that sum , but to keep it secretly for a rainy day . I want to see how you would come out of the trial , trot ; and you come out nobly - persevering , self - reliant , self - deny ! so do . do not speak to I , for I find my nerve a little shaken ! ' nobody would have think so , to see she sit upright , with she arm fold ; but she have wonderful self - command . ' then I be delighted to say , ' cry Traddles , beam with joy , ' that we have recover the whole money ! ' ' do not congratulate I , anybody ! ' exclaim my aunt . ' how so , sir ? ' ' you believe it have be misappropriate by ? ' say Traddles . ' of course I do , ' say my aunt , 'and be therefore easily silenced . Agnes , not a word ! ' ' and indeed , ' say , ' it be sell , by virtue of the power of management he hold from you ; but I need not say by whom sell , or on whose actual signature . it be afterwards pretend to , by that rascal , - and prove , too , by figure , - that he have possess himself of the money ( on general instruction , he say ) to keep other deficiencies and difficulty from the light . , be so weak and helpless in he hand as to pay you , afterwards , several sum of interest on a pretend principal which he know do not exist , make himself , unhappily , a party to the fraud . ' ' and at last take the blame upon himself , ' add my aunt ; ' and write I a mad letter , charge himself with robbery , and wrong unheard of . upon which i pay he a visit early one morning , call for a candle , bur not the letter , and tell he if he ever could right I and himself , to do it ; and if he
he could not , to keep he own counsel for he daughter 's sake . - if anybody speak to I , I will leave the house ! ' we all remain quiet ; Agnes cover she face . ' well , my dear friend , ' say my aunt , after a pause , ' and you have really extort the money back from he ? ' ' why , the fact be , ' return Traddles , ' have so completely hem he in , and be always ready with so many new point if a old one fail , that he could not escape from we . a most remarkable circumstance be , that I really do not think he grasp this sum even so much for the gratification of he avarice , which be inordinate , as in the hatred he feel for . he say so to I , plainly . he say he would even have spend as much , to baulk or injure . ' ! ' say my aunt , knitt she brows thoughtfully , and glance at . ' and what be become of he ? ' 'I do not know . he leave here , ' say Traddles , ' with he mother , who have be clamour , and beseech , and disclose , the whole time . they go away by one of the night coach , and I know no more about he ; except that he malevolence to I at parting be audacious . he seem to consider himself hardly less indebted to I , than to ; which I consider ( as I tell he ) quite a compliment . ' ' do you suppose he have any money , Traddle ? ' I ask . ' oh dear , yes , I should think so , ' he reply , shak he head , seriously . 'I should say he must have pocket a good deal , in one way or other . but , I think you would find , , if you have a opportunity of observe he course , that money would never keep that man out of mischief . he be such a incarnate hypocrite , that whatever object he pursue , he must pursue crookedly . it be he only compensation for the outward restraint he put upon himself . always creepe along the ground to some small end or other , he will always magnify every object in the way ; and consequently will hate and suspect everybody that come , in the most innocent manner , between he and it . so the crooked course will become crookeder , at any moment , for the least reason , or for none . it be only necessary to consider he history here , ' say Traddles , 'to know that . ' 'he be a monster of meanness ! ' say my aunt . ' really I do not know about that , ' observe Traddles thoughtfully . ' many people can be very mean , when they give they mind to it . ' ' and now , touche , ' say my aunt . ' well , really , ' say Traddles , cheerfully , ' I must , once more , give high praise . but for he have be so patient and persever for so long a time , we never could have hope to do anything worth speaking of . and I think we ought to consider that do right , for right 's sake , when we reflect what term he might have make with himself , for he silence . ' 'I think so too , ' say I . ' now , what would you give he ? ' inquire my aunt . 'Oh ! before you come to that , ' say , a little disconcert , 'I be afraid I think it discreet to omit ( not be able to carry everything before I ) two point , in make this lawless adjustment - for it be perfectly lawless from begin to end - of a difficult affair . those 's , and so forth , which give he for the advance he have -' ' well ! they must be pay , ' say my aunt . ' yes , but I do not know when they may be proceed on , or where they be , ' rejoin Traddle , open he eye ; ' and I anticipate , that , between this time and he departure , will be constantly arrest , or take in execution . ' ' then he must be constantly set free again , and take out of execution , ' say my aunt . ' what be the amount altogether ? ' ' why , have enter the transaction - he call they transaction - with great form , in a book , ' rejoin Traddles , smile ; ' and he make the amount a hundred and three pound , five . ' ' now , what shall we give he , that sum include ? ' say my aunt . ' Agne , my dear , you and I can talk about division of it afterwards . what should it be ? five hundred pound ? ' upon this , and I both struck in at once . we both recommend a small sum in money , and the payment , without stipulation to , of the claim as they come in . we propose that the family should have they passage and they outfit , and a hundred pound ; and that 's arrangement for the repayment of the advance should be gravely enter into , as it might be wholesome for he to suppose himself under that responsibility . to this , I add the suggestion , that I should give some explanation of he character and
and history to , who I know could be rely on ; and that to should be quietly entrust the discretion of advance another hundred . I further propose to interest in , by confiding so much of 's story to he as I might feel justified in relating , or might think expedient ; and to endeaavor to bring each of they to bear upon the other , for the common advantage . we all enter warmly into these view ; and I may mention at once , that the principal themselves do so , shortly afterwards , with perfect good will and harmony . see that Traddles now glance anxiously at my aunt again , I remind he of the second and last point to which he have advert . ' you and you aunt will excuse I , , if I touch upon a painful theme , as I greatly fear I shall , ' say Traddles , hesitat ; ' but I think it necessary to bring it to you recollection . on the day of 's memorable denunciation a threatening allusion be make by to you aunt 's - husband . ' my aunt , retain she stiff position , and apparent composure , assent with a nod . ' perhaps , ' observ Traddles , ' it be mere purposeless impertinence ? ' ' no , ' return my aunt . ' there be - pardon I - really such a person , and at all in he power ? ' hint Traddles . ' yes , my good friend , ' say my aunt . Traddle , with a perceptible lengthening of he face , explain that he have not be able to approach this subject ; that it have share the fate of 's liability , in not be comprehend in the term he have make ; that we be no longer of any authority with ; and that if he could do we , or any of we , any injury or annoyance , no doubt he would . my aunt remain quiet ; until again some stray tear find they way to she cheek . ' you be quite right , ' she say . ' it be very thoughtful to mention it . ' ' can I - or - do anything ? ' ask Traddles , gently . ' nothing , ' say my aunt . 'I thank you many time . , my dear , a vain threat ! let we have and back . and do not any of you speak to I ! ' with that she smooth she dress , and sit , with she upright carriage , look at the door . ' well , and ! ' say my aunt , when they enter . ' we have be discuss you emigration , with many apology to you for keep you out of the room so long ; and I will tell you what arrangement we propose . ' these she explain to the unbounded satisfaction of the family , - child and all be then present , - and so much to the awakening of 's punctual habits in the opening stage of all bill transaction , that he could not be dissuad from immediately rush out , in the highest spirit , to buy the stamp for he note of hand . but , he joy receive a sudden check ; for within five minute , he return in the custody of a heriff 's officer , inform we , in a flood of tear , that all be lost . we , be quite prepared for this event , which be of course a proceeding of 's , soon pay the money ; and in five minute more be seat at the table , fill up the stamp with a expression of perfect joy , which only that congenial employment , or the making of punch , could impart in full completeness to he shining face . to see he at work on the stamps , with the relish of a artist , touch they like picture , look at they sideway , take weighty note of date and amount in he pocket - book , and contemplate they when finish , with a high sense of they precious value , be a sight indeed . ' now , the best thing you can do , sir , if you will allow I to advise you , ' say my aunt , after silently observe he , ' be to abjure that occupation for evermore . ' ' madam , ' reply , ' it be my intention to register such a vow on the virgin page of the future . will attest it . I trust , ' say , solemnly , ' that my son Wilkins will ever bear in mind , that he have infinitely better put he fist in the fire , than use it to handle the serpent that have poisone the life - blood of he unhappy parent ! ' deeply affect , and change in a moment to the image of despair , regard the serpent with a look of gloomy abhorrence ( in which he late admiration of they be not quite subdue ) , fold they up and put they in he pocket . this close the proceeding of the evening . we be weary with sorrow and fatigue , and my aunt and I be to return to on the morrow . it be arrange that the Micawber should follow we , after effect a sale of they goods to a broker ; that 's affair should be bring to a settlement , with all convenient speed , under the direction of Traddle ; and that Agnes should also come to , pend those arrangement . we pass the night at the old house , which , freed from the
the presence of the , see purge of a disease ; and I lay in my old room , like a shipwrecked wanderer come home . we go back next day to my aunt 's house - not to mine - and when she and I sit alone , as of old , before go to bed , she say : ' , do you really wish to know what I have have upon my mind lately ? ' ' indeed I do , aunt . if there ever be a time when I feel unwilling that you should have a sorrow or anxiety which I could not share , it be now . ' ' you have have sorrow enough , child , ' say my aunt , affectionately , ' without the addition of my little misery . I could have no other motive , trot , in keep anything from you . ' 'I know that well , ' say I . ' but tell I now . ' ' would you ride with I a little way tomorrow morning ? ' ask my aunt . ' of course . ' ' at nine , ' say she . 'I will tell you then , my dear . ' at nine , accordingly , we go out in a little chariot , and drive to . we drive a long way through the street , until we come to one of the large hospitals . stand hard by the building be a plain hearse . the driver recognize my aunt , and , in obedience to a motion of she hand at the window , drive slowly off ; we follow . ' you understand it now , , ' say my aunt . ' he be gone ! ' ' do he die in the hospital ? ' ' yes . ' she sit immovable beside I ; but , again I see the stray tear on she face . ' he be there once before , ' say my aunt presently . ' he be ail a long time - a shattered , break man , these many year . when he know he state in this last illness , he ask they to send for I . he be sorry then . very sorry . ' ' you go , I know , aunt . ' 'I go . I be with he a good deal afterwards . ' ' he die the night before we go to ? ' say I . my aunt nod . ' no one can harm he now , ' she say . ' it be a vain threat . ' we drive away , out of town , to the churchyard at . ' better here than in the street , ' say my aunt . ' he be bear here . ' we alight ; and follow the plain coffin to a corner I remember well , where the service be read consign it to the dust . ' six - and - thirty year ago , this day , my dear , ' say my aunt , as we walk back to the chariot , be marry . God forgive we all ! ' we take we seat in silence ; and so she sit beside I for a long time , hold my hand . at length she suddenly burst into tear , and say : ' he be a fine - look man when I marry he , - and he be sadly change ! ' it do not last long . after the relief of tear , she soon become composed , and even cheerful . she nerf be a little shaken , she say , or she would not have give way to it . God forgive we all ! so we ride back to she little cottage at , where we find the follow short note , which have arrive by that morning 's post from : ' , ' . 'my dear Madam , and , ' the fair land of promise lately loom on the horizon be again envelope in impenetrable mist , and for ever withdraw from the eyes of a drifting wretch whose be seal ! 'Another writ have be issue ( in he 's of 's at ) , in another cause of . , and the defendant in that cause be the prey of the sheriff have legal jurisdiction in this bailiwick . ' now be the day , and now be the hour , see the front of battle lower , see approach proud edward 's power - chain and slavery ! ' Consign to which , and to a speedy end ( for mental torture be not supportable beyond a certain point , and that point I feel I have attaine ) , my course be run . bless you , bless you ! some future traveller , visit , from motives of curiosity , not unmingled , let we hope , with sympathy , the place of confinement allot to debtor in this city , may , and I trust will , , as he trace on its wall , inscribe with a rusty nail , ' the obscure initial , . m . ' P. . I re-open this to say that we common friend , ( who have not yet leave we , and be look extremely well ) , have pay the debt and cost , in the noble name of ; and that myself and family be at the height of earthly bliss . ' chapter 55 Tempest I now approach a event in my life , so indelible , so awful , so bound by a infinite variety of tie to all that have proceed it , in these page , that , from the beginning of my narrative , I have see it grow larger and
and larger as I advance , like a great tower in a plain , and throw its fore - cast shadow even on the incident of my childish day . for year after it occur , I dream of it often . I have start up so vividly impress by it , that it be fury have yet seem rage in my quiet room , in the still night . I dream of it sometimes , though at lengthened and uncertain interval , to this hour . I have a association between it and a stormy wind , or the lightest mention of a sea -shore , as strong as any of which my mind be conscious . as plainly as I behold what happen , I will try to write it down . I do not recall it , but see it do ; for it happen again before I . the time draw on rapidly for the sailing of the emigrant - ship , my good old nurse ( almost break - heart for I , when we first meet ) come up to . I be constantly with she , and she brother , and the Micawber ( they be very much together ) ; but Emily I never see . one evening when the time be close at hand , I be alone with and she brother . we conversation turn on . she describe to we how tenderly he have take leave of she , and how manfully and quietly he have borne himself . most of all , of late , when she believe he be most try . it be a subject of which the affectionate creature never tire ; and we interest in hear the many example which she , who be so much with he , have to relate , be equal to her in relate they . my aunt and I be at that time vacate the two cottage at ; I intend to go abroad , and she to return to she house at . we have a temporary lodging in . as I walk home to it , after this evening 's conversation , reflect on what have pass between and myself when I be last at , I wave in the original purpose I have form , of leave a letter for when I should take leave of she uncle on board the ship , and think it would be better to write to she now . she might desire , I think , after receive my communication , to send some part word by I to she unhappy lover . I ink to give she the opportunity . I therefore sit down in my room , before go to bed , and write to she . I tell she that I have see he , and that he have request I to tell she what I have already write in its place in these sheet . I faithfully repeat it . I have no need to enlarge upon it , if I have have the right . its deep fidelity and goodness be not to be adorn by I or any man . I leave it out , to be send round in the morning ; with a line to , request he to give it to she ; and go to be at daybreak . I be weaker than I know then ; and , not fall asleep until the sun be up , lay late , and unrefreshed , next day . I be rouse by the silent presence of my aunt at my bedside . I feel it in my sleep , as I suppose we all do feel such thing . ' trot , my dear , ' she say , when I open my eye , 'I could not make up my mind to disturb you . be here ; shall he come up ? ' I reply yes , and he soon appear . ' , ' he say , when we have shaken hand , 'ly you letter , sir , and she writ this heer ; and begge of I fur to ask you to read it , and if you see no hurt I not , to be so kind as take charge o not . ' 'have you read it ? ' say I . he nod sorrowfully . I open it , and read as follow : 'I have get you message . oh , what can I write , to thank you for you good and bless kindness to I ! 'I have put the word close to my heart . I shall keep they till I die . they be sharp thorn , but they be such comfort . I have pray over they , oh , I have pray so much . when I find what you be , and what uncle be , I think what must be , and can cry to he . ' good - bye for ever . now , my dear , my friend , good - bye for ever in this world . in another world , if I be forgive , I may wake a child and come to you . all thanks and blessing . farewell , evermore . ' this , blot with tear , be the letter . ' may I tell she as you doe not see no hurt I not , and as you will be so kind as take charge o not , ? ' say , when I have read it . ' unquestionably , ' say I - ' but I be think -' ' yes , ? ' 'I be think , ' say I , ' that I will go down again to . there be time , and to spare , for I to go and come back before the ship sails . my
my mind be constantly run on he , in he solitude ; to put this letter of she write in he hand at this time , and to enable you to tell she , in the moment of parting , that he have get it , will be a kindness to both of they . I solemnly accept he commission , dear good fellow , and can not discharge it too completely . the journey be nothing to I . I be restless , and shall be better in motion . I will go down tonight . ' though he anxiously endeavoure to dissuade I , I see that he be of my mind ; and this , if I have require to be confirm in my intention , would have have the effect . he go round to the coach office , at my request , and take the box - seat for I on the mail . in the evening I start , by that conveyance , down the road I have traverse under so many vicissitude . ' do not you think that ,' I ask the coachman , in the first stage out of , 'a very remarkable sky ? I do not remember to have see one like it . ' ' nor I - not equal to it ,' he reply . ' that be wind , sir . there will be mischiefinitely do at sea , I expect , before long . ' it be a murky confusion - here and there blot with a colour like the colour of the smoke from damp fuel - of fly cloud , toss up into most remarkable heap , suggest greater height in the cloud than there be depth below they to the bottom of the deepest hollow in the earth , through which the wild moon seem to plunge headlong , as if , in a dread disturbance of the law of nature , she have lose she way and be frightene . there have be a wind all day ; and it be rise then , with a extraordinary great sound . in another hour it have much increased , and the sky be more overcast , and blow hard . but , as the night advance , the cloud close in and densely over -spread the whole sky , then very dark , it come on to blow , harder and harder . it still increase , until we horse could scarcely face the wind . many time , in the dark part of the night ( it be then late in , when the night be not short ) , the leader turn about , or come to a dead stop ; and we be often in serious apprehension that the coach would be blow over . sweep gust of rain come up before this storm , like shower of steel ; and , at those time , when there be any shelter of tree or lee wall to be get , we be fain to stop , in a sheer impossibility of continue the struggle . when the day break , it blow harder and harder . I have be in when the seaman say it blow great gun , but I have never know the like of this , or anything approach to it . we come to - very late , have have to fight every inch of ground since we be ten mile out of ; and find a cluster of people in the market - place , who have risen from they bed in the night , fearful of fall chimney . some of these , congregat about the inn - yard while we change horse , tell we of great sheet of lead have be rip off a high church - tower , and fling into a by - street , which they then block up . other have to tell of country people , come in from neighbouring villag , who have see great tree lie tear out of the earth , and whole rick scatter about the roads and field . still , there be no abatement in the storm , but it blow harder . as we struggl on , nearer and nearer to the sea , from which this mighty wind be blow dead on shore , its force become more and more terrific . long before we see the sea , its spray be on we lip , and shower salt rain upon we . the water be out , over mile and miles of the flat country adjacent to ; and every sheet and puddle lash it be banks , and have its stress of little breaker set heavily towards we . when we come within sight of the sea , the wave on the horizon , catch at interval above the rolling abyss , be like glimpse of another shore with towers and building . when at last we get into the town , the people come out to they door , all aslant , and with streaming hair , make a wonder of the mail that have come through such a night . I put up at the old inn , and go down to look at the sea ; stagger along the street , which be strewn with sand and seaweed , and with fly blotch of sea -foam ; afraid of fall slate and tile ; and hold by people I meet , at angry corner . come near the beach , I see , not only the boatman , but half the people of the town , lurk behind building ; some , now and then brave the fury of the storm to look away to sea , and blow sheer out of they course in try to get zigzag back . join these group , I find bewailing woman whose husband be away in
in herring or oyster boat , which there be too much reason to think might have founder before they could run in anywhere for safety . Grizzl old sailor be among the people , shak they head , as they look from water to sky , and mutter to one another ; ship - owner , excited and uneasy ; child , huddl together , and pee into older face ; even stout mariner , disturbed and anxious , level they glass at the sea from behind place of shelter , as if they be survey a enemy . the tremendous sea itself , when I could find sufficient pause to look at it , in the agitation of the blinding wind , the fly stone and sand , and the awful noise , confound I . as the high watery wall come roll in , and , at they highest , tumble into surf , they look as if the least would engulf the town . as the reced wave sweep back with a hoarse roar , it seem to scoop out deep cafe in the beach , as if it be purpose be to undermine the earth . when some white - head billow thunder on , and dash themselves to piece before they reach the land , every fragment of the late whole seem possess by the full might of its wrath , rush to be gather to the composition of another monster . Undulating hill be change to valley , undulating valley ( with a solitary storm - bird sometimes skimm through they ) be lift up to hill ; mass of water shiver and shake the beach with a boom sound ; every shape tumultuously roll on , as soon as make , to change its shape and place , and beat another shape and place away ; the ideal shore on the horizon , with its towers and building , rose and fell ; the cloud fell fast and thick ; I seem to see a rending and upheave of all nature . not find among the people whom this memorable wind - for it be still remembe down there , as the greatest ever know to blow upon that coast - have bring together , I make my way to he house . it be shut ; and as no one answer to my knocking , I go , by back way and by - lane , to the yard where he work . I learn , there , that he have go to , to meet some sudden exigency of ship - repair in which he skill be require ; but that he would be back tomorrow morning , in good time . I go back to the inn ; and when I have wash and dress , and try to sleep , but in vain , it be five o'clock in the afternoon . I have not sit five minute by the coffee - room fire , when the waiter , come to stir it , as a excuse for talking , tell I that two collier have go down , with all hand , a few mile away ; and that some other ship have be see labour hard in the Road , and try , in great distress , to keep off shore . mercy on they , and on all poor sailor , say he , if we have another night like the last ! I be very much depresse in spirits ; very solitary ; and feel a uneasiness in 's not be there , disproportionate to the occasion . I be seriously affect , without know how much , by late event ; and my long exposure to the fierce wind have confuse I . there be that jumble in my thought and recollection , that I have lose the clear arrangement of time and distance . thus , if I have go out into the town , I should not have be surprise , I think , to encounter someone who I know must be then in . so to speak , there be in these respects a curiious inattention in my mind . yet it be busy , too , with all the remembrance the place naturally awaken ; and they be particularly distinct and vivid . in this state , the waiter 's dismal intelligence about the ship immediately connect itself , without any effort of my volition , with my uneasiness about . I be persuade that I have a apprehension of he return from by sea , and be lose . this grow so strong with I , that I resolve to go back to the yard before I take my dinner , and ask the boat - builder if he think he attempting to return by sea at all likely ? if he give I the least reason to think so , I would go over to Lowestoft and prevent it by bring he with I . I hastily order my dinner , and go back to the yard . I be no too soon ; for the boat - builder , with a lantern in he hand , be lock the yard - gate . he quite laugh when I ask he the question , and say there be no fear ; no man in he sense , or out of they , would put off in such a gale of wind , least of all , who have be bear to seafar . so sensible of this , beforehand , that I have really feel ashamed of do what I be nevertheless impelled to do , I go back to the inn . if such a wind could rise , I think it be rise . the howl and roar , the rattling of the door and window , the rumbling in the chimney , the apparent rocking of
of the very house that shelter I , and the prodigious tumult of the sea , be more fearful than in the morning . but there be now a great darkness besides ; and that invest the storm with new terror , real and fanciful . I could not eat , I could not sit still , I could not continue steadfast to anything . something within I , faintly answer to the storm without , toss up the depth of my memory and make a tumult in they . yet , in all the hurry of my thought , wild run with the thunder sea , - the storm , and my uneasiness regard be always in the fore - ground . my dinner go away almost untasted , and I try to refresh myself with a glass or two of wine . in vain . I fall into a dull slumber before the fire , without lose my consciousness , either of the uproar out of door , or of the place in which I be . both became overshadow by a new and indefinable horror ; and when I awoke - or rather when I shook off the lethargy that bound I in my chair - my whole frame thrill with objectless and unintelligible fear . I walk to and fro , try to read a old gazetteer , listen to the awful noise : look at face , scene , and figure in the fire . at length , the steady ticking of the undisturbed clock on the wall torment I to that degree that I resolve to go to bed . it be reassure , on such a night , to be tell that some of the inn-servant have agree together to sit up until morning . I go to bed , exceedingly weary and heavy ; but , on my lying down , all such sensation vanish , as if by magic , and I be broad awake , with every sense refin . for hour I lay there , listen to the wind and water ; imagine , now , that I hear shriek out at sea ; now , that I distinctly hear the firing of signal gun ; and now , the fall of house in the town . I get up , several time , and look out ; but could see nothing , except the reflection in the window - pane of the faint candle I have leave burn , and of my own haggard face look in at I from the black void . at length , my restlessness attain to such a pitch , that I hurrie on my clothes , and go downstairs . in the large kitchen , where I dimly see bacon and rope of onion hang from the beams , the watcher be cluster together , in various attitude , about a table , purposely move away from the great chimney , and bring near the door . a pretty girl , who have she ear stop with she apron , and she eye upon the door , scream when I appear , suppose I to be a spirit ; but the other have more presence of mind , and be glad of a addition to they company . one man , refer to the topic they have be discuss , ask I whether I think the soul of the collier - crew who have go down , be out in the storm ? I remain there , I dare say , two hour . once , I open the yard - gate , and look into the empty street . the sand , the sea-weed , and the flake of foam , be drive by ; and I be oblige to call for assistance before I could shut the gate again , and make it fast against the wind . there be a dark gloom in my solitary chamber , when I at length return to it ; but I be tired now , and , get into bed again , fell - off a tower and down a precipice - into the depth of sleep . I have a impression that for a long time , though I dream of be elsewhere and in a variety of scene , it be always blow in my dream . at length , I lose that feeble hold upon reality , and be engage with two dear friend , but who they be I do not know , at the siege of some town in a roar of cannonading . the thunder of the cannon be so loud and incessant , that I could not hear something I much desire to hear , until I make a great exertion and awoke . it be broad day - eight or nine o'clock ; the storm rage , in lieu of the battery ; and someone knock and call at my door . ' what be the matter ? ' I cry . 'A wreck ! close by ! ' I spring out of bed , and ask , what wreck ? 'A schooner , from or , laden with fruit and wine . make haste , sir , if you want to see she ! it be think , down on the beach , she will go to piece every moment . ' the excited voice go clamour along the staircase ; and I wrap myself in my clothes as quickly as I could , and run into the street . number of people be there before I , all run in one direction , to the beach . I run the same way , outstrippe a good many , and soon come face the wild sea . the wind might by this time have lull a little , though not more sensibly than if the cannonading I have dream of , have be diminish by
by the silencing of half - a - dozen gun out of hundred . but the sea , have upon it the additional agitation of the whole night , be infinitely more terrific than when I have see it last . every appearance it have then present , bear the expression of be swell ; and the height to which the breaker rose , and , look over one another , bore one another down , and roll in , in interminable host , be most appalling . in the difficulty of hear anything but wind and wave , and in the crowd , and the unspeakable confusion , and my first breathless effort to stand against the weather , I be so confused that I look out to sea for the wreck , and see nothing but the foam head of the great wave . a half - dress boatman , stand next I , point with he bare arm ( a tattoo would arrow on it , point in the same direction ) to the left . then , of great , I see it , close in upon we ! one mast be break short off , six or eight foot from the deck , and lay over the side , entangle in a maze of sail and rig ; and all that ruin , as the ship roll and beat - which she do without a moment 's pause , and with a violence quite inconceivable - beat the side as if it would stave it in . some effort be even then be make , to cut this portion of the wreck away ; for , as the ship , which be broadside on , turn towards we in she roll , I plainly descry she people at work with ax , especially one active figure with long curling hair , conspicuous among the rest . but a great cry , which be audible even above the wind and water , rise from the shore at this moment ; the sea , swee over the rolling wreck , make a clean breach , and carry man , spar , cask , plank , bulwark , heap of such toy , into the boiling surge . the second mast be yet stand , with the rag of a rent sail , and a wild confusion of broken cordage flapp to and fro . the ship have struck once , the same boatman hoarsely say in my ear , and then lift in and strike again . I understand he to add that she be part amidship , and I could readily suppose so , for the rolling and beat be too tremendous for any human work to suffer long . as he speak , there be another great cry of pity from the beach ; four man arise with the wreck out of the deep , cling to the rigging of the remaine mast ; uppermost , the active figure with the curling hair . there be a bell on board ; and as the ship roll and dash , like a desperate creature drive mad , now show we the whole sweep of she deck , as she turn on she beam - end towards the shore , now nothing but she keel , as she spring wildly over and turn towards the sea , the bell rang ; and its sound , the knell of those unhappy man , be borne towards we on the wind . again we lose she , and again she rise . two man be gone . the agony on the shore increase . groane , and clasp they hand ; woman shriek , and turn away they face . some run wildly up and down along the beach , cry for help where no help could be . I find myself one of these , frantically implor a knot of sailor whom I know , not to let those two lose creature perish before we eye . they be make out to I , in a agitated way - I do not know how , for the little I could hear I be scarcely compose enough to understand - that the lifeboat have be bravely man a hour ago , and could do nothing ; and that as no man would be so desperate as to attempt to wake off with a rope , and establish a communication with the shore , there be nothing left to try ; when I notice that some new sensation move the people on the beach , and see they part , and come break through they to the front . I run to he - as well as I know , to repeat my appeal for help . but , distract though I be , by a sight so new to I and terrible , the determination in he face , and he look out to sea - exactly the same look as I remember in connexion with the morning after 's flight - awoke I to a knowledge of he danger . I hold he back with both arm ; and implor the man with whom I have be speak , not to listen to he , not to do murder , not to let he stir from off that sand ! another cry arise on shore ; and look to the wreck , we see the cruel sail , with blow on blow , beat off the lower of the two man , and fly up in triumph round the active figure leave alone upon the mast . against such a sight , and against such determination as that of the calmly desperate man who be already accustom to lead half the people present , I might as hopefully have entreate the wind . ' , ' he say , cheerily grasp I by both hand , ' if my
my time be come , ' tis come . if not , I will bide it . above bless you , and bless all ! mates , make I ready ! I be a - go off ! ' I be sweep away , but not unkindly , to some distance , where the people around I make I stay ; urging , as I confusedly perceive , that he be bend on go , with help or without , and that I should endanger the precaution for he safety by trouble those with whom they rest . I do not know what I answer , or what they rejoin ; but I see hurry on the beach , and man run with rope from a capstan that be there , and penetrat into a circle of figure that hide he from I . then , I see he stand alone , in a seaman 's frock and trousers : a rope in he hand , or sling to he wrist : another round he body : and several of the best man hold , at a little distance , to the latter , which he lay out himself , slack upon the shore , at he foot . the wreck , even to my unpractised eye , be break up . I see that she be part in the middle , and that the life of the solitary man upon the mast hang by a thread . still , he cling to it . he have a singular red cap on , - not like a sailor 's cap , but of a finer colour ; and as the few yielding plank between he and destruction roll and bulge , and he anticipative death - knell rung , he be see by all of we to wave it . I see he do it now , and think I be go distract , when he action bring a old remembrance to my mind of a once dear friend . watch the sea , stand alone , with the silence of suspend breath behind he , and the storm before , until there be a great retiring wave , when , with a backward glance at those who hold the rope which be make fast round he body , he dash in after it , and in a moment be buffet with the water ; rise with the hill , fall with the valley , lose beneath the foam ; then draw again to land . they haul in hastily . he be hurt . I see blood on he face , from where I stand ; but he take no thought of that . he seem hurriedly to give they some direction for leave he more free - or so I judge from the motion of he arm - and be gone as before . and now he make for the wreck , rise with the hill , fall with the valley , lose beneath the rug foam , borne in towards the shore , borne on towards the ship , strive hard and valiantly . the distance be nothing , but the power of the sea and wind make the strife deadly . at length he near the wreck . he be so near , that with one more of he vigorous stroke he would be cling to it , - when a high , green , vast hill - side of water , move on shoreward , from beyond the ship , he seem to leap up into it with a mighty bound , and the ship be gone ! some eddy fragment I see in the sea , as if a mere cask have be break , in run to the spot where they be haul in . Consternation be in every face . they draw he to my very foot - insensible - dead . he be carry to the nearest house ; and , no one prevent I now , I remaine near he , busy , while every means of restoration be try ; but he have be beat to death by the great wave , and he generous heart be still for ever . as I sit beside the bed , when hope be abandon and all be do , a fisherman , who have know I when Emily and I be child , and ever since , whisper my name at the door . ' , ' say he , with tear start to he weather - beat face , which , with he trembling lip , be ashy pale , ' will you come over yonder ? ' the old remembrance that have be recall to I , be in he look . I ask he , terror - stricken , lean on the arm he hold out to support I : ' have a body come ashore ? ' he say , ' yes . ' ' do I know it ? ' I ask then . he answer nothing . but he lead I to the shore . and on that part of it where she and I have look for shells , two child - on that part of it where some lighter fragment of the old boat , blow down last night , have be scatter by the wind - among the ruin of the home he have wronged - I see he lie with he head upon he arm , as I have often see he lie at school . chapter 56 the , and the old no need , of , to have say , when we last spoke together , in that hour which I so little deem to be we parting - hour - no need to have say , ' think of I at my best ! ' I have do that ever ; and could I change now , look on
on this sight ! they bring a hand - bier , and lay he on it , and cover he with a flag , and take he up and bear he on towards the house . all the man who carry he have know he , and go sail with he , and see he merry and bold . they carry he through the wild roar , a hush in the midst of all the tumult ; and take he to the cottage where be already . but when they set the bier down on the threshold , they look at one another , and at I , and whisper . I know why . they feel as if it be not right to lay he down in the same quiet room . we go into the town , and take we burden to the inn . so soon as I could at all collect my thought , I send for , and beg he to provide I a conveyance in which it could be get to in the night . I know that the care of it , and the hard duty of prepare he mother to receive it , could only rest with I ; and I be anxious to discharge that duty as faithfully as I could . I choose the night for the journey , that there might be less curiosity when I leave the town . but , although it be nearly midnight when I come out of the yard in a chaise , follow by what I have in charge , there be many people wait . at interval , along the town , and even a little way out upon the road , I see more : but at length only the bleak night and the open country be around I , and the ash of my youthful friendship . upon a mellow autumn day , about noon , when the ground be perfume by fallen leave , and many more , in beautiful tint of yellow , red , and brown , yet hang upon the tree , through which the sun be shine , I arrive at . I walk the last mile , think as I go along of what I have to do ; and leave the carriage that have follow I all through the night , await order to advance . the house , when I come up to it , look just the same . not a blind be raise ; no sign of life be in the dull pave court , with its covered way lead to the disused door . the wind have quite gone down , and nothing move . I have not , at first , the courage to ring at the gate ; and when I do ring , my errand see to I to be express in the very sound of the bell . the little parlour-maid come out , with the key in she hand ; and look earnestly at I as she unlock the gate , say : 'I beg you pardon , sir . be you ill ? ' 'I have be much agitate , and be fatigue . ' ' be anything the matter , sir ? - ? -' ' Hush ! ' say I . ' yes , something have happen , that I have to break to . she be at home ? ' the girl anxiously reply that she mistress be very seldom out now , even in a carriage ; that she keep she room ; that she see no company , but would see I . she mistress be up , she say , and be with she . what message should she take upstairs ? give she a strict charge to be careful of she manner , and only to carry in my card and say I wait , I sit down in the drawing - room ( which we have now reach ) until she should come back . it be former pleasant air of occupation be gone , and the shutter be half close . the harp have not be use for many and many a day . he picture , as a boy , be there . the cabinet in which he mother have keep he letter be there . I wonder if she ever read they now ; if she would ever read they more ! the house be so still that I hear the girl 's light step upstairs . on she return , she bring a message , to the effect that be a invalid and could not come down ; but that if I would excuse she be in she chamber , she would be glad to see I . in a few moments I stand before she . she be in he room ; not in she own . I feel , of course , that she have take to occupy it , in remembrance of he ; and that the many token of he old sport and accomplishment , by which she be surround , remain there , just as he have leave they , for the same reason . she murmure , however , even in she reception of I , that she be out of she own chamber because its aspect be unsuited to she infirmity ; and with she stately look repell the least suspicion of the truth . at she chair , as usual , be . from the first moment of she dark eye rest on I , I see she know I be the bearer of evil tiding . the scar spring into view that instant . she withdraw herself a step behind the chair , to keep she own face out of 's observation ; and scrutinize I with a piercing gaze that never falter , never shrink . 'I be sorry to observe you
you be in mourning , sir , ' say . 'I be unhappily a widower , ' say I . ' you be very young to know so great a loss , ' she return . 'I be grieve to hear it . I be grieve to hear it . I hope will be good to you . ' 'I hope , ' say I , look at she , ' will be good to all of we . dear , we must all trust to that , in we heaviest misfortune . ' the earnestness of my manner , and the tear in my eyes , alarm she . the whole course of she thought appear to stop , and change . I try to command my voice in gently say he name , but it tremble . she repeat it to herself , two or three time , in a low tone . then , address I , she say , with enforce calmness : ' my son be ill . ' ' very ill . ' ' you have see he ? ' 'I have . ' ' be you reconcile ? ' I could not say yes , I could not say no . she slightly turn she head towards the spot where have be stand at she elbow , and in that moment I say , by the motion of my lip , to , ' dead ! ' that might not be induce to look behind she , and read , plainly write , what she be not yet prepare to know , I meet she look quickly ; but I have see throw she hand up in the air with vehemence of despair and horror , and then clasp they on she face . the handsome lady - so like , oh so like ! - regard I with a fix look , and put she hand to she forehead . I besotch she to be calm , and prepare herself to bear what I have to tell ; but I should rather have entreate she to weep , for she sit like a stone figure . ' when I be last here ,' I falter , ' tell I he be sai here and there . the night before last be a dreadful one at sea . if he be at sea that night , and near a dangerous coast , as it be say he be ; and if the vessel that be see should really be the ship which -' ' ! ' say , ' come to I ! ' she come , but with no sympathy or gentleness . she eye gleam like fire as she confront he mother , and break into a frightful laugh . ' now , ' she say , ' be you pride appease , you madwoman ? now have he make atonement to you - with he life ! do you hear ? - he life ! ' , fall back stifinitely in she chair , and make no sound but a moan , cast she eye upon she with a wide stare . ' aye ! ' cry , smit herself passionately on the breast , ' look at I ! , and groan , and look at I ! look here ! ' strike the scar , ' at you dead child 's handiwork ! ' the moan the mother utter , from time to time , go to my heart . always the same . always inarticulate and stifle . accompany with a incapable motion of the head , but with no change of face . always proceed from a rigid mouth and close tooth , as if the jaw be locked and the face freeze up in pain . ' do you remember when he do this ? ' she proceed . ' do you remember when , in he inheritance of you nature , and in you pampering of he pride and passion , he do this , and disfigure I for life ? look at I , mark until I die with he high displeasure ; and moan and groan for what you make he ! ' ' ,' I entreate she . ' for 's sake -' 'I will speak ! ' she say , turn on I with she lightning eye . ' be silent , you ! look at I , I say , proud mother of a proud , false son ! for you nurture of he , moan for you corruption of he , moan for you loss of he , moan for mine ! ' she clench she hand , and tremble through she spare , wear figure , as if she passion be kill she by inch . ' you , resent he self - will ! ' she exclaim . ' you , injure by he haughty temper ! you , who oppose to both , when you hair be grey , the quality which make both when you give he birth ! you , who from he cradle rear he to be what he be , and stunt what he should have be ! be you reward , now , for you year of trouble ? ' 'Oh , , shame ! oh cruel ! ' 'I tell you , ' she return , 'I will speak to she . no power on earth should stop I , while I be stand here ! have I be silent all these year , and shall I not speak now ? I love he better than you ever love he ! ' turn on she fiercely . 'I could have love he , and ask no return . if I have be he wife , I could have be the slave of he caprice for a word of love a year . I should have be . who know it
it better than I ? you be exact , proud , punctilious , selfish . my love would have be devote - would have trod you paltry whimper under foot ! ' with flash eye , she stamp upon the ground as if she actually do it . ' look here ! ' she say , strike the scar again , with a relentless hand . ' when he grow into the better understanding of what he have do , he see it , and repent of it ! I could se to he , and talk to he , and show the ardour that I feel in all he do , and attain with labour to such knowledge as most interes he ; and I attract he . when he be freshest and truest , he love I . yes , he do ! many a time , when you be put off with a slight word , he have take I to he heart ! ' she say it with a taunt pride in the midst of she frenzy - for it be little less - yet with a eager remembrance of it , in which the smoulder ember of a gentler feeling kind for the moment . 'I descend - as I might have know I should , but that he fascinate I with he boyish courtship - into a doll , a trifle for the occupation of a idle hour , to be drop , and take up , and trifle with , as the inconstant humwe take he . when he grow weary , I grow weary . as he fancy die out , I would no more have try to strengthen any power I have , than I would have marry he on he be force to take I for he wife . we fall away from one another without a word . perhaps you see it , and be not sorry . since then , I have be a mere disfigured piece of furniture between you both ; have no eye , no ears , no feeling , no remembrance . Moan ? for what you make he ; not for you love . I tell you that the time be , when I love he better than you ever do ! ' she stand with she bright angry eye confront the wide stare , and the set face ; and soften no more , when the moaning be repeat , than if the face have be a picture . ' , ' say I , ' if you can be so obdurate as not to feel for this afflict mother -' ' who feel for I ? ' she sharply retort . ' she have sow this . let she moan for the harvest that she reap today ! ' ' and if he fault -' I begin . ' Fault ! ' she cry , burst into passionate tear . ' who dare malign he ? he have a soul worth million of the friend to whom he stoop ! ' ' no one can have love he better , no one can hold he in dearer remembrance than I ,' I reply . 'I mean to say , if you have no compassion for he mother ; or if he fault - you have be bitter on they -' ' it be false , ' she cry , tear she black hair ; 'I love he ! ' ' - if he fault cannot ,' I go on , ' be banish from you remembrance , in such a hour ; look at that figure , even as one you have never see before , and render it some help ! ' all this time , the figure be unchanged , and look unchangeable . motionless , rigid , star ; moan in the same dumb way from time to time , with the same helpless motion of the head ; but give no other sign of life . suddenly knee down before it , and begin to loosen the dress . 'A curse upon you ! ' she say , look round at I , with a mingled expression of rage and grief . ' it be in a evil hour that you ever come here ! a curse upon you ! go ! ' after pass out of the room , I hurrie back to ring the bell , the sooner to alarm the servants . she have then take the impassive figure in she arm , and , still upon she knee , be weep over it , kiss it , call to it , rock it to and for upon she bosom like a child , and try every tender mean to rouse the dormant sense . no longer afraid of leave she , I noiselessly turn back again ; and alarme the house as I go out . later in the day , I return , and we lay he in he mother 's room . she be just the same , they tell I ; never leave she ; doctor be in attendance , many thing have be try ; but she lay like a statue , except for the low sound now and then . I go through the dreary house , and darken the window . the window of the chamber where he lay , I darken last . I lift up the leaden hand , and hold it to my heart ; and all the world seem death and silence , break only by he mother 's moaning . chapter 57 the one thing more , I have to do , before yield myself to the shock of these emotion . it be , to conceal what have occur , from those who be go away ; and to dismiss they on they voyage in happy ignorance . in this , no
no time be to be lose . I take aside that same night , and confide to he the task of stand between and intelligence of the late catastrophe . he zealously undertake to do so , and to intercept any newspaper through which it might , without such precaution , reach he . ' if it penetrate to he , sir , ' say , strike himself on the breast , ' it shall first pass through this body ! ' , I must observe , in he adaptation of himself to a new state of society , have acquire a bold buccaneering air , not absolutely lawless , but defensive and prompt . one might have suppose he a child of the wilderness , long accustom to live out of the confines of civilization , and about to return to he native wilds . he have provide himself , among other thing , with a complete suit of oilskin , and a straw hat with a very low crown , pitch or caulk on the outside . in this rough clothing , with a common mariner 's telescope under he arm , and a shrewd trick of casting up he eye at the sky as look out for dirty weather , he be far more nautical , after he manner , than . he whole family , if I may so express it , be clear for action . I find . in the closest and most uncompromising of bonnet , make fast under the ching ; and in a shawl which tie she up ( as I have be tie up , when my aunt first receive I ) like a bundle , and be secure behind at the waist , in a strong knot . I find make snug for stormy weather , in the same manner ; with nothing superfluous about she . master be hardly visible in a shirt , and the shaggiest suit of slop I ever see ; and the child be do up , like preserve meat , in impervious case . both and he eldest son wear they sleeve loosely turn back at the wrist , as be ready to lend a hand in any direction , and to ' tumble up ' , or s out , ' - - ! ' on the shortest notice . thus Traddles and I find they at nightfall , assemble on the wooden step , at that time know as , watch the departure of a boat with some of they property on board . I have tell Traddle of the terrible event , and it have greatly shock he ; but there could be no doubt of the kindness of keep it a secret , and he have come to help I in this last service . it be here that I take aside , and receive he promise . the family be lod in a little , dirty , tumble - down public - house , which in those day be close to the stair , and whose protrud wooden room overhng the river . the family , as emigrant , be object of some interest in and about , attract so many beholder , that we be glad to take refuge in they room . it be one of the wooden chamber upstairs , with the tide flow underneath . my aunt and Agnes be there , busily make some little extra comforts , in the way of dress , for the child . be quietly assist , with the old insensible work - box , yard - measure , and bit of wax - candle before she , that have now outlive so much . it be not easy to answer she inquiry ; still less to whisper , when bring he in , that I have give the letter , and all be well . but I do both , and make they happy . if I show any trace of what I feel , my own sorrow be sufficient to account for it . ' and when do the ship sail , ? ' ask my aunt . consider it necessary to prepare either my aunt or he wife , by degree , and say , sooner than he have expect yesterday . ' the boat bring you word , I suppose ? ' say my aunt . ' it do , ma 'am , ' he return . ' well ? ' say my aunt . ' and she sail -' ' Madam ,' he reply , 'I be inform that we must positively be on board before seven tomorrow morning . ' ' ! ' say my aunt , ' that be soon . be it a sea - go fact , ? ' '' Tis so , ma 'am . she will drop down the river with that theer tide . if and my sister come aboard at ' , arternoon of ' next day , they will see the last on we . ' ' and that we shall do , ' say I , ' be sure ! ' ' until then , and until we be at sea , ' observ , with a glance of intelligence at I , ' . and myself will constantly keep a double look - out together , on we good and chattel . , my love , ' say , clear he throat in he magnificent way , 'my friend be so obliging as to solicit , in my ear , that he should have the privilege of order the ingredient necessary to the composition of a moderate portion of that beverage which be peculiarly associate , in we minds , with the of . I allude to - in short , punch . under ordinary circumstance , I should scruple to entreat the indulgence of and , but -' 'I can only say
say for myself , ' say my aunt , ' that I will drink all happiness and success to you , , with the utmost pleasure . ' ' and I too ! ' say , with a smile . immediately descend to the bar , where he appear to be quite at home ; and in due time return with a steaming jug . I could not but observe that he have be peel the lemon with he own clasp - knife , which , as become the knife of a practical settler , be about a foot long ; and which he wip , not wholly without ostentation , on the sleeve of he coat . and the two elder member of the family I now find to be provide with similar formidable instrument , while every child have its own wooden spoon attach to its body by a strong line . in a similar anticipation of life afloat , and in the , , instead of help and he eldest son and daughter to punch , in wine - glass , which he might easily have do , for there be a shelf - full in the room , serve it out to they in a series of villainous little tin pots ; and I never see he enjoy anything so much as drink out of he own particular pint pot , and put it in he pocket at the close of the evening . ' the luxury of the old country , ' say , with a intense satisfaction in they renouncement , 'we abandon . the denizen of the forest cannot , of course , expect to participate in the refinement of the land of the free . ' here , a boy come in to say that be want downstairs . 'I have a presentiment , ' say , set down she tin pot , ' that it be a member of my family ! ' ' if so , my dear , ' observ , with he usual suddenness of warmth on that subject , 'as the member of you family - whoever he , she , or it , may be - have keep we wait for a considerable period , perhaps the may now wait my convenience . ' ' , ' say he wife , in a low tone , ' at such a time as this - ' ' " it be not meet , " ' say , rise , ' " that every nice offence should bear its comment ! " , I stand reprove . ' ' the loss , , ' observ he wife , ' have be my family 's , not yours . if my family be at length sensible of the deprivation to which they own conduct have , in the past , expose they , and now desire to extend the hand of fellowship , let it not be repulse . ' 'My dear ,' he return , 'so be it ! ' ' if not for they sake ; for mine , , ' say he wife . ' ,' he return , ' that view of the question be , at such a moment , irresistible . I cannot , even now , distinctly pledge myself to fall upon you family 's neck ; but the member of you family , who be now in attendance , shall have no genial warmth freeze by I . ' withdraw , and be absent some little time ; in the course of which . be not wholly free from a apprehension that word might have arisen between he and the . at length the same boy reappear , and present I with a note write in pencil , and head , in a legal manner , ' ' . from this document , I learn that be again arrest , ' be in a final paroxysm of despair ; and that he beg I to send he he knife and pint pot , by bearer , as they might prove serviceable during the brief remainder of he existence , in jail . he also request , as a last act of friendship , that I would see he family to the , and forget that such a be ever liv . of course I answer this note by go down with the boy to pay the money , where I find sit in a corner , look darkly at the Sheriff 's officer who have effect the capture . on he release , he embrace I with the utmost fervour ; and make a entry of the transaction in he pocket - book - be very particular , I recollect , about a halfpenny I inadvertently omit from my statement of the total . this momentous pocket - book be a timely reminder to he of another transaction . on we return to the room upstairs ( where he account for he absence by say that it have be occasion by circumstance over which he have no control ) , he take out of it a large sheet of paper , fold small , and quite cover with long sum , carefully work . from the glimpse I have of they , I should say that I never see such sum out of a school ciphering - book . these , it seem , be calculation of compound interest on what he call ' the principal amount of forty - one , ten , eleven and a half ' , for various period . after a careful consideration of these , and a elaborate estimate of he resource , he have come to the conclusion to select that sum which represent the amount with compound interest to two year , fifteen calendar month , and fourteen day , from that date . for this he have draw a note - of -
- hand with great neatness , which he hand over to Traddles on the spot , a discharge of he debt in full ( as between man and man ) , with many acknowledgement . 'I have still a presentiment , ' say , pensively shak she head , ' that my family will appear on board , before we finally depart . ' evidently have he presentiment on the subject too , but he put it in he tin pot and swallow it . ' if you have any opportunity of send letter home , on you passage , , ' say my aunt , ' you must let we hear from you , you know . ' 'my dear , ' she reply , 'I shall only be too happy to think that anyone expect to hear from we . I shall not fail to correspond . , I trust , as a old and familiar friend , will not object to receive occasional intelligence , himself , from one who know he when the twins be yet unconscious ? ' I say that I should hope to hear , whenever she have a opportunity of writing . ' please , there will be many such opportunity , ' say . ' the ocean , in these time , be a perfect fleet of ship ; and we can hardly fail to encounter many , in run over . it be merely crossing , ' say , trifl with he eye - glass , ' merely cross . the distance be quite imaginary . ' I think , now , how odd it be , but how wonderfully like , that , when he go from to , he should have talk as if he be go to the farthest limit of the earth ; and , when he go from to , as if he be go for a little trip across the channel . 'On the voyage , I shall endeaavor , ' say , 'occasionally to spin they a yarn ; and the melody of my son Wilkins will , I trust , be acceptable at the galley - fire . when have she sea -leg on - a expression in which I hope there be no conventional impropriety - she will give they , I dare say , " " . Porpoise and dolphin , I believe , will be frequently observe athwart we Bow ; and , either on the starboard or the larboard quarter , object of interest will be continually descry . in short , ' say , with the old genteel air , ' the probability be , all will be find so exciting , alow and aloft , that when the lookout , statione in the main - top , cry Land - oh ! we shall be very considerably astonish ! ' with that he flourish off the contents of he little tin pot , as if he have make the voyage , and have pass a first - class examination before the highest naval authority . ' what I chiefly hope , my dear , ' say , , that in some branch of we family we may live again in the old country . do not fry , ! I do not now refer to my own family , but to we child 's child . however vigorous the sapling , ' say , shak she head , 'I can not forget the parent - tree ; and when we race attains to eminence and fortune , I own I should wish that fortune to flow into the coffer of . ' 'My dear , ' say , ' must take she chance . I be bound to say that she have never do much for I , and that I have no particular wish upon the subject . ' ' , ' return , ' there , you be wrong . you be go out , , to this distant clime , to strengthen , not to weaken , the connexion between yourself and . ' ' the connexion in question , my love , ' rejoin , ' have not lay I , I repeat , under that load of personal obligation , that I be at all sensitive as to the formation of another connexion . ' ' , ' return . ' there , I again say , you be wrong . you do not know you power , . it be that which will strengthen , even in this step you be about to take , the connexion between yourself and . ' sit in he elbow - chair , with he eyebrow raise ; half receive and half repudiat 's view as they be state , but very sensible of they foresight . ' my dear , ' say , 'I wish to feel he position . it appear to I highly important that should , from the hour of he embarkation , feel he position . you old knowledge of I , my dear , will have tell you that I have not the sanguine disposition of . my disposition be , if I may say so , eminently practical . I know that this be a long voyage . I know that it will involve many privation and inconvenience . I can not shut my eye to those fact . but I also know what be . I know the latent power of . and therefore I consider it vitally important that should feel he position . ' 'my love ,' he observe , ' perhaps you will allow I to remark that it be barely possible that I do feel my position at the present moment . ' 'I think not , , ' she rejoin . ' not fully . my dear , 's be not a common case . be go to a distant country expressly
expressly in order that he may be fully understand and appreciate for the first time . I wish to take he stand upon that vessel 's prow , and firmly say , " this country I be come to conquer ! have you honour ? have you rich ? have you post of profitable pecuniary emolument ? let they be bring forward . they be mine ! " ' , glance at we all , seem to think there be a good deal in this idea . 'I wish , if I make myself understood , ' say , in she argumentative tone , 'to be the of he own fortune . that , my dear , appear to I to be he true position . from the first moment of this voyage , I wish to stand upon that vessel 's prow and say , " enough of delay : enough of disappointment : enough of limited means . that be in the old country . this be the new . produce you reparation . bring it forward ! " ' fold he arm in a resolute manner , as if he be then station on the figure - head . ' and do that , ' say , ' - feel he position - be I not right in say that will strengthen , and not weaken , he connexion with ? a important public character arise in that hemisphere , shall I be tell that its influence will not be feel at home ? can I be so weak as to imagine that , wield the rod of talent and of power in , will be nothing in ? I be but a woman ; but I should be unworthy of myself and of my papa , if I be guilty of such absurd weakness . ' 's conviction that she argument be unanswerable , give a moral elevation to she tone which I think I have never hear in it before . ' and therefore it be , ' say , ' that I the more wish , that , at a future period , we may live again on the parent soil . may be - I can not disguise from myself that the probability be , will be - a page of History ; and he ought then to be represent in the country which give he birth , and do not give he employment ! ' 'my love , ' observe , ' it be impossible for I not to be touch by you affection . I be always willing to defer to you good sense . what will be - will be . forbid that I should grudge my native country any portion of the wealth that may be accumulate by we descendant ! ' ' that be well , ' say my aunt , nodd towards , ' and I drink my love to you all , and every blessing and success attend you ! ' put down the two child he have be nurse , one on each knee , to join and in drink to all of we in return ; and when he and the cordially shook hand as comrade , and he brown face brighten with a smile , I feel that he would make he way , establish a good name , and be belove , go where he would . even the child be instruct , each to dip a wooden spoon into 's pot , and pledge we in its contents . when this be do , my aunt and Agne rose , and part from the emigrant . it be a sorrowful farewell . they be all cry ; the child hang about Agnes to the last ; and we leave poor in a very distressed condition , sobb and weep by a dim candle , that must have make the room look , from the river , like a miserable light - house . I go down again next morning to see that they be away . they have depart , in a boat , as early as five o'clock . it be a wonderful instance to I of the gap such parting make , that although my association of they with the tumble - down public - house and the wooden stair date only from last night , both see dreary and desert , now that they be go . in the afternoon of the next day , my old nurse and I go down to . we find the ship in the river , surround by a crowd of boat ; a favourable wind blow ; the signal for sail at she mast - head . I hire a boat directly , and we put off to she ; and get through the little vortex of confusion of which she be the centre , go on board . be wait for we on deck . he tell I that have just now be arrest again ( and for the last time ) at the suit of , and that , in compliance with a request I have make to he , he have pay the money , which I repay he . he then take we down between deck ; and there , any lingering fear I have of he have hear any rumour of what have happen , be dispell by 's come out of the gloom , take he arm with a air of friendship and protection , and tell I that they have scarcely be asunder for a moment , since the night before last . it be such a strange scene to I , and so confined and dark , that , at first , I could make out hardly anything ; but , by degree , it clear , as my eye become more accustomed to the gloom , and I seem to stand in a
a picture by . among the great beam , bulk , and ringbolt of the ship , and the emigrant - berth , and chest , and bundle , and barrels , and heap of miscellaneous baggage -'light up , here and there , by dangling lantern ; and elsewhere by the yellow daylight stray down a windsail or a hatchway - be crowd group of people , make new friendship , take leave of one another , talk , laugh , cry , eat and drink ; some , already settle down into the possession of they few foot of space , with they little household arrange , and tiny child establish on stool , or in dwarf elbow - chair ; other , despairing of a resting - place , and wander disconsolately . from baby who have but a week or two of life behind they , to crook old man and woman who seem to have but a week or two of life before they ; and from ploughman bodily carry out soil of on they boot , to smith take away sample of its soot and smoke upon they skin ; every age and occupation appear to be cramm into the narrow compass of the ' tween deck . as my eye glance round this place , I think I see sit , by a open port , with one of the child near she , a figure like 's ; it first attract my attention , by another figure part from it with a kiss ; and as it glide calmly away through the disorder , remind I of - ! but in the rapid motion and confusion , and in the unsettlement of my own thought , I lose it again ; and only know that the time be come when all visitor be be warn to leave the ship ; that my nurse be cry on a chest beside I ; and that , assist by some younger stooping woman in black , be busily arran 's goods . ' be there any last wured , ? ' say he . ' be there any one forgotten thing afore we part ? ' ' one thing ! ' say I . ' ! ' he touch the younger woman I have mention on the shoulder , and stand before I . ' heaven bless you , you good man ! ' cry I . ' you take she with you ! ' she answer for he , with a burst of tear . I could speak no more at that time , but I wring he hand ; and if ever I have love and honoure any man , I love and honoure that man in my soul . the ship be clear fast of stranger . the greatest trial that I have , remain . I tell he what the noble spirit that be go , have give I in charge to say at parting . it move he deeply . but when he charge I , in return , with many message of affection and regret for those deaf ear , he move I more . the time be come . I embrace he , take my weeping nurse upon my arm , and hurrie away . on deck , I take leave of poor . she be look distractedly about for she family , even then ; and she last word to I be , that she never would desert . we go over the side into we boat , and lay at a little distance , to see the ship waft on she course . it be then calm , radiant sunset . she lay between we , and the red light ; and every taper line and spar be visible against the glow . a sight at once so beautiful , so mournful , and so hopeful , as the glorious ship , lie , still , on the flushed water , with all the life on board she crowd at the bulwark , and there cluster , for a moment , bare - head and silent , I never see . , only for a moment . as the sail rise to the wind , and the ship begin to move , there break from all the boat three resoun cheer , which those on board take up , and echo back , and which be echo and re-echo . my heart burst out when I hear the sound , and beheld the waving of the hat and handkerchief - and then I see she ! then I see she , at she uncle 's side , and trembl on he shoulder . he point to we with a eager hand ; and she see we , and wave she last good - bye to I . aye , Emily , beautiful and droop , cling to he with the utmost trust of thy bruise heart ; for he have cling to thee , with all the might of he great love ! surround by the rosy light , and stand high upon the deck , apart together , she cling to he , and he hold she , they solemnly pass away . the night have fall on the Kentish hill when we be row ashore - and fall darkly upon I . chapter 58 absence it be a long and gloomy night that gather on I , haunt by the ghost of many hope , of many dear remembrance , many error , many unavailing sorrow and regret . I go away from ; not know , even then , how great the shock be , that I have to bear . I leave all who be dear to I , and go away ; and believe that I have borne it , and it be past . as a man upon a field of
of battle will receive a mortal hurt , and scarcely know that he be strike , so I , when I be leave alone with my undisciplined heart , have no conception of the wound with which it have to strive . the knowledge come upon I , not quickly , but little by little , and grain by grain . the desolate feel with which I go abroad , deepen and wide hourly . at first it be a heavy sense of loss and sorrow , wherein I could distinguish little else . by imperceptible degree , it become a hopeless consciousness of all that I have lost - love , friendship , interest ; of all that have be shatte - my first trust , my first affection , the whole airy castle of my life ; of all that remain - a ruin blank and waste , lie wide around I , unbroken , to the dark horizon . if my grief be selfish , I do not know it to be so . I mourn for my child - wife , take from she blooming world , so young . I mourn for he who might have win the love and admiration of thousand , as he have win mine long ago . I mourn for the broken heart that have find rest in the stormy sea ; and for the wander remnant of the simple home , where I have hear the night - wind blow , when I be a child . from the accumulate sadness into which I fall , I have at length no hope of ever issue again . I roam from place to place , carry my burden with I everywhere . I feel it be whole weight now ; and I droop beneath it , and I say in my heart that it could never be lighten . when this despondency be at it be worst , I believe that I should die . sometimes , I think that I would like to die at home ; and actually turn back on my road , that I might get there soon . at other time , I pass on farther away , - from city to city , seek I know not what , and try to leave I know not what behind . it be not in my power to retrace , one by one , all the weary phase of distress of mind through which I pass . there be some dream that can only be imperfectly and vaguly describe ; and when I oblige myself to look back on this time of my life , I seem to be recalle such a dream . I see myself pass on among the novelty of foreign town , palace , cathedral , temple , picture , castle , tomb , fantastic street - the old abiding place of History and Fancy - as a dreamer might ; bear my painful load through all , and hardly conscious of the object as they fake before I . listlessness to everything , but brood sorrow , be the night that fall on my undisciplined heart . let I look up from it - as at last I do , thank ! - and from its long , sad , wretch dream , to daw . for many month I travel with this ever - darken cloud upon my mind . some blind reason that I have for not return home - reason then struggle within I , vainly , for more distinct expression - keep I on my pilgrimage . sometimes , I have proceed restlessly from place to place , stop nowhere ; sometimes , I have linger long in one spot . I have have no purpose , no sustaining soul within I , anywhere . I be in . I have come out of , over one of the great pass of the Alps , and have since wander with a guide among the by - way of the mountain . if those awful solitude have speak to my heart , I do not know it . I have find sublimity and wonder in the dread height and precipice , in the roaring torrent , and the waste of ice and snow ; but as yet , they have teach I nothing else . I come , one evening before sunset , down into a valley , where I be to rest . in the course of my descent to it , by the win track along the mountain - side , from which I see it shin far below , I think some long - unwonted sense of beauty and tranquillity , some softening influence awaken by its peace , move faintly in my breast . I remember pausing once , with a kind of sorrow that be not all oppressive , not quite despairing . I remember almost hope that some better change be possible within I . I come into the valley , as the evening sun be shine on the remote height of snow , that close it in , like eternal cloud . the base of the mountain form the gorge in which the little village lay , be richly green ; and high above this gentler vegetation , grow forests of dark fir , cleave the wintry snow - drift , wedge - like , and stemm the avalanche . above these , be range upon range of craggy steep , grey rock , bright ice , and smooth verdure - speck of pasture , all gradually blend with the crowning snow . Dot here and there on the mountain 's - side , each tiny det a home , be lonely wooden cottage , so dwarf by the towering height that they appear too small for toy . so do even the clustered village in the valley , with it be
be wooden bridge across the stream , where the stream tumble over broken rock , and roar away among the tree . in the quiet air , there be a sound of distant singe - shepherd voice ; but , as one bright evening clould float midway along the mountain 's - side , I could almost have believe it come from there , and be not earthly music . all at once , in this serenity , great speak to I ; and soothe I to lay down my weary head upon the grass , and weep as I have not weep yet , since die ! I have find a packet of letter await I but a few minute before , and have stroll out of the village to read they while my supper be make ready . other packet have miss I , and I have receive none for a long time . beyond a line or two , to say that I be well , and have arrive at such a place , I have not have fortitude or constancy to write a letter since I leave home . the packet be in my hand . I open it , and read the writing of Agnes . she be happy and useful , be prosper as she have hope . that be all she tell I of herself . the rest refer to I . she give I no advice ; she urge no duty on I ; she only tell I , in she own fervent manner , what she trust in I be . she know ( she say ) how such a nature as mine would turn affliction to good . she know how trial and emotion would exal and strengthen it . she be sure that in my every purpose I should gain a firmer and a higher tendency , through the grief I have undergone . she , who so glory in my fame , and so look forward to its augmentation , well know that I would labour on . she know that in I , sorrow could not be weakness , but must be strength . as the endurance of my childish day have do it be part to make I what I be , so greater calamity would nerve I on , to be yet better than I be ; and so , as they have teach I , would I teach other . she commend I to , who have take my innocent darling to he rest ; and in she sisterly affection cherish I always , and be always at my side go where I would ; proud of what I have do , but infinitely prouder yet of what I be reserve to do . I put the letter in my breast , and think what have I be a hour ago ! when I hear the voice die away , and see the quiet evening clould grow dim , and all the colour in the valley fade , and the golden snow upon the mountain - top become a remote part of the pale night sky , yet feel that the night be pass from my mind , and all its shadow clearing , there be no name for the love I bear she , dearer to I , henceforward , than ever until then . I read she letter many time . I write to she before I sleep . I tell she that I have be in sore need of she help ; that without she I be not , and I never have be , what she think I ; but that she inspire I to be that , and I would try . I do try . in three month more , a year would have pass since the beginning of my sorrow . I determine to make no resolution until the expiration of those three month , but to try . I live in that valley , and its neighbourhood , all the time . the three month gone , I resolve to remain away from home for some time longer ; to settle myself for the present in , which be grow dear to I in the remembrance of that evening ; to resume my pen ; to work . I resort humbly whither have commend I ; I seek out , never seek in vain ; and I admit to my breast the human interest I have lately shrunk from . it be not long , before I have almost as many friend in the valley as in : and when I leave it , before the winter set in , for , and come back in the spring , they cordial greeting have a homely sound to I , although they be not convey in English word . I work early and late , patiently and hard . I write a story , with a purpose grow , not remotely , out of my experience , and send it to Traddles , and he arrange for its publication very advantageously for I ; and the tiding of my grow reputation begin to reach I from traveller whom I encounter by chance . after some rest and change , I fall to work , in my old ardent way , on a new fancy , which take strong possession of I . as I advance in the execution of this task , I feel it more and more , and rouse my utmost energie to do it well . this be my third work of fiction . it be not half write , when , in a interval of rest , I think of return home . for a long time , though study and work patiently , I have accustom myself to robust exercise . my health , severely impaire when I leave , be quite restore
restore . I have see much . I have be in many country , and I hope I have improve my store of knowledge . I have now recall all that I think it needful to recall here , of this term of absence - with one reservation . I have make it , thus far , with no purpose of suppresse any of my thought ; for , as I have elsewhere say , this narrative be my write memory . I have desire to keep the most secret current of my mind apart , and to the last . I enter on it now . I can not so completely penetrate the mystery of my own heart , as to know when I begin to think that I might have set its earliest and brightest hope on Agnes . I can not say at what stage of my grief it first become associate with the reflection , that , in my wayward boyhood , I have throw away the treasure of she love . I believe I may have hear some whisper of that distant think , in the old unhappy loss or want of something never to be realize , of which I have be sensible . but the thought come into my mind as a new reproach and new regret , when I be leave so sad and lonely in the world . if , at that time , I have be much with she , I should , in the weakness of my desolation , have betraye this . it be what I remotely dread when I be first impell to stay away from . I could not have borne to lose the smallest portion of she sisterly affection ; yet , in that betrayal , I should have set a constraint between we hitherto unknown . I could not forget that the feeling with which she now regard I have grow up in my own free choice and course . that if she have ever love I with another love - and I sometimes think the time be when she might have do so - I have cast it away . it be nothing , now , that I have accustom myself to think of she , when we be both mere child , as one who be far remove from my wild fancie . I have bestow my passionate tenderness upon another object ; and what I might have do , I have not do ; and what be to I , I and she own noble heart have make she . in the beginning of the change that gradually work in I , when I try to get a better understanding of myself and be a better man , I do glance , through some indefinite probation , to a period when I might possibly hope to cancel the mistaken past , and to be so blessed as to marry she . but , as time wear on , this shadowy prospect fad , and depart from I . if she have ever love I , then , I should hold she the more sacred ; remember the confidence I have repose in she , she knowledge of my errant heart , the sacrifice she must have make to be my friend and sister , and the victory she have win . if she have never love I , could I believe that she would love I now ? I have always feel my weakness , in comparison with she constancy and fortitude ; and now I feel it more and more . whatever I might have be to she , or she to I , if I have be more worthy of she long ago , I be not now , and she be not . the time be past . I have let it go by , and have deservedly lose she . that I suffer much in these contention , that they fill I with unhappiness and remorse , and yet that I have a sustaining sense that it be require of I , in right and honour , to keep away from myself , with shame , the thought of turn to the dear girl in the withering of my hope , from whom I have frivolously turn when they be bright and fresh - which consideration be at the root of every think I have concern she - be all equally true . I make no effort to conceal from myself , now , that I love she , that I be devoted to she ; but I bring the assurance home to myself , that it be now too late , and that we long - subsist relation must be undisturbed . I have think , much and often , of my 's shadow out to I what might have happen , in those year that be destin not to try we ; I have consider how the thing that never happen , be often as much reality to we , in they effect , as those that be accomplish . the very year she speak of , be reality now , for my correction ; and would have be , one day , a little later perhaps , though we have part in we earliest folly . I endeavoure to convert what might have be between myself and , into a means of make I more self - deny , more resolved , more conscious of myself , and my defect and error . thus , through the reflection that it might have be , I arrive at the conviction that it could never be . these , with they perplexity and inconsistency , be the shifting quicksand of my mind , from the time of my departure to the time of my return home , three year afterwards . three year have elapse since the
the sailing of the emigrant ship ; when , at that same hour of sunset , and in the same place , I stand on the deck of the packet vessel that bring I home , look on the rosy water where I have see the image of that ship reflect . three year . Long in the aggregate , though short as they go by . and home be very dear to I , and too - but she be not mine - she be never to be mine . she might have be , but that be past ! chapter 59 return I land in on a wintry autumn evening . it be dark and raine , and I see more fog and mud in a minute than I have see in a year . I walk from the to the Monument before I find a coach ; and although the very house - fronts , look on the swollen gutter , be like old friend to I , I could not but admit that they be very dingy friend . I have often remark - I suppose everybody have - that one 's go away from a familiar place , would seem to be the signal for change in it . as I look out of the coach window , and observe that a old house on - , which have stand untouched by painter , carpenter , or bricklayer , for a century , have be pull down in my absence ; and that a neighbour street , of time - honoured insalubrity and inconvenience , be be drain and wide ; I half expect to find 's look older . for some change in the fortune of my friend , I be prepare . my aunt have long be re-establish at , and Traddles have begin to get into some little practice at the , in the very first term after my departure . he have chamber in 's , now ; and have tell I , in he last letter , that he be not without hope of be soon unit to the dearest girl in the world . they expect I home before ; but have no idea of my returning so soon . I have purposely misl they , that I might have the pleasure of take they by surprise . and yet , I be perverse enough to feel a chill and disappointment in receive no welcome , and ratt , alone and silent , through the misty street . the well - know shop , however , with they cheerful light , do something for I ; and when I alight at the door of the 's - house , I have recover my spirits . it recall , at first , that so - different time when I have put up at the , and remind I of the change that have come to pass since then ; but that be natural . ' do you know where live in the ? ' I ask the waiter , as I warm myself by the coffee - room fire . ' , sir . number two . ' ' have a rising reputation among the lawyer , I believe ? ' say I . ' well , sir , ' return the waiter , ' probably he have , sir ; but I be not aware of it myself . ' this waiter , who be middle - aged and spare , look for help to a waiter of more authority - a stout , potential old man , with a double ching , in black breech and stocking , who come out of a place like a churchwarden 's pew , at the end of the coffee - room , where he keep company with a cash - box , a Directory , a law - list , and other book and papers . ' , ' say the spare waiter . ' number two in the court . ' the potential waiter wav he away , and turn , gravely , to I . be inquire , ' say I , ' whether , at number two in the court , have not a rise reputation among the lawyer ? ' ' never hear he name , ' say the waiter , in a rich husky voice . I feel quite apologetic for Traddles . 'he be a young man , sure ? ' say the portentous waiter , fix he eye severely on I . ' how long have he be in the ? ' ' not above three year , ' say I . the waiter , who I suppose have live in he churchwarden 's pew for forty year , could not pursue such a insignificant subject . he ask I what I would have for dinner ? I feel I be in again , and really be quite cast down on 's account . there seem to be no hope for he . I meekly order a bit of fish and a steak , and stand before the fire muse on he obscurity . as I follow the chief waiter with my eye , I could not help think that the garden in which he have gradually blow to be the flower he be , be a arduous place to rise in . it have such a prescriptive , stiff - necked , long - establish , solemn , elderly air . I glance about the room , which have have its sanded floor san , no doubt , in exactly the same manner when the chief waiter be a boy - if he ever be a boy , which appear improbable ; and at the shining table , where I see myself reflect , in unruffled depth of old mahogany ; and at the lamps , without a flaw in they trimming or cleaning
cleaning ; and at the comfortable green curtain , with they pure brass rod , snugly enclose the box ; and at the two large coal fire , brightly burn ; and at the row of decanter , burly as if with the consciousness of pipe of expensive old port wine below ; and both , and the law , appear to I to be very difficult indeed to be take by storm . I go up to my bedroom to change my wet clothes ; and the vast extent of that old wainscote apartment ( which be over the archway lead to the , I remember ) , and the sedate immensity of the four - post bedstead , and the indomitable gravity of the chest of drawer , all seem to unite in sternly frown on the fortune of Traddles , or on any such daring youth . I come down again to my dinner ; and even the slow comfort of the meal , and the orderly silence of the place - which be bare of guest , the not yet be over - be eloquent on the audacity of Traddles , and he small hope of a livelihood for twenty year to come . I have see nothing like this since I go away , and it quite dash my hope for my friend . the chief waiter have have enough of I . he come near I no more ; but devote himself to a old gentleman in long gaiter , to meet whom a pint of special port seem to come out of the cellar of its own accord , for he give no order . the second waiter inform I , in a whisper , that this old gentleman be a retired conveyancer live in the , and worth a mint of money , which it be expect he would leave to he laundress 's daughter ; likewise that it be rumoure that he have a service of plate in a bureau , all tarnish with lie by , though more than one spoon and a fork have never yet be beheld in he chamber by mortal vision . by this time , I quite give Traddle up for lost ; and settle in my own mind that there be no hope for he . be very anxious to see the dear old fellow , nevertheless , I dispatch my dinner , in a manner not at all calculate to raise I in the opinion of the chief waiter , and hurrie out by the back way . two in the be soon reach ; and a inscription on the door - post inform I that occupy a set of chamber on the top storey , I ascend the staircase . a crazy old staircase I find it to be , feebly light on each landing by a club - head little oil wick , die away in a little dungeon of dirty glass . in the course of my stumbling upstairs , I fancie I hear a pleasant sound of laughter ; and not the laughter of a attorney or barrister , or attorney 's clerk or barrister 's clerk , but of two or three merry girl . happening , however , as I stop to listen , to put my foot in a hole where the of 's have leave a plank deficient , I fall down with some noise , and when I recover my footing all be silent . Grop my way more carefully , for the rest of the journey , my heart beat high when I find the outer door , which have paint on it , open . I knock . a considerable scuffling within ensue , but nothing else . I therefore knock again . a small sharp - look lad , half - footboy and half - clerk , who be very much out of breath , but who look at I as if he defy I to prove it legally , present himself . 'Is within ? ' I say . ' yes , sir , but he be engage . ' 'I want to see he . ' after a moment 's survey of I , the sharp - look lad decide to let I in ; and open the door wider for that purpose , admit I , first , into a little closet of a hall , and next into a little sitting - room ; where I come into the presence of my old friend ( also out of breath ) , seat at a table , and bend over papers . ' ! ' cry Traddles , look up . ' it be Copperfield ! ' and rush into my arm , where I hold he tight . ' all well , my dear Traddle ? ' ' all well , my dear , dear , and nothing but good news ! ' we cry with pleasure , both of we . ' my dear fellow , ' say Traddles , rumpl he hair in he excitement , which be a most unnecessary operation , 'my dearest , my long - lost and most welcome friend , how glad I be to see you ! how brown you be ! how glad I be ! upon my life and honour , I never be so rejoice , my belov Copperfield , never ! ' I be equally at a loss to express my emotion . I be quite unable to speak , at first . ' my dear fellow ! ' say Traddles . ' and grow so famous ! my glorious Copperfield ! good gracious I , when do you come , where have you come from , what have you be do ? ' never pause for a answer to anything he say , , who have clap I into a easy - chair by the
the fire , all this time impetuously stir the fire with one hand , and pull at my neck - kerchief with the other , under some wild delusion that it be a great - coat . without put down the poker , he now hug I again ; and I hug he ; and , both laugh , and both wip we eye , we both sit down , and shake hand across the hearth . 'To think , ' say , ' that you should have be so nearly come home as you must have been , my dear old boy , and not at the ceremony ! ' ' what ceremony , my dear Traddle ? ' ' good gracious I ! ' cry Traddle , open he eye in he old way . ' do not you get my last letter ? ' ' certainly not , if it refer to any ceremony . ' ' why , my dear , ' say Traddles , stick he hair upright with both hand , and then put he hand on my knee , 'I be married ! ' ' marry ! ' I cry joyfully . ' bless I , yes ! ' say Traddles - ' by the - to Sophy - down in . why , my dear boy , she be behind the window curtain ! look here ! ' to my amazement , the dearest girl in the world come at that same instant , laugh and blush , from she place of concealment . and a more cheerful , amiable , honest , happy , bright - look bride , I believe ( as I could not help say on the spot ) the world never see . I kiss she as a old acquaintance should , and wish they joy with all my might of heart . ' dear I , ' say , ' what a delightful re-union this be ! you be so extremely brown , my dear Copperfield ! bless my soul , how happy I be ! ' ' and so be I , ' say I . ' and I be sure I be ! ' say the blushing and laugh . ' we be all as happy as possible ! ' say Traddles . ' even the girl be happy . dear I , I declare I forgot they ! ' ' Forgot ? ' say I . ' the girl , ' say Traddles . ' 's sister . they be stay with we . they have come to have a peep at . the fact be , when - be it you that tumble upstairs , ? ' ' it be , ' say I , laugh . ' well then , when you tumble upstairs , ' say , be rom with the girl . in point of fact , we be play at in the corner . but as that would not do in , and as it would not look quite professional if they be see by a client , they decamp . and they be now - listen , I have no doubt , ' say Traddles , glance at the door of another room . 'I be sorry , ' say I , laugh afresh , 'to have occasion such a dispersion . ' ' upon my word , ' rejoin Traddles , greatly delighted , ' if you have see they run away , and run back again , after you have knock , to pick up the comb they have drop out of they hair , and go on in the maddest manner , you would not have say so . my love , will you fetch the girl ? ' trip away , and we hear she receive in the adjoining room with a peal of laughter . ' really musical , be not it , my dear ? ' say Traddles . ' it be very agreeable to hear . it quite light up these old room . to a unfortunate bachelor of a fellow who have liv alone all he life , you know , it be positively delicious . it be charme . poor thing , they have have a great loss in - who , I do assure you , be , and ever be , the dearest girl ! - and it gratify I beyond expression to find they in such good spirit . the society of girl be a very delightful thing , . it be not professional , but it be very delightful . ' Observe that he slightly falter , and comprehend that in the goodness of he heart he be fearful of give I some pain by what he have say , I express my concurrence with a heartiness that evidently relieve and pleas he greatly . ' but then , ' say Traddles , 'ou domestic arrangement be , to say the truth , quite unprofessional altogether , my dear Copperfield . even be be here , be unprofessional . and we have no other place of abode . we have put to sea in a cockboat , but we be quite prepared to rough it . and a extraordinary manager ! you will be surprise how those girl be stow away . I be sure I hardly know how it be done ! ' ' be many of the young lady with you ? ' I inquire . ' the eldest , the beauty be here , ' say Traddles , in a low confidential voice , ' . and 's here - the one I mention to you as have something the matter with she spine , you know . immensely better ! and the two youngest that educate be with we . and be here . ' ' indeed ! ' cry I . ' yes , ' say Traddles . ' now
now the whole set - I mean the chamber - be only three room ; but Sophy arrange for the girl in the most wonderful way , and they sleep as comfortably as possible . in that room , ' say Traddles , point . ' two in that . ' I could not help glance round , in search of the accommodation remain for and . Traddles understand I . ' well ! ' say Traddles , 'we be prepare to rough it , as I say just now , and we do improvise a bed last week , upon the floor here . but there be a little room in the roof - a very nice room , when you be up there - which papere herself , to surprise I ; and that be we room at present . it be a capital little gipsy sort of place . there be quite a view from it . ' ' and you be happily marry at last , my dear Traddle ! ' say I . ' how rejoice I be ! ' ' thank you , my dear Copperfield , ' say Traddle , as we shook hand once more . ' yes , I be as happy as it be possible to be . there be you old friend , you see , ' say Traddles , nodd triumphantly at the flower - pot and stand ; ' and there be the table with the marble top ! all the other furniture be plain and serviceable , you perceive . and as to plate , bless you , we have not so much as a tea - spoon . ' ' all to be earn ? ' say I , cheerfully . ' exactly so , ' reply Traddle , ' all to be earn . of course we have something in the shape of tea - spoon , because we stir we tea . but they be metal . ' ' the silver will be the brighter when it come , ' say I . ' the very thing we say ! ' cry Traddles . ' you see , my dear , ' fall again into the low confidential tone , ' after I have deliver my argument in Doe dem . Jipe versus , which do I great service with the profession , I go down into , and have some serious conversation in private with the . I dwelt upon the fact that - who I do assure you , , be the dearest girl ! -' 'I be certain she be ! ' say I . ' she be , indeed ! ' rejoin Traddles . ' but I be afraid I be wander from the subject . do I mention the ? ' ' you say that you dwelt upon the fact -' ' true ! upon the fact that and I have be engage for a long period , and that , with the permission of she parent , be more than content to take I - in short , ' say Traddles , with he old frank smile , 'on we present - metal footing . very well . I then propose to the - who be a most excellent clergyman , , and ought to be a Bishop ; or at least ought to have enough to live upon , without pinch himself - that if I could turn the corner , say of two hundred and fifty pound , in one year ; and could see my way pretty clearly to that , or something better , next year ; and could plainly furnish a little place like this , besides ; then , and in that case , and I should be united . I take the liberty of represent that we have be patient for a good many year ; and that the circumstance of 's be extraordinarily useful at home , ought not to operate with she affectionate parent , against she establishment in life - do not you see ? ' ' certainly it ought not , ' say I . 'I be glad you think so , , ' rejoin Traddles , ' because , without any imputation on the , I do think parent , and brothers , and so forth , be sometimes rather selfish in such case . well ! I also point out , that my most earnest desire be , to be useful to the family ; and that if I get on in the world , and anything should happen to he - I refer to the -' 'i understand , ' say I . ' - to - it would be the utmost gratification of my wish , to be a parent to the girl . he reply in a most admirable manner , exceedingly flatter to my feeling , and undertake to obtain the consent of to this arrangement . they have a dreadful time of it with she . it mount from she leg into she chest , and then into she head -' ' what mount ? ' I ask . ' she grief , ' reply Traddle , with a serious look . 'her feeling generally . as I mention on a former occasion , she be a very superior woman , but have lose the use of she limb . whatever occur to harass she , usually settle in she leg ; but on this occasion it mount to the chest , and then to the head , and , in short , pervad the whole system in a most alarming manner . however , they bring she through it by unremitting and affectionate attention ; and we be marry yesterday six week . you have no idea what a Monster I feel , , when I see the whole family cry and faint away in every direction ! could
could not see I before we leave - could not forgive I , then , for deprive she of she child - but she be a good creature , and have do so since . I have a delightful letter from she , only this morning . ' ' and in short , my dear friend , ' say I , ' you feel as blest as you deserve to feel ! ' 'Oh ! that be you partiality ! ' laugh Traddles . ' but , indeed , I be in a most enviable state . I work hard , and read insatiably . I get up at five every morning , and do not mind it at all . I hide the girl in the daytime , and make merry with they in the evening . and I assure you I be quite sorry that they be go home on , which be the day before the first day of . but here , ' say Traddles , break off in he confidence , and speak aloud , ' be the girl ! , - - - and ! ' they be a perfect nest of ros ; they look so wholesome and fresh . they be all pretty , and be very handsome ; but there be a loving , cheerful , fireside quality in 's bright look , which be better than that , and which assure I that my friend have choose well . we all sit round the fire ; while the sharp boy , who I now divine have lose he breath in put the papers out , clear they away again , and produce the tea - thing . after that , he retire for the night , shutt the outer door upon we with a bang . , with perfect pleasure and composure beam from she household eye , have make the tea , then quietly make the toast as she sit in a corner by the fire . she have see Agnes , she tell I while she be toast . ' ' have take she down into for a wedding trip , and there she have see my aunt , too ; and both my aunt and Agnes were well , and they have all talk of nothing but I . ' ' have never have I out of he thought , she really believe , all the time I have be away . ' ' be the authority for everything . ' ' be evidently the idol of she life ; never to be shake on he pedestal by any commotion ; always to be believe in , and do homage to with the whole faith of she heart , come what might . the deference which both she and show towards the beauty , please I very much . I do not know that I think it very reasonable ; but I think it very delightful , and essentially a part of they character . if Traddles ever for a instant miss the tea - spoon that be still to be win , I have no doubt it be when he hand the she tea . if he sweet - tempered wife could have get up any self - assertion against anyone , I be satisfied it could only have be because she be the 's sister . a few slight indication of a rather petted and capricious manner , which I observ in the , be manifestly consider , by Traddles and he wife , as she birthright and natural endowment . if she have be bear a , and they labour , they could not have be more satisfied of that . but they self - forgetfulness charme I . they pride in these girl , and they submission of themselves to all they whim , be the pleasantest little testimony to they own worth I could have desire to see . if Traddles be address as 'a darling ' , once in the course of that evening ; and besotch to bring something here , or carry something there , or take something up , or put something down , or find something , or fetch something , he be so addressed , by one or other of he sister - in - law , at least twelve time in a hour . neither could they do anything without . be hair fall down , and nobody but could put it up . somebody forget how a particular tune go , and nobody but could hum that tune right . somebody want to recall the name of a place in , and only know it . something be want to be write home , and alone could be trust to write before breakfast in the morning . somebody break down in a piece of knitting , and no one but be able to put the defaulter in the right direction . they be entire mistress of the place , and and wait on they . how many child could have take care of in she time , I can not imagine ; but she seem to be famous for know every sort of song that ever be address to a child in the tongue ; and she sang dozen to order with the clearest little voice in the world , one after another ( every sister issue direction for a different tune , and the beauty generally strike in last ) , so that I be quite fascinated . the best of all be , that , in the midst of they exaction , all the sister have a great tenderness and respect both for and . I be sure , when I take my leave , and be come out to walk with I to the coffee - house , I think I have never see a obstinate head of hair , or any
any other head of hair , roll about in such a shower of kiss . altogether , it be a scene I could not help dwell on with pleasure , for a long time after I get back and have wish Traddles good night . if I have beheld a thousand rose blow in a top set of chamber , in that wither 's , they could not have brighten it half so much . the idea of those girl , among the dry law - stationer and the attorney ' office ; and of the tea and toast , and child 's songs , in that grim atmosphere of pounce and parchment , red - tape , dusty wafer , ink - jar , brief and draft paper , law report , writ , declaration , and bill of cost ; see almost as pleasantly fanciful as if I have dream that the 's famous family have be admit on the roll of attorney , and have bring the talk bird , the singing tree , and the golden water into 's . somehow , I find that I have take leave of Traddle for the night , and come back to the coffee - house , with a great change in my despondency about he . I begin to think he would get on , in spite of all the many order of chief waiter in . Draw a chair before one of the coffee - room fire to think about he at my leisure , I gradually fell from the consideration of he happiness to trace prospects in the live - coal , and to think , as they break and change , of the principal vicissitude and separation that have mark my life . I have not see a coal fire , since I have leave three year ago : though many a wood fire have I watch , as it crumble into hoary ash , and mingl with the feathery heap upon the hearth , which not inaptly figure to I , in my despondency , my own dead hope . I could think of the past now , gravely , but not bitterly ; and could contemplate the future in a brave spirit . , in it be best sense , be for I no more . she in whom I might have inspire a dearer love , I have teach to be my sister . she would marry , and would have new claimant on she tenderness ; and in do it , would never know the love for she that have grow up in my heart . it be right that I should pay the forfeit of my headlong passion . what I reap , I have sow . I be think . and have I truly disciplin my heart to this , and could I resolutely bear it , and calmly hold the place in she home which she have calmly hold in mine , - when I find my eye rest on a countenance that might have arisen out of the fire , in its association with my early remembrance . the , to whose good office I be indebt in the very first chapter of this history , sit read a newspaper in the shadow of a opposite corner . he be tolerably stricken in year by this time ; but , be a mild , meek , calm little man , have worn so easily , that I think he look at that moment just as he might have look when he sit in we parlour , wait for I to be bear . have leave six or seven year ago , and I have never see he since . he sit placidly peruse the newspaper , with he little head on one side , and a glass of warm sherry negus at he elbow . he be so extremely conciliatory in he manner that he seem to apologize to the very newspaper for take the liberty of read it . I walk up to where he be sit , and say , ' how do you do , ? ' he be greatly flutter by this unexpected address from a stranger , and reply , in he slow way , 'I thank you , sir , you be very good . thank you , sir . I hope you be well . ' ' you do not remember I ? ' say I . ' well , sir , ' return , smile very meekly , and shake he head as he survey I , 'I have a kind of a impression that something in you countenance be familiar to I , sir ; but I could not lay my hand upon you name , really . ' ' and yet you know it , long before I know it myself ,' I return . ' do I indeed , sy ? ' say . ' be it possible that I have the honour , sir , of officiating when -? ' ' yes , ' say I . ' dear I ! ' cry . ' but no doubt you be a good deal change since then , sir ? ' ' probably , ' say I . ' well , sir , ' observ , ' I hope you will excuse I , if I be compelle to ask the favour of you name ? ' on my tell he my name , he be really move . he quite shook hand with I - which be a violent proceeding for he , he usual course be to slide a tepid little fish - slice , a inch or two in advance of he hip , and evince the greatest discomposure when anybody grapple with it . even now , he put he hand in he coat - pocket as soon as he could disengage it
it , and seem relieve when he have get it safe back . ' dear I , sir ! ' say , survey I with he head on one side . ' and it be , be it ? well , sir , I think I should have know you , if I have take the liberty of look more closely at you . there be a strong resemblance between you and you poor father , sir . ' 'I never have the happiness of see my father ,' I observe . ' very true , sir , ' say , in a soothing tone . ' and very much to be deplor it be , on all account ! we be not ignorant , sir , ' say , slowly shak he little head again , ' down in we part of the country , of you fame . there must be great excitement here , sir , ' say , tap himself on the forehead with he forefinger . ' you must find it a try occupation , sir ! ' ' what be you part of the country now ? ' I ask , seat myself near he . 'I be establish within a few mile of 's , sir , ' say . ' , come into a little property in that neighbourhood , under she father 's will , I buy a practice down there , in which you will be glad to hear I be do well . my daughter be grow quite a tall lass now , sir , ' say , give he little head another little shake . ' she mother let down two tuck in she frock only last week . be time , you see , sir ! ' as the little man put he now empty glass to he lip , when he make this reflection , I propose to he to have it refill , and I would keep he company with another . ' well , sir ,' he return , in he slow way , ' it be more than I be accustom to ; but I can not deny myself the pleasure of you conversation . it seem but yesterday that I have the honour of attend you in the measle . you come through they charmingly , sir ! ' I acknowledge this compliment , and order the negus , which be soon produce . ' quite a uncommon dissipation ! ' say , stirr it , ' but I can not resist so extraordinary a occasion . you have no family , sir ? ' I shook my head . 'I be aware that you sustain a bereavement , sir , some time ago , ' say . 'I hear it from you father - in - law 's sister . very decided character there , sir ? ' ' why , yes , ' say I , ' decide enough . where do you see she , ? ' ' be you not aware , sir , ' return , with he placidest smile , 'that you father - in - law be again a neighbour of mine ? ' ' no , ' say I . ' he be indeed , sir ! ' say . ' marry a young lady of that part , with a very good little property , poor thing . - and this action of the brain now , sir ? do not you find it fatigue you ? ' say , look at I like a admiring . I waive that question , and return to the . 'I be aware of he be marry again . do you attend the family ? ' I ask . ' not regularly . I have be call in ,' he reply . ' strong phrenological development of the organ of firmness , in and he sister , sir . ' I reply with such a expressive look , that be embolden by that , and the negus together , to give he head several short shakes , and thoughtfully exclaim , 'Ah , dear I ! we remember old time , ! ' ' and the brother and sister be pursue they old course , be they ? ' say I . ' well , sir , ' reply , 'a medical man , be so much in family , ought to have neither eye nor ear for anything but he profession . still , I must say , they be very severe , sir : both as to this life and the next . ' ' the next will be regulate without much reference to they , I dare say ,' I return : ' what be they do as to this ? ' shook he head , stir he negus , and sip it . ' she be a charming woman , sir ! ' he observ in a plaintive manner . ' the present ? ' a charming woman indeed , sir , ' say ; 'as amiable , I be sure , as it be possible to be ! 's opinion be , that she spirit have be entirely break since she marriage , and that she be all but melancholy mad . and the lady , ' observ , timorously , ' be great observer , sir . ' 'I suppose she be to be subdue and break to they detestable mould , help she ! ' say I . ' and she have be . ' ' well , sir , there be violent quarrel at first , I assure you , ' say Chillip ; ' but she be quite a shadow now . would it be consider forward if I be to say to you , sir , in confidence , that since the sister come to help , the brother and sister between they have nearly reduce she
she to a state of imbecility ? ' I tell he I could easily believe it . 'I have no hesitation in saying , ' say , fortify himself with another sip of negus , ' between you and I , sir , that she mother die of it - or that tyranny , gloom , and worry have make nearly imbecile . she be a lively young woman , sir , before marriage , and they gloom and austerity destroy she . they go about with she , now , more like she keeper than she husband and sister - in - law . that be 's remark to I , only last week . and I assure you , sir , the lady be great observer . herself be a great observer ! ' ' do he gloomily profess to be ( I be asham to use the word in such association ) religious still ? ' I inquire . ' you anticipate , sir , ' say , he eyelid get quite red with the unwonted stimulus in which he be indulge . ' one of 's most impressive remarnks . ,' he proceed , in the calmest and slowest manner , ' quite electrify I , by point out that set up a image of himself , and call it the . you might have knock I down on the flat of my back , sir , with the feather of a pen , I assure you , when say so . the lady be great observer , sir ? ' ' intuitively , ' say I , to he extreme delight . 'I be very happy to receive such support in my opinion , sir ,' he rejoin . ' it be not often that I venture to give a non-medical opinion , I assure you . deliver public address sometimes , and it be say , - in short , sir , it be say by , - that the darker tyrant he have lately be , the more ferocious be he doctrine . ' 'I believe to be perfectly right , ' say I . ' . do go so far as to say , ' pursue the meekest of little man , much encourage , ' that what such people miscall they religion , be a vent for they bad humour and arrogance . and do you know I must say , sir ,' he continue , mildly lay he head on one side , ' that I do not find authority for and in the ? ' 'I never find it either ! ' say I . ' in the meantime , sir , ' say , ' they be much dislike ; and as they be very free in consign everybody who dislike they to perdition , we really have a good deal of perdition go on in we neighbourhood ! however , as say , sir , they undergo a continual punishment ; for they be turn inward , to feed upon they own heart , and they own heart be very bad feeding . now , sir , about that brain of yours , if you will excuse my return to it . do not you expose it to a good deal of excitement , sir ? ' I find it not difficult , in the excitement of 's own brain , under he potation of negus , to divert he attention from this topic to he own affair , on which , for the next half - hour , he be quite loquacious ; give I to understand , among other piece of information , that he be then at the 's - house to lay he professional evidence before a commission of Lunacy , touch the state of mind of a patient who have become derange from excessive drinking . ' and I assure you , sir ,' he say , 'I be extremely nervous on such occasion . I could not support be what be call , sir . it would quite unman I . do you know it be some time before I recover the conduct of that alarming lady , on the night of you birth , ? ' I tell he that I be go down to my aunt , the of that night , early in the morning ; and that she be one of the most tender - hear and excellent of woman , as he would know full well if he know she better . the mere notion of the possibility of he ever see she again , appear to terrify he . he reply with a small pale smile , ' be she so , indeed , sir ? really ? ' and almost immediately call for a candle , and go to bed , as if he be not quite safe anywhere else . he do not actually stagger under the negus ; but I should think he placid little pulse must have make two or three more beat in a minute , than it have do since the great night of my aunt 's disappointment , when she strike at he with she bonnet . thoroughly tired , I go to be too , at midnight ; pass the next day on the Dover coach ; burst safe and sound into my aunt 's old parlour while she be at tea ( she wear spectacle now ) ; and be receive by she , and , and dear old , who act as housekeeper , with open arm and tear of joy . my aunt be mightily amused , when we begin to talk composedly , by my account of my meeting with , and of he hold she in such dread remembrance ; and both she and have a great deal to say about my poor mother 's second husband , and ' that murder woman
woman of a sister ' , - on whom I think no pain or penalty would have induce my aunt to bestow any or , or any other designation . chapter 60 Agne my aunt and I , when we be leave alone , talk far into the night . how the emigrant never write home , otherwise than cheerfully and hopefully ; how have actually remit diver small sum of money , on account of those ' pecuniary liability ' , in reference to which he have be so business - like as between man and man ; how , return into my aunt 's service when she come back to , have finally carry out she renunciation of mankind by enter into wedlock with a thrive tavern - keeper ; and how my aunt have finally set she seal on the same great principle , by aiding and abett the bride , and crown the marriage - ceremony with she presence ; be among we topic - already more or less familiar to I through the letter I have have . , as usual , be not forget . my aunt inform I how he incessantly occupy himself in copy everything he could lay he hand on , and keep the at a respectful distance by that semblance of employment ; how it be one of the main joy and reward of she life that he be free and happy , instead of pining in monotonous restraint ; and how ( as a novel general conclusion ) nobody but she could ever fully know what he be . ' and when , , ' say my aunt , pat the back of my hand , as we sit in we old way before the fire , ' when be you go over to ? ' 'I shall get a horse , and ride over tomorrow morning , aunt , unless you will go with I ? ' ' no ! ' say my aunt , in she short abrupt way . 'I mean to stay where I be . ' then , I should ride , I say . I could not have come through today without stopping , if I have be come to anyone but she . she be pleased , but answer , ' , ; my old bone would have keep till tomorrow ! ' and softly pat my hand again , as I sit look thoughtfully at the fire . Thoughtfully , for I could not be here once more , and so near , without the revival of those regrets with which i have so long be occupi . Soften regret they might be , teach I what I have fail to learn when my younger life be all before I , but not the less regret . 'Oh , ,' I seem to hear my aunt say once more ; and I understand she better now - ' , blind , blind ! ' we both keep silence for some minute . when I raise my eye , I find that she be steadily observant of I . perhaps she have follow the current of my mind ; for it see to I a easy one to track now , wilful as it have be once . ' you will find she father a white - hair old man , ' say my aunt , ' though a better man in all other respects - a reclaim man . neither will you find he measure all human interest , and joy , and sorrow , with he one poor little inch - rule now . trust I , child , such thing must shrink very much , before they can be measure off in that way . ' ' indeed they must , ' say I . ' you will find she , ' pursue my aunt , 'as good , as beautiful , as earnest , as disinterested , as she have always been . if I know higher praise , trot , I would bestow it on she . ' there be no higher praise for she ; no higher reproach for I . oh , how have I stray so far away ! ' if she train the young girl whom she have about she , to be like herself , ' say my aunt , earnest even to the filling of she eye with tear , ' heaven know , she life will be well employ ! useful and happy , as she say that day ! how could she be otherwise than useful and happy ! ' 'have Agnes any -' I be think aloud , rather than speak . ' well ? hey ? any what ? ' say my aunt , sharply . ' any lover , ' say I . 'A score , ' cry my aunt , with a kind of indignant pride . ' she might have marry twenty time , my dear , since you have be go ! ' ' no doubt , ' say I . ' no doubt . but have she any lover who be worthy of she ? Agnes could care for no other . ' my aunt sit musing for a little while , with she ching upon she hand . slowly raise she eye to mine , she say : 'I suspect she have a attachment , . ' 'A prosperous one ? ' say I . ' trot , ' return my aunt gravely , 'I can not say . I have no right to tell you even so much . she have never confide it to I , but I suspect it . ' she look so attentively and anxiously at I ( I even see she tremble ) , that I feel now , more than ever , that she have follow my late thought . I summon all the resolution
resolution I have make , in all those many day and night , and all those many conflict of my heart . ' if it should be so , ' I begin , ' and I hope it be - ' 'I do not know that it be , ' say my aunt curtly . ' you must not be rule by my suspicion . you must keep they secret . they be very slight , perhaps . I have no right to speak . ' ' if it should be so ,' I repeat , ' Agnes will tell I at she own good time . a sister to whom I have confide so much , aunt , will not be reluctant to confide in I . ' my aunt withdraw she eye from mine , as slowly as she have turn they upon I ; and cover they thoughtfully with she hand . by and by she put she other hand on my shoulder ; and so we both sit , look into the past , without say another word , until we part for the night . I ride away , early in the morning , for the scene of my old school - day . I can not say that I be yet quite happy , in the hope that I be gain a victory over myself ; even in the prospect of so soon look on she face again . the well - remembe ground be soon traverse , and I come into the quiet street , where every stone be a boy 's book to I . I go on foot to the old house , and go away with a heart too full to enter . I return ; and look , as I pass , through the low window of the turret - room where first , and afterwards , have be will not to sit , see that it be a little parlour now , and that there be no office . otherwise the staid old house be , as to its cleanliness and order , still just as it have be when I first see it . I request the new maid who admit I , to tell Wickfield that a gentleman who wait on she from a friend abroad , be there ; and I be show up the grave old staircase ( caution of the step I know so well ) , into the unchanged drawing - room . the book that and I have read together , be on they shelf ; and the desk where I have laboure at my lesson , many a night , stand yet at the same old corner of the table . all the little change that have creep in when the be there , were change again . everything be as it use to be , in the happy time . I stand in a window , and look across the ancient street at the opposite house , recalle how I have watch they on wet afternoon , when I first come there ; and how I have use to speculate about the people who appear at any of the window , and have follow they with my eye up and down stair , while woman go click along the pavement in patten , and the dull rain fell in slanting line , and pour out of the water - spout yonder , and flow into the road . the feeling with which I use to watch the tramp , as they come into the town on those wet evening , at dusk , and lim past , with they bundle droop over they shoulders at the end of stick , come freshly back to I ; fraught , as then , with the smell of damp earth , and wet leave and briar , and the sensation of the very air that blow upon I in my own toilsome journey . the opening of the little door in the panel wall make I start and turn . she beautiful serene eye meet mine as she come towards I . she stop and lay she hand upon she bosom , and I catch she in my arm . 'Agnes ! my dear girl ! I have come too suddenly upon you . ' 'no , no ! I be so rejoice to see you , ! ' ' dear Agnes , the happiness it be to I , to see you once again ! ' I fold she to my heart , and , for a little while , we be both silent . presently we sit down , side by side ; and she angel - face be turn upon I with the welcome I have dream of , wake and sleep , for whole year . she be so true , she be so beautiful , she be so good , - I owed she so much gratitude , she be so dear to I , that I could find no utterance for what I feel . I try to bless she , try to thank she , try to tell she ( as I have often done in letter ) what a influence she have upon I ; but all my effort be in vain . my love and joy be dumb . with she own sweet tranquillity , she calme my agitation ; lead I back to the time of we parting ; speak to I of , whom she have visit , in secret , many time ; speak to I tenderly of 's grave . with the unerring instinct of she noble heart , she touch the chord of my memory so softly and harmoniously , that not one jar within I ; I could listen to the sorrowful , distant music , and desire to shrink from nothing it awoke . how could I
I , when , blend with it all , be she dear self , the better angel of my life ? ' and you , ,' I say , by and by . ' tell I of yourself . you have hardly ever tell I of you own life , in all this lapse of time ! ' ' what should I tell ? ' she answer , with she radiant smile . ' be well . you see we here , quiet in we own home ; we anxiety set at rest , we home restore to we ; and know that , dear Trotwood , you know all . ' ' all , ? ' say I . she look at I , with some flutter wonder in she face . ' be there nothing else , ? ' I say . she colour , which have just now fad , return , and fad again . she smile ; with a quiet sadness , I think ; and shake she head . I have seek to lead she to what my aunt have hint at ; for , sharply painful to I as it must be to receive that confidence , I be to discipline my heart , and do my duty to she . I see , however , that she be uneasy , and I let it pass . ' you have much to do , dear Agne ? ' ' with my school ? ' say she , look up again , in all she bright composure . ' yes . it be laborious , be it not ? ' ' the labour be so pleasant , ' she return , ' that it be scarcely grateful in I to call it by that name . ' ' nothing good be difficult to you , ' say I . she colour come and go once more ; and once more , as she bend she head , I see the same sad smile . ' you will wait and see papa , ' say , cheerfully , ' and pass the day with we ? perhaps you will sleep in you own room ? we always call it yours . ' I could not do that , have promise to ride back to my aunt 's at night ; but I would pass the day there , joyfully . ' I must be a prisoner for a little while , ' say , ' but here be the old book , Trotwood , and the old music . ' ' even the old flower be here , ' say I , look round ; 'or the old kind . ' 'I have find a pleasure , ' return Agnes , smile , ' while you have be absent , in keep everything as it use to be when we be children . for we be very happy then , I think . ' ' know we be ! ' say I . ' and every little thing that have remind I of my brother , ' say , with she cordial eye turn cheerfully upon I , ' have be a welcome companion . even this , ' show I the basket - trifle , full of key , still hang at she side , ' seem to jingle a kind of old tune ! ' she smile again , and go out at the door by which she have come . it be for I to guard this sisterly affection with religious care . it be all that I have leave myself , and it be a treasure . if I once shook the foundation of the sacred confidence and usage , in virtue of which it be give to I , it be lose , and could never be recover . I set this steadily before myself . the better I love she , the more it behove I never to forget it . I walk through the street ; and , once more see my old adversary the butcher - now a constable , with he staff hang up in the shop - go down to look at the place where I have fight he ; and there meditate on and the eldest , and all the idle love and liking , and disliking , of that time . nothing seem to have survive that time but Agnes ; and she , ever a star above I , be brighter and higher . when I return , have come home , from a garden he have , a couple of mile or so out of town , where he now employ himself almost every day . I find he as my aunt have describe he . we sit down to dinner , with some half - dozen little girl ; and he seem but the shadow of he handsome picture on the wall . the tranquillity and peace belong , of old , to that quiet ground in my memory , pervad it again . when dinner be done , take no wine , and I desire none , we go up - stair ; where Agnes and she little charge sang and play , and work . after tea the child leave we ; and we three sit together , talk of the bygone day . ' my part in they , ' say , shak he white head , ' have much matter for regret - for deep regret , and deep contrition , Trotwood , you well know . but I would not cancel it , if it be in my power . ' I could readily believe that , look at the face beside he . 'I should cancel with it ,' he pursue , ' such patience and devotion , such fidelity , such a child 's love , as I must not forget , no !
! even to forget myself . ' 'I understand you , sir ,' I softly say . 'I hold it - I have always hold it - in veneration . ' ' but no one know , not even you ,' he return , ' how much she have do , how much she have undergone , how hard she have striven . dear Agne ! ' she have put she hand entreatingly on he arm , to stop he ; and be very , very pale . ' well , well ! ' he say with a sigh , dismissing , as I then see , some trial she have borne , or be yet to bear , in connexion with what my aunt have tell I . ' well ! I have never tell you , , of she mother . have anyone ? ' ' never , sir . ' ' it be not much - though it be much to suffer . she marry I in opposition to she father 's wish , and he renounce she . she pray he to forgive she , before my Agne come into this world . he be a very hard man , and she mother have long be dead . he repulse she . he break she heart . ' Agnes lean upon he shoulder , and steal she arm about he neck . ' she have a affectionate and gentle heart , ' he say ; ' and it be break . I know it be tender nature very well . no one could , if I do not . she love I dearly , but be never happy . she be always labour , in secret , under this distress ; and be delicate and downcast at the time of he last repulse - for it be not the first , by many - pin away and die . she leave I Agnes , two week old ; and the grey hair that you recollect I with , when you first come . ' he kiss on she cheek . ' my love for my dear child be a diseased love , but my mind be all unhealthy then . I say no more on that . I be not speak of myself , Trotwood , but of she mother , and of she . if I give you any clue to what I be , or to what I have be , you will unravel it , I know . what Agne be , I need not say . I have always read something of she poor mother 's story , in she character ; and so I tell it you tonight , when we three be again together , after such great change . I have tell it all . ' he bow head , and she angel - face and filial duty , derive a more pathetic meaning from it than they have have before . if I have want anything by which to mark this night of we re-union , I should have find it in this . Agnes rise up from she father 's side , before long ; and go softly to she piano , play some of the old air to which we have often listen in that place . ' have you any intention of go away again ? ' Agnes ask I , as I be stand by . ' what do my sister say to that ? ' 'I hope not . ' ' then I have no such intention , Agnes . ' 'I think you ought not , Trotwood , since you ask I , ' she say , mildly . ' you grow reputation and success enlarge you power of do good ; and if I could spare my brother , ' with she eye upon I , ' perhaps the time could not . ' ' what I be , you have make I , . you should know best . ' 'I make you , ? ' ' yes ! Agnes , my dear girl ! ' I say , bend over she . 'I try to tell you , when we meet today , something that have be in my thought since die . you remember , when you come down to I in we little room - pointing upward , ? ' 'Oh , ! ' she return , she eye fill with tear . ' so loving , so confid , and so young ! can I ever forget ? ' 'as you be then , my sister , I have often think since , you have ever be to I . ever point upward , ; ever lead I to something better ; ever direct I to higher thing ! ' she only shook she head ; through she tear I see the same sad quiet smile . ' and I be so grateful to you for it , , so bound to you , that there be no name for the affection of my heart . I want you to know , yet do not know how to tell you , that all my life long I shall look up to you , and be guide by you , as I have be through the darkness that be past . whatever betide , whatever new tie you may form , whatever change may come between we , I shall always look to you , and love you , as I do now , and have always do . you will always be my solace and resource , as you have always been . until I die , my dearest sister , I shall see you always before I , point upward ! ' she put she hand in mine , and tell I she be proud of I , and of what I say ; although I
I praise she very far beyond she worth . then she go on softly play , but without remove she eye from I . ' do you know , what I have hear tonight , Agnes , ' say I , strangely seem to be a part of the feeling with which I regard you when I see you first - with which I sit beside you in my rough school - day ? ' ' you know I have no mother , ' she reply with a smile , ' and feel kindly towards I . ' ' more than that , , I know , almost as if I have know this story , that there be something inexplicably gentle and soften , surround you ; something that might have be sorrowful in someone else ( as I can now understand it be ) , but be not so in you . ' she softly play on , look at I still . ' will you laugh at my cherishing such fancie , Agnes ? ' ' no ! ' ' or at my say that I really believe I feel , even then , that you could be faithfully affectionate against all discouragement , and never cease to be so , until you cease to live ? - will you laugh at such a dream ? ' 'Oh , no ! oh , no ! ' for a instant , a distressful shadow cross she face ; but , even in the start it give I , it be gone ; and she be play on , and look at I with she own calm smile . as I ride back in the lonely night , the wind go by I like a restless memory , I think of this , and fear she be not happy . I be not happy ; but , thus far , I have faithfully set the seal upon the past , and , think of she , point upward , think of she as point to that sky above I , where , in the mystery to come , I might yet love she with a love unknown on earth , and tell she what the strife have be within I when I love she here . chapter 61 I be for a time - at all event until my book should be complete , which would be the work of several month - I take up my abode in my aunt 's house at ; and there , sit in the window from which I have look out at the moon upon the sea , when that rohave first give I shelter , I quietly pursue my task . in pursuance of my intention of refer to my own fictions only when they course should incidentally connect itself with the progress of my story , I do not enter on the aspiration , the delight , anxiety , and triumph of my art . that I truly devote myself to it with my strongest earnestness , and bestow upon it every energy of my soul , I have already say . if the book I have write be of any worth , they will supply the rest . I shall otherwise have write to poor purpose , and the rest will be of interest to no one . occasionally , I go to ; to lose myself in the swarm of life there , or to consult with Traddle on some business point . he have manage for I , in my absence , with the soundest judgement ; and my worldly affair be prosper . as my notoriety begin to bring upon I a enormous quantity of letter from people of whom I have no knowledge - chiefly about nothing , and extremely difficult to answer - I agree with Traddles to have my name pain up on he door . there , the devote postman on that beat deliver bushel of letter for I ; and there , at interval , I laboure through they , like a of without the salary . among this correspondence , there drop in , every now and then , a obliging proposal from one of the numerous outsider always lurk about the , to practise under cover of my name ( if I would take the necessary step remain to make a proctor of myself ) , and pay I a percentage on the profit . but I decline these offer ; be already aware that there be plenty of such covert practitioner in existence , and consider the Commons quite bad enough , without my do anything to make it worse . the girl have go home , when my name burst into bloom on Traddles 's door ; and the sharp boy look , all day , as if he have never hear of , shut up in a back room , glance down from she work into a sooty little strip of garden with a pump in it . but there I always find she , the same bright housewife ; often hum she ballad when no strange foot be come up the stair , and blunt the sharp boy in he official closet with melody . I wonder , at first , why I so often find Sophy write in a copy - book ; and why she always shut it up when I appear , and hurrie it into the table - drawer . but the secret soon come out . one day , Traddles ( who have just come home through the drizzling sleet from ) take a paper out of he desk , and ask I what I think of that handwriting ? 'Oh , do , ! ' cry , who be warm he slipper before the fire . ' my dear , ' return , in a delighted state , ' why
why not ? what do you say to that write , ? ' ' it be extraordinarily legal and formal , ' say I . 'I do not think I ever see such a stiff hand . ' ' not like a lady 's hand , be it ? ' say Traddles . 'A lady 's ! ' I repeat . ' Brick and mortar be more like a lady 's hand ! ' Traddle break into a rapturous laugh , and inform I that it be 's writing ; that have vow and declare he would need a copying - clerk soon , and she would be that clerk ; that she have acquire this hand from a pattern ; and that she could throw off - I forget how many folio a hour . be very much confus by my be tell all this , and say that when ' ' be make a judge he would not be so ready to proclaim it . 's deny ; averr that he should always be equally proud of it , under all circumstance . ' what a thoroughly good and charme wife she be , my dear Traddle ! ' say I , when she have go away , laugh . ' my dear , ' return Traddles , ' she be , without any exception , the dearest girl ! the way she manage this place ; she punctuality , domestic knowledge , economy , and order ; she cheerfulness , ! ' ' indeed , you have reason to commend she ! ' I return . ' you be a happy fellow . I believe you make yourselves , and each other , two of the happiest people in the world . ' 'I be sure we be two of the happiest people , ' return Traddles . 'I admit that , at all event . bless my soul , when I see she get up by candle - light on these dark morning , busy herself in the day 's arrangement , go out to market before the clerk come into the Inn , care for no weather , devise the most capital little dinner out of the plainest material , make pudding and pie , keep everything in its right place , always so neat and ornamental herself , sit up at night with I if it be ever so late , sweet - tempere and encourage always , and all for I , I positively sometimes can not believe it , ! ' he be tender of the very slipper she have be war , as he put they on , and stretch he foot enjoyingly upon the fender . 'I positively sometimes can not believe it , ' say Traddles . ' then we pleasur ! dear I , they be inexpensive , but they be quite wonderful ! when we be at home here , of a evening , and shut the outer door , and draw those curtain - which she make - where could we be more snug ? when it be fine , and we go out for a walk in the evening , the street abound in enjoyment for we . we look into the glittering window of the jeweller ' shop ; and I show which of the diamond - ey serpent , coil up on white satin rise grounds , I would give she if I could afford it ; and show I which of the gold watch that be cap and jewell and engine - turn , and possess of the horizontal lever - escape - movement , and all sort of thing , she would buy for I if she could afford it ; and we pick out the spoon and fork , fish - slice , butter- knife , and sugar - tong , we should both prefer if we could both afford it ; and really we go away as if we have get they ! then , when we stroll into the square , and great street , and see a house to let , sometimes we look up at it , and say , how would that do , if I be make a judge ? and we parcel it out - such a room for we , such room for the girl , and so forth ; until we settle to we satisfaction that it would do , or it would not do , as the case may be . sometimes , we go at half - price to the pit of the theatre - the very smell of which be cheap , in my opinion , at the money - and there we thoroughly enjoy the play : which believe every word of , and so do I . in walk home , perhaps we buy a little bit of something at a cook 's - shop , or a little lobster at the fishmonger , and bring it here , and make a splendid supper , chat about what we have see . now , you know , , if I be , we could not do this ! ' ' you would do something , whatever you be , my dear Traddle , ' think I , ' that would be pleasant and amiable . and by the way ,' I say aloud , 'I suppose you never draw any skeleton now ? ' ' really , ' reply Traddle , laugh , and redden , 'I can not wholly deny that I do , my dear Copperfield . for be in one of the back row of the 's the other day , with a pen in my hand , the fancy come into my head to try how I have preserve that accomplishment . and I be afraid there be a skeleton - in a wig - on the ledge of the desk . '
' after we have both laugh heartily , wound up by look with a smile at the fire , and say , in he forgiving way , ' ! ' 'I have a letter from that old - Rascal here , ' say I . for I never be less dispose to forgive he the way he use to batter Traddle , than when I see Traddles so ready to forgive he himself . ' from the schoolmaster ? ' exclaim Traddles . ' no ! ' ' among the person who be attract to I in my rising fame and fortune , ' say I , look over my letter , ' and who discover that they be always much attach to I , be the self - same Creakle . he be not a schoolmaster now , . he be retire . he be a . ' I think Traddles might be surprised to hear it , but he be not so at all . ' how do you suppose he come to be a ? ' say I . ' oh dear I ! ' reply Traddles , ' it would be very difficult to answer that question . perhaps he vote for somebody , or lent money to somebody , or buy something of somebody , or otherwise oblige somebody , or job for somebody , who know somebody who get the lieutenant of the county to nominate he for the commission . ' 'On the commission he be , at any rate , ' say I . ' and he write to I here , that he will be glad to show I , in operation , the only true system of prison discipline ; the only unchallengeable way of make sincere and last convert and penitent - which , you know , be by solitary confinement . what do you say ? ' 'to the system ? ' inquire Traddles , look grave . ' no . to my accept the offer , and you go with I ? ' 'I do not object , ' say Traddles . ' then I will write to say so . you remember ( to say nothing of we treatment ) this same Creakle turn he son out of door , I suppose , and the life he use to lead he wife and daughter ? ' ' perfectly , ' say Traddles . ' yet , if you will read he letter , you will find he be the tenderest of man to prisoner convict of the whole calendar of felony , ' say I ; ' though I can not find that he tenderness extend to any other class of create being . ' Traddle shrug he shoulders , and be not at all surprised . I have not expect he to be , and be not surprise myself ; or my observation of similar practical satire would have be but scanty . we arrange the time of we visit , and I write accordingly to Creakle that evening . on the appointed day - I think it be the next day , but no matter - Traddle and I repair to the prison where be powerful . it be a immense and solid building , erect at a vast expense . I could not help think , as we approach the gate , what a uproar would have be make in the country , if any deluded man have propose to spend one half the money it have cost , on the erection of a industrial school for the young , or a house of refuge for the deserving old . in a office that might have be on the ground - floor of the of , it be so massively construct , we be present to we old schoolmaster ; who be one of a group , compose of two or three of the busier sort of magistrate , and some visitor they have bring . he receive I , like a man who have form my mind in bygone year , and have always love I tenderly . on my introducing Traddles , express , in like manner , but in a inferior degree , that he have always be 's guide , philosopher , and friend . we venerable instructor be a great deal older , and not improve in appearance . he face be as fiery as ever ; he eye be as small , and rather deeper set . the scanty , wet - look grey hair , by which i remember he , be almost gone ; and the thick vein in he bald head be no the more agreeable to look at . after some conversation among these gentleman , from which I might have suppose that there be nothing in the world to be legitimately take into account but the supreme comfort of prisoner , at any expense , and nothing on the wide earth to be do outside prison - door , we begin we inspection . it be then just dinner - time , we go , first into the great kitchen , where every prisoner 's dinner be in course of be set out separately ( to be hand to he in he cell ) , with the regularity and precision of clock - work . I say aside , to Traddles , that I wonder whether it occur to anybody , that there be a striking contrast between these plentiful repast of choice quality , and the dinner , not to say of pauper , but of soldier , sailor , labourer , the great bulk of the honest , work community ; of whom not one man in five hundred ever dine half so well . but I learn that the ' system ' require high living ; and , in short , to dispose of the system , once for all
all , I find that on that head and on all other , ' the system 's put a end to all doubt , and dispose of all anomaly . nobody appear to have the least idea that there be any other system , but the system , to be consider . as we be go through some of the magnificent passage , I inquire of and he friend what be suppose to be the main advantage of this all - governing and universally over -riding system ? I find they to be the perfect isolation of prisoner - so that no one man in confinement there , know anything about another ; and the reduction of prisoner to a wholesome state of mind , lead to sincere contrition and repentance . now , it strike I , when we begin to visit individual in they cell , and to traverse the passage in which those cell were , and to have the manner of the go to chapel and so forth , explain to we , that there be a strong probability of the prisoner know a good deal about each other , and of they carry on a pretty complete system of intercourse . this , at the time I write , have be prove , I believe , to be the case ; but , as it would have be flat blasphemy against the system to have hinte such a doubt then , I look out for the penitence as diligently as I could . and here again , I have great misgiving . I find as prevalent a fashion in the form of the penitence , as I have leave outside in the form of the coat and waistcoat in the window of the tailor 's shop . I find a vast amount of profession , varie very little in character : varie very little ( which I think exceedingly suspicious ) , even in word . I find a great many fox , disparage whole vineyard of inaccessible grape ; but I find very few fox whom I would have trust within reach of a bunch . above all , I find that the most professing man be the greatest object of interest ; and that they conceit , they vanity , they want of excitement , and they love of deception ( which many of they possess to a almost incredible extent , as they histories show ) , all prompt to these profession , and be all gratify by they . however , I hear so repeatedly , in the course of we goings to and fro , of a certain number , who be the favourite , and who really appear to be a , that I resolve to suspend my judgement until I should see . twenty eight , I understand , be also a bright particular star ; but it be he misfortune to have he glory a little dim by the extraordinary lustre of . I hear so much of , of he pious admonition to everybody around he , and of the beautiful letter he constantly write to he mother ( whom he seem to consider in a very bad way ) , that I become quite impatient to see he . I have to restrain my impatience for some time , on account of be reserve for a concluding effect . but , at last , we come to the door of he cell ; and , look through a little hole in it , report to we , in a state of the greatest admiration , that he be read a . there be such a rush of head immediately , to see read he , that the little hole be block up , six or seven head deep . to remedy this inconvenience , and give we a opportunity of conversing with in all he purity , direct the door of the cell to be unlocked , and to be invite out into the passage . this be do ; and whom should and I then behold , to we amazement , in this convert , but ! he know we directly ; and say , as he come out - with the old writhe , - ' how do you do , ? how do you do , ? ' this recognition cause a general admiration in the party . I rather think that everyone be strike by he not be proud , and take notice of we . ' well , , ' say , mournfully admir he . ' how do you find yourself today ? ' 'I be very umble , sir ! ' reply . ' you be always so , , ' say . here , another gentleman ask , with extreme anxiety : ' be you quite comfortable ? ' ' yes , I thank you , sir ! ' say , look in that direction . ' far more comfortable here , than ever I be outside . I see my folly , now , sir . that be what make I comfortable . ' several gentleman be much affect ; and a third questioner , force himself to the front , inquire with extreme feel : ' how do you find the beef ? ' ' thank you , sir , ' reply , glance in the new direction of this voice , ' it be tougher yesterday than I could wish ; but it be my duty to bear . I have commit folly , gentlemen , ' say , look round with a meek smile , ' and I ought to bear the consequence without repin . ' a murmur , partly of gratification at 's celestial state of mind , and partly of indignation against the contractor who have give he any cause of complaint ( a note of which be immediately make by
by ) , have subsid , stood in the midst of we , as if he feel himself the principal object of merit in a highly meritorious museum . that we , the neophyte , might have a excess of light shine upon we all at once , order be give to let out . I have be so much astonish already , that I only feel a kind of resign wonder when walk forth , read a good book ! ' , ' say a gentleman in spectacle , who have not yet spoken , ' you complain last week , my good fellow , of the cocoa . how have it be since ? ' 'I thank you , sir , ' say , ' it have be better make . if I might take the liberty of say so , sir , I do not think the milk which be boil with it be quite genuine ; but I be aware , sir , that there be a great adulteration of milk , in , and that the article in a pure state be difficult to be obtain . ' it appear to I that the gentleman in spectacle back he against 's , for each of they take he own man in hand . ' what be you state of mind , ? ' say the questioner in spectacle . 'I thank you , sir , ' return ; 'I see my folly now , sir . I be a good deal troublead when I think of the sins of my former companion , sir ; but I trust they may find forgiveness . ' ' you be quite happy yourself ? ' say the questioner , nodd encouragement . 'I be much oblige to you , sir , ' return . ' perfectly so . ' ' be there anything at all on you mind now ? ' say the questioner . ' if so , mention it , . ' ' , ' say , without look up , ' if my eye have not deceive I , there be a gentleman present who be acquaint with I in my former life . it may be profitable to that gentleman to know , sir , that I attribute my past folly , entirely to have liv a thoughtless life in the service of young man ; and to have allow myself to be lead by they into weakness , which I have not the strength to resist . I hope that gentleman will take warning , sir , and will not be offend at my freedom . it be for he good . I be conscious of my own past folly . I hope he may repent of all the wickedness and sin to which he have be a party . ' I observ that several gentleman be shade they eye , each with one hand , as if they have just come into church . ' this do you credit , twenty eight , ' return the questioner . 'I should have expect it of you . be there anything else ? ' ' ,' return , slightly lift up he eyebrow , but not he eye , ' there be a young woman who fall into dissolute course , that I endeavoure to save , sir , but could not rescue . I beg that gentleman , if he have it in he power , to inform that young woman from I that I forgive she she bad conduct towards myself , and that I call she to repentance - if he will be so good . ' 'I have no doubt , twenty eight , ' return the questioner , ' that the gentleman you refer to feel very strongly - as we all must - what you have so properly say . we will not detain you . ' 'I thank you , sir , ' say . ' gentlemen , I wish you a good day , and hope you and you family will also see you wickedness , and amend ! ' with this , retir , after a glance between he and ; as if they be not altogether unknown to each other , through some medium of communication ; and a murmur go round the group , as he door shut upon he , that he be a most respectable man , and a beautiful case . ' now , , ' say , enter on a clear stage with he man , ' be there anything that anyone can do for you ? if so , mention it . ' 'I would umbly ask , sir , ' return , with a jerk of he malevolent head , ' for leave to write again to mother . ' ' it shall certainly be grant , ' say . ' thank you , sir ! I be anxious about mother . I be afraid she be not safe . ' somebody incautiously ask , what from ? but there be a scandalized whisper of ' ! ' ' Immortally safe , sir , ' return , writhing in the direction of the voice . 'I should wish mother to be get into my state . I never should have be get into my present state if I have not come here . I wish mother have come here . it would be better for everybody , if they get take up , and be bring here . ' this sentiment give unbounded satisfaction - greater satisfaction , I think , than anything that have pass yet . ' before I come here , ' say , steal a look at we , as if he would have blight the outer world to which we belong , if he could , be give to folly ; but now I be sensible of my folly . there be a
a deal of sin outside . there be a deal of sin in mother . there be nothing but sin everywhere - except here . ' ' you be quite change ? ' say . ' oh dear , yes , sir ! ' cry this hopeful penitent . ' you would not relapse , if you be go out ? ' ask somebody else . ' oh - ar no , sir ! ' ' well ! ' say , ' this be very gratifying . you have address , . do you wish to say anything further to he ? ' ' you know I , a long time before I come here and be change , , ' say , look at I ; and a more villainous look I never see , even on he visage . ' you know I when , in spite of my folly , I be umble among they that be proud , and meek among they that be violent - you be violent to I yourself , . once , you strike I a blow in the face , you know . ' General commiseration . several indignant glance direct at I . ' but I forgive you , , ' say , make he forgive nature the subject of a most impious and awful parallel , which I shall not record . 'I forgive everybody . it would ill become I to bear malice . I freely forgive you , and I hope you will curb you passion in future . I hope will repent , and , and all of that sinful lot . you have be visit with affliction , and I hope it may do you good ; but you would better have come here . have better have come here , and too . the best wish I could give you , , and give all of you gentleman , be , that you could be take up and bring here . when I think of my past folly , and my present state , I be sure it would be best for you . I pity all who be not bring here ! ' he sneak back into he cell , amidst a little chorus of approbation ; and both and I experience a great relief when he be lock in . it be a characteristic feature in this repentance , that I be fain to ask what these two man have do , to be there at all . that appear to be the last thing about which they have anything to say . I address myself to one of the two warder , who , I suspect from certain latent indication in they face , kknow pretty well what all this stir be worth . ' do you know , ' say I , as we walk along the passage , ' what felony be 's last " folly " ? ' the answer be that it be a Bank case . 'a fraud on the of ? ' I ask . ' yes , sir . , forgery , and conspiracy . he and some other . he set the other on . it be a deep plot for a large sum . sentence , transportation for life . be the knowingest bird of the lot , and have very nearly keep himself safe ; but not quite . the be just able to put salt upon he tail - and only just . ' ' do you know 's offence ? ' ' , ' return my informant , speak throughout in a low tone , and look over he shoulder as we walk along the passage , to guard himself from be overhear , in such a unlawful reference to these Immaculates , by and the rest ; ' twenty eight ( also transportation ) get a place , and rob a young master of a matter of two hundred and fifty pound in money and valuable , the night before they be go abroad . I particularly recollect he case , from he be take by a dwarf . ' 'a what ? ' 'a little woman . I have forget she name ? ' ' not ? ' ' that be it ! he have elude pursuit , and be go to in a flaxen wig , and whisker , and such a complete disguise as never you see in all you born day ; when the little woman , be in , meet he walk along the street - pick he out with she sharp eye in a moment - run betwixt he leg to upset he - and hold on to he like grim . ' ' excellent ! ' cry I . ' you would have say so , if you have see she , stand on a chair in the witness - box at the trial , as I do , ' say my friend . ' he cut she face right open , and pound she in the most brutal manner , when she take he ; but she never loose she hold till he be lock up . she hold so tight to he , in fact , that the officer be oblige to take them both together . she give she evidence in the gamest way , and be highly compliment by the bench , and cheer right home to she lodging . she say in that she would have take he single - hand ( on account of what she know concern he ) , if he have be . and it be my belief she would ! ' it be mine too , and I highly respecte for it . we have now see all there be to see . it would have be in vain to represent to such a man as the , that and twenty eight
eight be perfectly consistent and unchanged ; that exactly what they be then , they have always be ; that the hypocritical knave be just the subjects to make that sort of profession in such a place ; that they know its market - value at least as well as we do , in the immediate service it would do they when they be expatriate ; in a word , that it be a rotten , hollow , painfully suggestive piece of business altogether . we leave they to they system and themselves , and go home wonder . ' perhaps it be a good thing , Traddles , ' say I , 'to have a unsound hobby ride hard ; for it be the sooner ridden to death . ' 'i hope so , ' reply Traddle . chapter 62 a light sHINEs on my WAy the year come round to - time , and I have be at home above two month . I have see frequently . however lould the general voice might be in give I encouragement , and however fervent the emotion and endeavour to which it rouse I , I hear she lightest word of praise as I hear nothing else . at least once a week , and sometimes oftener , I ride over there , and pass the evening . I usually ride back at night ; for the old unhappy sense be always hover about I now - most sorrowfully when I leave she - and I be glad to be up and out , rather than wander over the past in weary wakefulness or miserable dream . I wear away the longest part of many wild sad night , in those ride ; revive , as I go , the thoughts that have occupy I in my long absence . or , if I be to say rather that I listen to the echoe of those thought , I should better express the truth . they speak to I from afar off . I have put they at a distance , and accept my inevitable place . when I read to what I write ; when I see she listen face ; move she to smile or tear ; and hear she cordial voice so earnest on the shadowy event of that imaginative world in which I liv ; I think what a fate mine might have be - but only think so , as I have think after I be marry to , what I could have wish my wife to be . my duty to , who love I with a love , which , if I disquiet , I wronge most selfishly and poorly , and could never restore ; my mature assurance that I , who have work out my own destiny , and win what I have impetuously set my heart on , have no right to yomurmu , and must bear ; comprise what I feel and what I have learn . but I love she : and now it even become some consolation to I , vaguly to conceive a distant day when I might blamelessly avow it ; when all this should be over ; when I could say ' Agnes , so it be when I come home ; and now I be old , and I never have love since ! ' she do not once show I any change in herself . what she always have be to I , she still be ; wholly unaltered . between my aunt and I there have be something , in this connexion , since the night of my return , which I can not call a restraint , or a avoidance of the subject , so much as a implied understanding that we think of it together , but do not shape we thought into word . when , accord to we old custom , we sit before the fire at night , we often fall into this train ; as naturally , and as consciously to each other , as if we have unreservedly say so . but we preserve a unbroken silence . I believe that she have read , or partly read , my thought that night ; and that she fully comprehend why I give mine no more distinct expression . this - time be come , and have repose no new confidence in I , a doubt that have several time arisen in my mind - whether she could have that perception of the true state of my breast , which restrain she with the apprehension of give I pain - begin to oppress I heavily . if that be so , my sacrifice be nothing ; my plainest obligation to she unfulfilled ; and every poor action I have shrink from , I be hourly do . I resolve to set this right beyond all doubt ; - if such a barrier be between we , to break it down at once with a determined hand . it be - what last reason have I to remember it ! - a cold , harsh , winter day . there have be snow , some hour before ; and it lay , not deep , but hard - freeze on the ground . out at sea , beyond my window , the wind blow ruggedly from the north . I have be think of it , swee over those mountain waste of snow in , then inaccessible to any human foot ; and have be speculat which be the lonelier , those solitary region , or a desert ocean . ' ride today , ? ' say my aunt , put she head in at the door . ' yes , ' say I , 'I be go over to . it be a good day for a ride . ' 'I hope you horse may think
think so too , ' say my aunt ; ' but at present he be hold down he head and he ear , stand before the door there , as if he think he stable preferable . ' my aunt , I may observe , allow my horse on the forbidden ground , but have not at all relent towards the donkey . ' he will be fresh enough , presently ! ' say I . ' the ride will do he master good , at all event , ' observe my aunt , glance at the papers on my table . 'Ah , child , you pass a good many hour here ! I never think , when I use to read book , what work it be to write they . ' ' it be work enough to read they , sometimes ,' I return . ' as to the writing , it have its own charms , aunt . ' 'Ah ! I see ! ' say my aunt . ' Ambition , love of approbation , sympathy , and much more , I suppose ? well : go along with you ! ' ' do you know anything more , ' say I , stand composedly before she - she have pat I on the shoulder , and sit down in my chair - 'on that attachment of Agnes ? ' she look up in my face a little while , before reply : 'I think I do , . ' ' be you confirm in you impression ? ' I inquire . 'I think I be , . ' she look so steadfastly at I : with a kind of doubt , or pity , or suspense in she affection : that I summon the stronger determination to show she a perfectly cheerful face . ' and what be more , -' say my aunt . ' yes ! ' 'I think be go to be married . ' ' bless she ! ' say I , cheerfully . ' bless she ! ' say my aunt , ' and she husband too ! ' I echo it , part from my aunt , and go lightly downstairs , mount , and ride away . there be greater reason than before to do what I have resolve to do . how well I recollect the wintry ride ! the frozen particle of ice , brush from the blade of grass by the wind , and borne across my face ; the hard clatter of the horse 's hoof , beat a tune upon the ground ; the stiff - till soil ; the snowdrift , lightly eddy in the chalk - pit as the breeze ruffle it ; the smoke team with the waggon of old hay , stop to breathe on the hill - top , and shake they bell musically ; the whitened slope and sweeps of - land lie against the dark sky , as if they be draw on a huge slate ! I find alone . the little girl have go to they own hom now , and she be alone by the fire , reading . she put down she book on see I come in ; and have welcome I as usual , take she work - basket and sit in one of the old - fashioned window . I sit beside she on the window - seat , and we talk of what I be do , and when it would be do , and of the progress I have make since my last visit . be very cheerful ; and laughingly predict that I should soon become too famous to be talk to , on such subject . ' so I make the most of the present time , you see , ' say , ' and talk to you while I may . ' as I look at she beautiful face , observant of she work , she raise she mild clear eye , and see that I be look at she . ' you be thoughtful today , ! ' ' Agne , shall I tell you what about ? I come to tell you . ' she put aside she work , as she be use to do when we be seriously discuss anything ; and give I she whole attention . ' my dear , do you doubt my be true to you ? ' ' no ! ' she answer , with a look of astonishment . ' do you doubt my be what I always have be to you ? ' ' no ! ' she answer , as before . ' do you remember that I try to tell you , when I come home , what a debt of gratitude I owed you , dearest Agnes , and how fervently I feel towards you ? ' 'I remember it , ' she say , gently , ' very well . ' ' you have a secret , ' say I . ' let I share it , . ' she cast down she eye , and tremble . 'I could hardly fail to know , even if I have not hear - but from other lip than yours , , which seem strange - that there be someone upon whom you have bestow the treasure of you love . do not shut I out of what concern you happiness so nearly ! if you can trust I , as you say you can , and as I know you may , let I be you friend , you brother , in this matter , of all other ! ' with a appealing , almost a reproachful , glance , she rise from the window ; and hurrie across the room as if without know where , put she hand before she face , and burst into such tear as
as smote I to the heart . and yet they awaken something in I , bring promise to my heart . without my know why , these tear ally themselves with the quietly sad smile which be so fix in my remembrance , and shake I more with hope than fear or sorrow . ' Agnes ! ! Dearest ! what have I do ? ' ' let I go away , . I be not well . I be not myself . I will speak to you by and by - another time . I will write to you . do not speak to I now . do not ! do not ! ' I seek to recollect what she have say , when I have speak to she on that former night , of she affection need no return . it seem a very world that I must search through in a moment . ' Agnes , I can not bear to see you so , and think that I have be the cause . my dearest girl , dearer to I than anything in life , if you be unhappy , let I share you unhappiness . if you be in need of help or counsel , let I try to give it to you . if you have indeed a burden on you heart , let I try to lighten it . for whom do I live now , , if it be not for you ! ' 'Oh , spare I ! I be not myself ! another time ! ' be all I could distinguish . be it a selfish error that be lead I away ? or , have once a clue to hope , be there something open to I that I have not da to think off ? ' I must say more . I can not let you leave I so ! for 's sake , Agnes , let we not mistake each other after all these year , and all that have come and go with they ! I must speak plainly . if you have any lingering think that I could envy the happiness you will confer ; that I could not resign you to a dearer protector , of you own choosing ; that I could not , from my removed place , be a contente witness of you joy ; dismiss it , for I do not deserve it ! I have not suffer quite in vain . you have not teach I quite in vain . there be no alloy of self in what I feel for you . ' she be quiet now . in a little time , she turn she pale face towards I , and say in a low voice , break here and there , but very clear : 'I owe it to you pure friendship for I , Trotwood - which , indeed , I do not doubt - to tell you , you be mistaken . I can do no more . if I have sometimes , in the course of year , want help and counsel , they have come to I . if I have sometimes be unhappy , the feeling have pass away . if I have ever have a burden on my heart , it have be lighten for I . if I have any secret , it be - no new one ; and be - not what you suppose . I can not reveal it , or divide it . it have long be mine , and must remain mine . ' ' Agnes ! stay ! a moment ! ' she be go away , but I detain she . I clasp my arm about she waist . ' in the course of year ! ' ' it be not a new one ! ' new thought and hope be whir through my mind , and all the colour of my life be change . ' Dearest Agnes ! whom I so respect and honour - whom I so devotedly love ! when I come here today , I think that nothing could have wrest this confession from I . I think I could have keep it in my bosom all we life , till we be old . but , , if I have indeed any new - born hope that I may ever call you something more than , widly different from ! -' she tear fall fast ; but they be not like those she have lately shed , and I see my hope brighten in they . ' Agnes ! ever my guide , and best support ! if you have be more mindful of yourself , and less of I , when we grow up here together , I think my heedless fancy never would have wander from you . but you be so much better than I , so necessary to I in every boyish hope and disappointment , that to have you to confide in , and rely upon in everything , become a second nature , supplant for the time the first and greater one of love you as I do ! ' still weep , but not sadly - joyfully ! and clasp in my arm as she have never be , as I have think she never be to be ! ' when I love - fondly , , as you know -' ' yes ! ' she cry , earnestly . 'I be glad to know it ! ' ' when I love she - even then , my love would have be incomplete , without you sympathy . I have it , and it be perfect . and when I lose she , , what should I have be without you , still ! ' closer in my arm , nearer to my heart , she trembl hand upon my
my shoulder , she sweet eye shine through she tear , on mine ! 'I go away , dear Agnes , love you . I stay away , love you . I return home , love you ! ' and now , I try to tell she of the struggle I have have , and the conclusion I have come to . I try to lay my mind before she , truly , and entirely . I try to show she how I have hope I have come into the better knowledge of myself and of she ; how I have resign myself to what that better knowledge bring ; and how I have come there , even that day , in my fidelity to this . if she do so love I ( I say ) that she could take I for she husband , she could do so , on no deserving of mine , except upon the truth of my love for she , and the trouble in which it have ripen to be what it be ; and hence it be that I reveal it . and o , , even out of thy true eye , in that same time , the spirit of my child - wife look upon I , say it be well ; and win I , through thee , to tenderest recollection of the that have wither in its bloom ! 'I be so blest , Trotwood - my heart be so overcharged - but there be one thing I must say . ' ' Dearest , what ? ' she lay she gentle hand upon my shoulders , and look calmly in my face . ' do you know , yet , what it be ? ' 'I be afraid to speculate on what it be . tell I , my dear . ' 'I have love you all my life ! ' o , we be happy , we be happy ! we tear be not for the trials ( hers so much the greater ) through which we have come to be thus , but for the rapture of be thus , never to be divide more ! we walk , that winter evening , in the field together ; and the bless calm within we seem to be partake by the frosty air . the early star begin to shine while we be linger on , and look up to they , we thank we GOD for have guide we to this tranquillity . we stand together in the same old - fashioned window at night , when the moon be shine ; with she quiet eye raise up to it ; I follow she glance . long miles of road then open out before my mind ; and , toil on , I see a ragged way - worn boy , forsake and neglect , who should come to call even the heart now beat against mine , he own . it be nearly dinner - time next day when we appear before my aunt . she be up in my study , say : which it be she pride to keep in readiness and order for I . we find she , in she spectacle , sit by the fire . ' goodness I ! ' say my aunt , pee through the dusk , ' who be this you be bring home ? ' 'Agnes , ' say I . as we have arrange to say nothing at first , my aunt be not a little discomfit . she dart a hopeful glance at I , when I say ' ' ; but see that I look as usual , she take off she spectacle in despair , and rub she nose with they . she greet heartily , nevertheless ; and we be soon in the lighted parlour downstair , at dinner . my aunt put on she spectacle twice or thrice , to take another look at I , but as often take they off again , disappoint , and rub she nose with they . much to the discomfiture of , who know this to be a bad symptom . ' by the by , aunt , ' say I , after dinner ; 'I have be speak to Agnes about what you tell I . ' ' then , , ' say my aunt , turn scarlet , ' you do wrong , and break you promise . ' ' you be not angry , aunt , I trust ? I be sure you will not be , when you learn that be not unhappy in any attachment . ' ' stuff and nonsense ! ' say my aunt . as my aunt appear to be annoyed , I think the best way be to cut she annoyance short . I take Agnes in my arm to the back of she chair , and we both lean over she . my aunt , with one clap of she hand , and one look through she spectacle , immediately go into hysteric , for the first and only time in all my knowledge of she . the hysteric call up . the moment my aunt be restore , she fly at , and call she a silly old creature , hug she with all she might . after that , she hug ( who be highly honoured , but a good deal surprise ) ; and after that , tell they why . then , we be all happy together . I could not discover whether my aunt , in she last short conversation with I , have fall on a pious fraud , or have really mistake the state of my mind . it be quite enough , she say , that she have tell I be go to be marry ; and that I now know better than anyone
anyone how true it be . we be marry within a fortnight . Traddles and , and and , be the only guest at we quiet wedding . we leave they full of joy ; and drive away together . Clasp in my embrace , I hold the source of every worthy aspiration I have ever have ; the centre of myself , the circle of my life , my own , my wife ; my love of whom be found on a rock ! ' Dearest husband ! ' say . ' now that I may call you by that name , I have one thing more to tell you . ' ' let I hear it , love . ' ' it grow out of the night when die . she send you for I . ' ' she do . ' ' she tell I that she leave I something . can you think what it be ? ' I believe I could . I draw the wife who have so long love I , closer to my side . ' she tell I that she make a last request to I , and leave I a last charge . ' ' and it be -' ' that only I would occupy this vacant place . ' and lay she head upon my breast , and wept ; and I weep with she , though we be so happy . chapter 63 a visitor what I have purpose to record be nearly finish ; but there be yet a incident conspicuous in my memory , on which it often rest with delight , and without which one thread in the web I have spun would have a ravelled end . I have advance in fame and fortune , my domestic joy be perfect , I have be marry ten happy year . Agnes and I be sit by the fire , in we house in , one night in spring , and three of we child be play in the room , when I be tell that a stranger wish to see I . he have be ask if he come on business , and have answer no ; he have come for the pleasure of see I , and have come a long way . he be a old man , my servant say , and look like a farmer . as this sound mysterious to the child , and moreover be like the beginning of a favourite story Agnes use to tell they , introductory to the arrival of a wick old Fairy in a cloak who hate everybody , it produce some commotion . one of we boy lay he head in he mother 's lap to be out of harm 's way , and little Agnes ( we eldest child ) leave she doll in a chair to represent she , and thrust out she little heap of golden curl from between the window - curtain , to see what happen next . ' let he come in here ! ' say I . there soon appear , pause in the dark doorway as he enter , a hale , grey - hair old man . little Agnes , attract by he look , have run to bring he in , and I have not yet clearly see he face , when my wife , start up , cry out to I , in a pleased and agitate voice , that it be ! it be . a old man now , but in a ruddy , hearty , strong old age . when we first emotion be over , and he sit before the fire with the child on he knee , and the blaze shin on he face , he look , to I , as vigorous and robust , withal as handsome , a old man , as ever I have see . ' , ' say he . and the old name in the old tone fall so naturally on my ear ! ' , ' ti a joyful hour as I see you , once more , ' long with you own trew wife ! ' 'a joyful hour indeed , old friend ! ' cry I . ' and these heer pretty one , ' say . 'To look at these heer flower ! why , , you be but the heighth of the littlest of these , when I first see you ! when 'ly war not no bigger , and we poor lad be but a lad ! ' ' time have change I more than it have change you since then , ' say I . ' but let these dear rogue go to bed ; and as no house in but this must hold you , tell I where to send for you luggage ( be the old black bag among it , that go so far , I wonder ! ) , and then , over a glass of Yarmouth grog , we will have the tiding of ten year ! ' ' be you alone ? ' ask . ' yes , ma 'am ,' he say , kiss she hand , ' quite alone . ' we sit he between we , not know how to give he welcome enough ; and as I begin to listen to he old familiar voice , I could have fancie he be still pursue he long journey in search of he darling niece . ' it be a mort of water , ' say , ' yofu to come across , and on 'y stay a matter of fower week . but water ( 'specially when ' ttis salt ) come nat'ral to I ; and friend be dear , and I be heer . - which be verse , ' say , surprised to find it out , ' though I have not
not such intention . ' ' be you go back those many thousand mile , so soon ? ' ask . ' yes , ma 'am , ' he return . 'I hagive the promise to , afore I come away . you see , I doe not grow younger as the year come round , and if I have not sail as ' twa , most like I should not never have do ot . and it be allus be on my mind , as I must come and see and you own sweet bloom self , in you wedded happiness , afore I get to be too old . ' he look at we , as if he could never feast he eye on we sufficiently . Agnes laughingly put back some scatter lock of he grey hair , that he might see we better . ' and now tell we , ' say I , ' everything relate to you fortune . ' ' we fortun , , ' he rejoin , 'is soon tell . we have not far nohow , but far to thrive . we have allus thrive . we have work as we ought to 't , and maybe we liv a leetle hard at first or so , but we have allus thrive . what with sheep - farming , and what with stock - farming , and what with one thing and what with t'other , we be as well to do , as well could be . be be kiender a blessing fell upon we , ' say , reverentially inclin he head , ' and we have do nowt but prosper . that be , in the long run . if not yesterday , why then today . if not today , why then tomorrow . ' ' and ? ' say and I , both together . ' 'ly , ' say he , ' arter you leave she , ma 'am - and I never heered she say of she prayer at night , t'other side the canva screen , when we be settle in the , but what I heered you name - and arter she and I lose sight of , that theer shine sundown - be that low , at first , that , if she have know have then what ma 'r Davy kep from we so kind and thowtful , ' ti my opinion she would have droop away . but theer be some poor folk aboard as have illness among th'ey , and she take care of they ; and theer be the child in we company , and she take care of they ; and so she get to be busy , and to be do good , and that help she . ' ' when do she first hear of it ? ' I ask . 'I kep it from she arter I heered on 't , ' say , ' go on nigh a year . we be live then in a solitary place , but among the beautifullest tree , and with the rose a - cover we to the roof . Theer come along one day , when I be out a - work on the land , a traveller from we own or in ( I doe not rightly mind which ) , and of course we take he in , and hagive he to eat and drink , and make he welcome . we all do that , all the colony over . he would get a old newspaper with he , and some other account in print of the storm . that be how she know would it . when I come home at night , I find she know would it . ' he drop he voice as he say these word , and the gravity I so well remember overspread he face . ' do it change she much ? ' we ask . ' aye , for a good long time , ' he say , shak he head ; ' if not to this present hour . but I think the solitoode do she good . and she have a deal to mind in the way of poultry and the like , and mind of it , and come through . I wonder ,' he say thoughtfully , ' if you could see my em 'ly now , , whether you would know she ! ' ' be she so alter ? ' I inquire . 'I doe not know . I see she ev'ry day , and doe not know ; but , odd - time , I have thowt so . a slight figure , ' say , look at the fire , 'kiender worn ; soft , sorrowful , blue eye ; a delicate face ; a pritty head , lean a little down ; a quiet voice and way - timid a'most . that be Em'ly ! ' we silently observ he as he sit , still look at the fire . ' some think ,' he say , 'as she affection be ill - bestow ; some , as she marriage be break off by death . no one know how ' tis . she might have marry well , a mort of time , " but , uncle , " she say to I , " that be gone for ever . " Cheerful along with I ; retir when other be by ; fond of go any distance yofu to teach a child , or yofu to tend a sick person , or yofu to do some kindness tow'rd a young girl 's wedding ( and she be do a many , but have never see one ) ; fondly love of she uncle ; patient ; like by young and old ; sowt out by all that have any trouble . that
that be Em'ly ! ' he draw he hand across he face , and with a half - suppress sigh look up from the fire . with you yet ? ' I ask . ' ,' he reply , ' get married , , in the second year . a young man , a farm - labourer , as come by we on he way to market with he ma 'r 's dray - a journey of over five hundred mile , theer and back - make offer fur to take she yofu he wife ( wife be very scarce theer ) , and then to set up yofu they two self in the . she speak to I fur to tell he she trew story . I do . they be married , and they live fower hundred mile away from any voice but they own and the singing bird . ' ' . ? ' I suggest . it be a pleasant key to touch , for suddenly burst into a roar of laughter , and rub he hand up and down he leg , as he have be accustom to do when he enjoy himself in the long - shipwreck boat . ' would you believe it ! ' he say . ' why , someun even make offer fur to marry she ! if a ship 's cook that be turn settler , , do not make offer fur to marry , I be Gorm - and I can not say no fairer than that ! ' I never see laugh so . this sudden ecstasy on the part of be so delightful to she , that she could not leave off laugh ; and the more she laugh the more she make I laugh , and the greater 's ecstasy become , and the more he rub he leg . ' and what do say ? ' I ask , when I be grave enough . ' if you will believe I , ' return , ' , ' stead of say " thank you , I be much obleeged to you , I be not a - go yofu to change my condition at my time of life , " up ' with a bucket as be stand by , and lay it over that theer ship 's cook 's head ' till he sung out fur help , and I go in and resky of he . ' burst into a great roar of laughter , and and I both keep he company . ' but I must say this , for the good creetur ,' he resume , wip he face , when we be quite exhausted ; ' she have be all she say she would be to we , and more . she be the willingest , the trewest , the honestest - help woman , , as ever draw would the breath of life . I have never know ' she to be lone and lorn , for a single minute , not even when the colony be all afore we , and we be new to it . and think of the old 'un be a thing she never do , I do assure you , since she leave ! ' ' now , last , not least , , ' say I . ' he have pay off every obligation he incur here - even to 's bill , you remember my dear Agnes - and therefore we may take it for grant that he be do well . but what be the latest news of he ? ' , with a smile , put he hand in he breast - pocket , and produce a flat - fold , paper parcel , from which he take out , with much care , a little odd - look newspaper . ' you be to understan ' , , ' say he , 'as we have leave the now , be so well to do ; and have go right away round to , wheer theer 's what we call a town . ' ' be in the near you ? ' say I . ' bless you , yes , ' say , turn to with a will . I never wish to meet a better gan 'l'man for turn to with a will . I have see that theer bald head of he a perspiring in the sun , , till I a'most thowt it would have melt away . and now he be a Magistrate . ' , eh ? ' say I . point to a certain paragraph in the newspaper , where I read aloud as follow , from the : ' the public dinner to we distinguished fellow - colonist and townsman , , , , come off yesterday in the large room of the , which be crowd to suffocation . it be estimate that not fewer than forty - seven person must have be accommodate with dinner at one time , exclusive of the company in the passage and on the stair . the beauty , fashion , and exclusiveness of , flock to do honou to one so deservedly esteem , so highly talented , and so widly popular . ( of - , ) preside , and on he right sit the distinguished guest . after the removal of the cloth , and the singing of ( beautifully execute , and in which we be at no loss to distinguish the bell - like note of that gift amateur , , , ) , the usual loyal and patriotic toast be severally give and rapturously receive . , in a speech replete with feeling , then propose " we distinguished , the ornament of we town . may he never leave we but to better himself , and may he success among we be such as to render he
he bettere himself impossible ! " the cheering with which the toast be receive defy description . again and again it rise and fall , like the wave of ocean . at length all be hush , and , , present himself to return thanks . far be it from we , in the present comparatively imperfect state of the resource of we establishment , to endeaavor to follow we distinguished townsman through the smoothly - flow period of he polished and highly - ornate address ! Suffice it to observe , that it be a masterpiece of eloquence ; and that those passage in which he more particularly trace he own successful career to its source , and warn the younger portion of he auditory from the shoal of ever incurr pecuniary liabilities which they be unable to liquidate , bring a tear into the manliest eye present . the remain toast be Doctor ; ( who gracefully bow she acknowledgement from the side - door , where a galaxy of beauty be elevate on chair , at once to witness and adorn the gratify scene ) , ( late ) ; ; , , ( who convulse the assembly by humorously remark that he find himself unable to return thanks in a speech , but would do so , with they permission , in a song ) ; 's Family ( well know , it be needless to remark , in the mother - country ) , &c . &c . &c . at the conclusion of the proceeding the table be clear as if by art -magic for dancing . among the votary of , who disport themselves until give warning for departure , , , , and the lovely and accomplish , fourth daughter of , be particularly remarkable . ' I be look back to the name of , please to have discover , in these happier circumstance , , formerly poor pinch usher to my magistrate , when point to another part of the paper , my eye rest on my own name , and I read thus : ' to , , ' the . ' my dear Sir , ' year have elapse , since I have a opportunity of ocularly peruse the lineament , now familiar to the imagination of a considerable portion of the civilized world . ' but , my dear Sir , though estrange ( by the force of circumstance over which I have have no control ) from the personal society of the friend and companion of my youth , I have not be unmindful of he soaring flight . have I be debar , though seas between we braid ha ' roared , ( ) from participating in the intellectual feast he have spread before we . 'i cannot , therefore , allow of the departure from this place of a individual whom we mutually respect and esteem , without , my dear Sir , take this public opportunity of thank you , on my own behalf , and , I may undertake to add , on that of the whole of the of , for the gratification of which you be the ministering agent . ' go on , my dear Sir ! you be not unknown here , you be not unappreciated . though " remite " , we be neither " unfriended " , " melancholy " , nor ( I may add ) " slow " . go on , my dear Sir , in you eagle course ! the inhabitant of may at least aspire to watch it , with delight , with entertainment , with instruction ! ' among the eyes elevate towards you from this portion of the globe , will ever be find , while it have light and life , ' the ' eye ' Appertaining to ' , ' . ' I find , on glancing at the remaining contents of the newspaper , that be a diligent and esteem correspondent of that journal . there be another letter from he in the same paper , touch a bridge ; there be a advertisement of a collection of similar letter by he , to be shortly republish , in a neat volume , ' with considerable additions ' ; and , unless I be very much mistaken , the lead article be he also . we talk much of , on many other evening while remaine with we . he live with we during the whole term of he stay , - which , I think , be something less than a month , - and he sister and my aunt come to to see he . Agnes and I part from he aboard - ship , when he sai ; and we shall never part from he more , on earth . but before he leave , he go with I to , to see a little tablet I have put up in the churchyard to the memory of . while I be copy the plain inscription for he at he request , I see he stoop , and gather a tuft of grass from the grave and a little earth . ' for 'ly , ' he say , as he put it in he breast . 'I promise , . ' chapter 64 and now my write story end . I look back , once more - for the last time - before I close these leave . I see myself , with Agnes at my side , journey along the road of life . I see we child and we friend around we ; and I hear the roar of many voice , not indifferent to I as I travel on . what face be the most distinct to I in the fleeting crowd ? lo , these ; all turn to I as I ask my thought the question ! here be
be my aunt , in stronger spectacle , a old woman of four - score year and more , but upright yet , and a steady walker of six mile at a stretch in winter weather . always with she , here come , my good old nurse , likewise in spectacle , accustom to do needle - work at night very close to the lamp , but never sit down to it without a bit of wax candle , a yard - measure in a little house , and a work - box with a picture of 's upon the lid . the cheek and arm of , so hard and red in my childish day , when I wonder why the bird do not peck she in preference to apple , be shrivell now ; and she eye , that use to darke they whole neighbourhood in she face , be fainter ( though they glitter still ) ; but she rough forefinger , which I once associate with a pocket nutmeg - grater , be just the same , and when I see my least child catch at it as it totter from my aunt to she , I think of we little parlour at home , when I could scarcely walk . my aunt 's old disappointment be set right , now . she be godmother to a real living ; and ( the next in order ) say she spoil she . there be something bulky in 's pocket . it be nothing smaller than the , which be in rather a dilapidate condition by this time , with diver of the leave tear and stitch across , but which Peggotty exhibit to the child as a precious relic . I find it very curious to see my own infant face , look up at I from the Crocodile story ; and to be remind by it of my old acquaintance Brook of . among my boy , this summer holiday time , I see a old man make giant kites , and gaze at they in the air , with a delight for which there be no word . he greet I rapturously , and whisper , with many nod and wink , ' Trotwood , you will be glad to hear that I shall finish the when I have nothing else to do , and that you aunt be the most extraordinary woman in the world , sir ! ' who be this bent lady , support herself by a stick , and show I a countenance in which there be some trace of old pride and beauty , feebly contende with a querulous , imbecile , fretful wandering of the mind ? she be in a garden ; and near she stand a sharp , dark , withered woman , with a white scar on she lip . let I hear what they say . ' , I have forget this gentleman 's name . ' bend over she , and call to she , ' . ' 'I be glad to see you , sir . I be sorry to observe you be in mourning . I hope will be good to you . ' she impatient attendent scold she , tell she I be not in mourning , bid she look again , try to rouse she . ' you have see my son , sir , ' say the elder lady . ' be you reconcile ? ' look fixedly at I , she put she hand to she forehead , and moan . suddenly , she cry , in a terrible voice , ' Rosa , come to I . he be dead ! ' knee at she foot , by turn caress she , and quarrel with she ; now fiercely tell she , love he better than you ever do ! '- now soothe she to sleep on she breast , like a sick child . thus I leave they ; thus I always find they ; thus they wear they time away , from year to year . what ship come sail home from , and what English lady be this , marry to a grow old with great flap of ear ? can this be ? indeed it be , peevish and fine , with a black man to carry card and letter to she on a golden salver , and a copper - coloured woman in linen , with a bright handkerchief round she head , to serve she in she dressing - room . but keep no diary in these day ; never sing 's ; eternally quarrel with the old , who be a sort of yellow bear with a tan hide . be steep in money to the throat , and talk and think of nothing else . I like she better in the of . or perhaps this be the of ! for , though have a stately house , and mighty company , and sumptuous dinner every day , I see no green growth near she ; nothing that can ever come to fruit or flower . what call ' society ' , I see ; among it , from he patent place , sneer at the hand that give it he , and speak to I of the as charmingly antique ' . but when society be the name for such hollow gentleman and lady , , and when its breeding be profess indifference to everything that can advance or can retard mankind , I think we must have lose ourselves in that same desert of , and have better find the way out . and lo , the Doctor , always we good friend , labour at he dictionary ( somewhere about the letter d ) , and happy in he home and wife . also the , on a considerably reduce footing , and by no
