by Preface a judge once have the kindness to inform I , as one of a company of some hundred and fifty man and woman not labour under any suspicion of lunacy , that the court of , though the shining subject of much popular prejudice ( at which point I think the judge 's eye have a cast in my direction ) , be almost immaculate . there have been , he admit , a trivial blemish or so in its rate of progress , but this be exaggerate and have be entirely owe to the " parsimony of the public , " which guilty public , it appear , have be until lately bent in the most determined manner on by no means enlarge the number of judg appoint -- I believe by the , but any other king will do as well . this seem to I too profound a joke to be insert in the body of this book or I should have restore it to or to , with one or other of whom I think it must have originate . in such mouth I might have couple it with a apt quotation from one of 's sonnet : " my nature be subdue to what it work in , like the dyer 's hand : Pity I , then , and wish I be renew ! " but as it be wholesome that the parsimonious public should know what have be do , and still be do , in this connexion , I mention here that everything set forth in these page concern the court of be substantially true , and within the truth . the case of be in no essential alter from one of actual occurrence , make public by a disinterested person who be professionally acquaint with the whole of the monstrous wrong from begin to end . at the present moment ( , 1853 ) there be a suit before the court which be commence nearly twenty year ago , in which from thirty to forty counsel have be know to appear at one time , in which cost have be incur to the amount of seventy thousand pound , which be a friendly suit , and which be ( I be assure ) no nearer to its termination now than when it be begin . there be another well - know suit in , not yet decide , which be commence before the close of the last century and in which more than double the amount of seventy thousand pound have be swallow up in cost . if I want other authority for and , I could rain they on these page , to the shame of -- a parsimonious public . there be only one other point on which I offer a word of remark . the possibility of what be call spontaneous combustion have be deny since the death of ; and my good friend ( quite mistaken , as he soon find , in suppose the thing to have be abandon by all authority ) publish some ingenious letter to I at the time when that event be chronicle , argue that spontaneous combustion could not possibly be . I have no need to observe that I do not wilfully or negligently mislead my reader and that before I write that description I take pain to investigate the subject . there be about thirty case on record , of which the most famous , that of the , be minutely investigate and describe by , a prebendary of , otherwise distinguished in letter , who publish a account of it at in 1731 , which he afterwards republish at . the appearance , beyond all rational doubt , observ in that case be the appearance observe in 's case . the next most famous instance happen at six year earlier , and the historian in that case be cat , one of the most renowned surgeon produce by . the subject be a woman , whose husband be ignorantly convict of have murder she ; but on solemn appeal to a higher court , he be acquit because it be show upon the evidence that she have die the death of which this name of spontaneous combustion be give . I do not think it necessary to add to these notable fact , and that general reference to the authority which will be find at page 30 , vol . ii . ,* the record opinion and experience of distinguished medical professor , french , English , and , in more modern day , contente myself with observing that I shall not abandon the fact until there shall have be a considerable spontaneous combustion of the testimony on which human occurrence be usually receive . in I have purposely dwelt upon the romantic side of familiar thing . 1853 * another case , very clearly describe by a dentist , occur at the town of , in the of , quite recently . the subject be a German who keep a liquor - shop and be a inveterate drunkard . chapter I in . term lately over , and the sit in 's . Implacable weather . as much mud in the street as if the water have but newly retire from the face of the earth , and it would not be wonderful to meet a , forty foot long or so , waddl like a elephantine lizard up . smoke lowere down from chimney - pots , make a soft black drizzle , with flake of soot in it as big as full - grow snowflake -- go into mourning , one might imagine , for the death of the sun . dog , undistinguishable in mire . horse , scarcely better ; splashed to they very blinker . foot passenger , jostl one another 's umbrella in a general infection of ill temper ,
, and lose they foot - hold at street -corner , where ten of thousand of other foot passenger have be slipp and slide since the day break ( if this day ever break ) , add new deposit to the crust upon crust of mud , stick at those point tenaciously to the pavement , and accumulate at compound interest . Fog everywhere . Fog up the river , where it flow among green ait and meadow ; fog down the river , where it roll defile among the tier of shipping and the waterside pollution of a great ( and dirty ) city . Fog on the marsh , fog on the Kentish height . Fog creepe into the caboose of collier - brig ; fog lie out on the yard and hover in the rigging of great ship ; fog droop on the gunwale of barge and small boat . Fog in the eyes and throat of ancient pensioner , wheeze by the fireside of they wards ; fog in the stem and bowl of the afternoon pipe of the wrathful skipper , down in he close cabin ; fog cruelly pinch the toe and finger of he shivering little ' prentice boy on deck . chance people on the bridge pee over the parapet into a nether sky of fog , with fog all round they , as if they be up in a balloon and hang in the misty cloud . gas loom through the fog in diver place in the street , much as the sun may , from the spongey field , be see to loom by husbandman and ploughboy . most of the shop lighte two hour before they time -- as the gas seem to know , for it have a haggard and unwilling look . the raw afternoon be rawest , and the dense fog be densest , and the muddy streets be muddiest near that leae - head old obstruction , appropriate ornament for the threshold of a leaden - head old corporation , . and hard by , in 's , at the very heart of the fog , sit the in he High Court of . never can there come fog too thick , never can there come mud and mire too deep , to assort with the groping and flounder condition which this high court of , most pestilent of hoary sinner , hold this day in the sight of heaven and earth . on such a afternoon , if ever , the ought to be sit here -- as here he be -- with a foggy glory round he head , softly fence in with crimson cloth and curtain , address by a large advocate with great whisker , a little voice , and a interminable brief , and outwardly direct he contemplation to the lantern in the roof , where he can see nothing but fog . on such a afternoon some score of member of the of bar ought to be -- as here they be -- mistily engage in one of the ten thousand stage of a endless cause , trip one another up on slippery precedent , grope knee - deep in technicality , run they goat - hair and horsehair warde head against wall of word and make a pretence of equity with serious face , as player might . on such a afternoon the various solicitor in the cause , some two or three of whom have inherit it from they father , who make a fortune by it , ought to be -- as be they not ?--range in a line , in a long mat well ( but you might look in vain for truth at the bottom of it ) between the registrar 's red table and the silk gown , with bill , cross -bill , answer , rejoinder , injunction , affidavit , issue , reference to master , master ' report , mountain of costly nonsense , pile before they . well may the court be dim , with waste candle here and there ; well may the fog hang heavy in it , as if it would never get out ; well may the stain - glass window lose they colour and admit no light of day into the place ; well may the uninitiated from the street , who peep in through the glass pane in the door , be deter from entrance by its owlish aspect and by the drawl , languidly echo to the roof from the padded dais where the look into the lantern that have no light in it and where the attendant wig be all stuck in a fog - bank ! this be the court of , which have its decaying house and its blighted lands in every shire , which have its worn - out lunatic in every madhouse and its dead in every churchyard , which have its ruined suitor with he slipshod heel and threadbare dress borrowing and begge through the round of every man 's acquaintance , which give to monie might the means abundantly of weary out the right , which so exhaust finances , patience , courage , hope , so overthrow the brain and break the heart , that there be not a honourable man among its practitioner who would not give -- who do not often give -- the warning , " suffer any wrong that can be do you rather than come here ! " who happen to be in the 's court this murky afternoon besides the , the counsel in the cause , two or three counsel who be never in any cause , and the well of solicitor before mention ? there be the registrar below the judge , in wig and gown ; and there be two or three mace , or petty - bag , or privy purs , or whatever they
they may be , in legal court suits . these be all yawn , for no crumb of amusement ever fall from and ( the cause in hand ) , which be squeeze dry year upon year ago . the short - hand writer , the reporter of the court , and the reporter of the newspaper invariably decamp with the rest of the regular when and come on . they place be a blank . stand on a seat at the side of the hall , the better to peer into the curtained sanctuary , be a little mad old woman in a squeezed bonnet who be always in court , from its sitting to its rising , and always expect some incomprehensible judgment to be give in she favour . some say she really be , or be , a party to a suit , but no one know for certain because no one car . she carry some small litter in a reticule which she call she document , principally consist of paper match and dry lavender . a sallow prisoner have come up , in custody , for the half - dozenth time to make a personal application " to purge himself of he contempt , " which , be a solitary surviving executor who have fall into a state of conglomeration about account of which it be not pretend that he have ever any knowledge , he be not at all likely ever to do . in the meantime he prospect in life be end . another ruin suitor , who periodically appear from and break out into effort to address the Chancellor at the close of the day 's business and who can by no means be make to understand that the Chancellor be legally ignorant of he existence after make it desolate for a quarter of a century , plant himself in a good place and keep a eye on the judge , ready to call out " my ! " in a voice of sonorous complaint on the instant of he rising . a few lawyer ' clerk and other who know this suitor by sight linger on the chance of he furnish some fun and enliven the dismal weather a little . and drone on . this scarecrow of a suit have , in course of time , become so complicated that no man alive know what it mean . the party to it understand it least , but it have be observe that no two Chancery lawyer can talk about it for five minute without come to a total disagreement as to all the premise . Innumerable child have be bear into the cause ; innumerable young people have marry into it ; innumerable old people have die out of it . score of person have deliriously find themselves make party in and without know how or why ; whole family have inherit legendary hatred with the suit . the little plaintiff or defendent who be promise a new rocking - horse when and should be settle have grow up , possess himself of a real horse , and trot away into the other world . fair wards of court have fade into mother and grandmother ; a long procession of Chancellors have come in and go out ; the legion of bill in the suit have be transform into mere bill of mortality ; there be not three Jarndyces leave upon the earth perhaps since old in despair blow he brain out at a coffee - house in ; but and still drag its dreary length before the court , perennially hopeless . and have pass into a joke . that be the only good that have ever come of it . it have be death to many , but it be a joke in the profession . every master in have have a reference out of it . every be " in it , " for somebody or other , when he be counsel at the bar . good thing have be say about it by blue - nosed , bulbous - shoe old bencher in select port - wine committee after dinner in hall . Articled clerk have be in the habit of flesh they legal wit upon it . the last handle it neatly , when , correcte , the eminent silk gown who say that such a thing might happen when the sky raine potatoe , he observe , " or when we get through and , " -- a pleasantry that particularly tick the mace , bag , and purse . how many people out of the suit and have stretch forth its unwholesome hand to spoil and corrupt would be a very wide question . from the master upon whose impaling file ream of dusty warrants in and have grimly writh into many shape , down to the copying - clerk in the 's who have copy he ten of thousand of folio - page under that eternal heading , no man 's nature have be make better by it . in trickery , evasion , procrastination , spoliation , botheration , under false pretence of all sort , there be influence that can never come too good . the very solicitor ' boy who have keep the wretch suitor at bay , by protesting time out of mind that , , or otherwise be particularly engage and have appointment until dinner , may have get a extra moral twist and shuffle into themselves out of and . the receiver in the cause have acquire a goodly sum of money by it but have acquire to a distrust of he own mother and a contempt for he own kind . , , and otherwise have lapse into a habit of vaguly promise themselves that they will look into that outstanding little matter and see what can be do for -- who be not well
well use -- when and shall be get out of the office . Shirk and shark in all they many variety have be sown broadcast by the ill - fated cause ; and even those who have contemplate its history from the outermost circle of such evil have be insensibly temp into a loose way of let bad thing alone to take they own bad course , and a loose belief that if the world go wrong it be in some off - hand manner never mean to go right . thus , in the midst of the mud and at the heart of the fog , sit the in he High Court of . " , " say the , latterly something restless under the eloquence of that learn gentleman . " , " say . know more of and than anybody . he be famous for it -- suppose never to have read anything else since he leave school . " have you nearly conclude you argument ? " " Mlud , no --variety of point -- feel it my duty tsubmit--ludship , " be the reply that slide out of . " several member of the bar be still to be hear , I believe ? " say the Chancellor with a slight smile . of 's learn friend , each arm with a little summary of eighteen hundred sheet , up like eighteen hammers in a pianoforte , make eighteen bow , and drop into they eighteen place of obscurity . " we will proceed with the hearing on fortnight , " say the Chancellor . for the question at issue be only a question of cost , a mere bud on the forest tree of the parent suit , and really will come to a settlement one of these day . the rise ; the bar rise ; the prisoner be bring forward in a hurry ; the man from cry , " my lord ! " Mace , bag , and purse indignantly proclaim silence and fry at the man from . " in reference , " proceed the Chancellor , still on and , " to the young girl -- " " 's pardon -- boy , " say prematurely . " in reference , " proceed the Chancellor with extra distinctness , " to the young girl and boy , the two young people " -- crush -- " whom I direct to be in attendance to - day and who be now in my private room , I will see they and satisfy myself as to the expediency of make the order for they residing with they uncle . " on he leg again . " Begludship 's pardon -- dead . " " with they " -- look through he double eye - glass at the papers on he desk -- " grandfather . " " Begludship 's pardon-- victim of rash action -- brain . " suddenly a very little counsel with a terrific bass voice arise , fully inflate , in the back settlement of the fog , and say , " will you lordship allow I ? I appear for he . he be a cousin , several time remove . I be not at the moment prepare to inform the court in what exact remove he be a cousin , but he be a cousin . " leave this address ( deliver like a sepulchral message ) ring in the rafter of the roof , the very little counsel drop , and the fog know he no more . everybody look for he . nobody can see he . " I will speak with both the young people , " say the anew , " and satisfy myself on the subject of they residing with they cousin . I will mention the matter to - morrow morning when I take my seat . " the Chancellor be about to bow to the bar when the prisoner be present . nothing can possibly come of the prisoner 's conglomeration but he be send back to prison , which be soon done . the man from venture another remonstrative " my lord ! " but the Chancellor , be aware of he , have dexterously vanished . everybody else quickly vanish too . a battery of blue bag be load with heavy charge of papers and carry off by clerk ; the little mad old woman march off with she document ; the empty court be lock up . if all the injustice it have commit and all the misery it have cause could only be lock up with it , and the whole burnt away in a great funeral pyre -- why so much the better for other party than the party in and ! in it be but a glimpse of the world of fashion that we want on this same miry afternoon . it be not so unlike the of but that we may pass from the one scene to the other , as the crow fly . both the world of fashion and the court of Chancery be thing of precedent and usage : oversleepe who have play at strange game through a deal of thundery weather ; sleep beauty whom the knight will wake one day , when all the stop spit in the kitchen shall begin to turn prodigiously ! it be not a large world . relatively even to this world of ours , which have its limit too ( as you Highness shall find when you have make the tour of it and be come to the brink of the void beyond ) , it be a very little speck . there be much good in it ; there be many good and true people in it ; it have its appointed place . but the evil of it be that it be a world wrap up in too much jeweller
jeweller 's cotton and fine wool , and can not hear the rushing of the larger world , and can not see they as they circle round the sun . it be a deadened world , and its growth be sometimes unhealthy for want of air . my have return to she house in town for a few day previous to she departure for , where she ladyship intend to stay some week , after which she movement be uncertain . the fashionable intelligence say so for the comfort of the , and it know all fashionable thing . to know thing otherwise be to be unfashionable . my have be down at what she call , in familiar conversation , she " place " in . the water be out in . a arch of the bridge in the park have be sap and sop away . the adjacent low - lie ground for half a mile in breadth be a stagnant river with melancholy tree for island in it and a surface puncture all over , all day long , with fall rain . my 's place have be extremely dreary . the weather for many a day and night have be so wet that the tree seem wet through , and the soft lopping and pruning of the woodman 's axe can make no crash or crackle as they fall . the deer , look soak , leave quagmire where they pass . the shot of a rifle lose its sharpness in the moist air , and it be smoke move in a tardy little cloud towards the green rise , coppice - top , that make a background for the falling rain . the view from my 's own window be alternately a lead - coloured view and a view in indian ink . the vase on the stone terrace in the foreground catch the rain all day ; and the heavy drop fall -- drip , drip , drip -- upon the broad flag pavement , call from old time the Ghost 's walk , all night . on the little church in the park be mouldy ; the oaken pulpit break out into a cold sweat ; and there be a general smell and taste as of the ancient Dedlock in they grave . my ( who be childless ) , look out in the early twilight from she boudoir at a keeper 's lodge and see the light of a fire upon the latticed pane , and smoke rise from the chimney , and a child , chase by a woman , run out into the rain to meet the shining figure of a wrap - up man come through the gate , have be put quite out of temper . my say she have be " bore to death . " therefore my have come away from the place in and have leave it to the rain , and the crow , and the rabbit , and the deer , and the partridge and pheasant . the picture of the Dedlocks past and gone have seem to vanish into the damp wall in mere lowness of spirit , as the housekeeper have pass along the old room shut up the shutter . and when they will next come forth again , the fashionable intelligence -- which , like the fiend , be omniscient of the past and present , but not the future -- can not yet undertake to say . be only a baronet , but there be no mightier baronet than he . he family be as old as the hill , and infinitely more respectable . he have a general opinion that the world might get on without hills but would be do up without Dedlocks . he would on the whole admit nature to be a good idea ( a little low , perhaps , when not enclose with a park - fence ) , but a idea dependent for its execution on you great county family . he be a gentleman of strict conscience , disdainful of all littleness and meanness and ready on the shortest notice to die any death you may please to mention rather than give occasion for the least impeachment of he integrity . he be a honourable , obstinate , truthful , high - spirited , intensely prejudice , perfectly unreasonable man . be twenty year , full measure , older than my . he will never see sixty - five again , nor perhaps sixty - six , nor yet sixty - seven . he have a twist of the gout now and then and walk a little stifinitely . he be of a worthy presence , with he light - grey hair and whisker , he fine shirt - frill , he pure -white waistcoat , and he blue coat with bright buttons always button . he be ceremonious , stately , most polite on every occasion to my , and hold she personal attraction in the highest estimation . he gallantry to my , which have never change since he court she , be the one little touch of romantic fancy in he . indeed , he marry she for love . a whisper still go about that she have not even family ; howbein , have so much family that perhaps he have enough and could dispense with any more . but she have beauty , pride , ambition , insolent resolve , and sense enough to portion out a legion of fine lady . wealth and station , add to these , soon float she upward , and for year now my have be at the centre of the fashionable intelligence and at the top of the fashionable tree . how weep when he have no more world to conquer , everybody know -- or have some reason to know by this time , the matter have be
be rather frequently mention . my , have conquer Her world , fall not into the melting , but rather into the freezing , mood . a exhaust composure , a worn - out placidity , a equanimity of fatigue not to be ruffle by interest or satisfaction , be the trophy of she victory . she be perfectly well - breed . if she could be translate to heave to - morrow , she might be expect to ascend without any rapture . she have beauty still , and if it be not in it 's heyday , it be not yet in its autumn . she have a fine face -- originally of a character that would be rather call very pretty than handsome , but improve into classicality by the acquired expression of she fashionable state . she figure be elegant and have the effect of be tall . not that she be so , but that " the most be make , " as the have frequently assert upon oath , " of all she point . " the same authority observe that she be perfectly get up and remark in commendation of she hair especially that she be the best - groome woman in the whole stud . with all she perfection on she head , my have come up from she place in ( hotly pursue by the fashionable intelligence ) to pass a few day at she house in town previous to she departure for , where she ladyship intend to stay some week , after which she movement be uncertain . and at she house in town , upon this muddy , murky afternoon , present himself a old - fashioned old gentleman , attorney - at - law and eke solicitor of the of , who have the honour of acting as legal adviser of the Dedlock and have as many cast - iron box in he office with that name outside as if the present baronet be the coin of the conjuror 's trick and be constantly be juggle through the whole set . across the hall , and up the stair , and along the passage , and through the room , which be very brilliant in the season and very dismal out of it -- fairy - land to visit , but a desert to live in -- the old gentleman be conduct by a in powder to my 's presence . the old gentleman be rusty to look at , but be repute to have make good thrift out of aristocratic marriage settlement and aristocratic will , and to be very rich . he be surround by a mysterious halo of family confidence , of which he be know to be the silent depository . there be noble mausoleum root for centurie in retired glade of park among the grow timber and the fern , which perhaps hold fewer noble secret than walk abroad among man , shut up in the breast of . he be of what be call the old school -- a phrase generally mean any school that seem never to have be young -- and wear knee - breech tie with ribbon , and gaiter or stocking . one peculiarity of he black clothes and of he black stocking , be they silk or worst , be that they never shine . Mute , close , irresponsive to any glancing light , he dress be like himself . he never converse when not professionally consult . he be find sometimes , speechless but quite at home , at corner of dinner - table in great country house and near door of drawing - rooms , concern which the fashionable intelligence be eloquent , where everybody know he and where half the Peerage stop to say " how do you do , ? " he receive these salutation with gravity and bury they along with the rest of he knowledge . be with my and be happy to see . there be a air of prescription about he which be always agreeable to Sir ; he receive it as a kind of tribute . he like 's dress ; there be a kind of tribute in that too . it be eminently respectable , and likewise , in a general way , retainer - like . it express , as it be , the steward of the legal mystery , the butler of the legal cellar , of the Dedlock . have Tulkinghorn any idea of this himself ? it may be so , or it may not , but there be this remarkable circumstance to be not in everything associate with my as one of a class -- as one of the leader and representative of she little world . she suppose herself to be a inscrutable being , quite out of the reach and ke of ordinary mortal -- see herself in she glass , where indeed she look so . yet every dim little star revolve about she , from she maid to the manager of the , know she weakness , prejudice , folly , haughtiness , and caprice and life upon as accurate a calculation and as nice a measure of she moral nature as she dressmaker take of she physical proportion . be a new dress , a new custom , a new singer , a new dancer , a new form of jewellery , a new dwarf or giant , a new chapel , a new anything , to be set up ? there be deferential people in a dozen callings whom my suspect of nothing but prostration before she , who can tell you how to manage she as if she be a baby , who do nothing but nurse she all they life , who , humbly affect to follow with profound subservience , lead she and she whole troop after they ; who , in
in hooking one , hook all and bear they off as bear away the stately fleet of the majestic . " if you want to address we people , sir , " say and , the jeweller -- mean by we people and the rest --" you must remember that you be not deal with the general public ; you must hit we people in they weakest place , and they weakest place be such a place . " " to make this article go down , gentlemen , " say and , the mercer , to they friend the manufacturer , " you must come to we , because we know where to have the fashionable people , and we can make it fashionable . " " if you want to get this print upon the table of my high connexion , sir , " say , the librarian , " or if you want to get this dwarf or giant into the house of my high connexion , sir , or if you want to secure to this entertainment the patronage of my high connexion , sir , you must leave it , if you please , to I , for I have be accustom to study the leader of my high connexion , sir , and I may tell you without vanity that I can turn they round my finger " -- in which , who be a honest man , do not exaggerate at all . therefore , while may not know what be pass in the Dedlock mind at present , it be very possible that he may . " my 's cause have be again before the Chancellor , have it , ? " say , give he he hand . " yes . it have be on again to - day , " reply , make one of he quiet bow to my , who be on a sofa near the fire , shade she face with a hand - screen . " it would be useless to ask , " say my with the dreariness of the place in still upon she , " whether anything have be done . " " Nothe that you would call anything have be do to - day , " reply . " nor ever will be , " say my . have no objection to a interminable Chancery suit . it be a slow , expensive , british , constitutional kind of thing . to be sure , he have not a vital interest in the suit in question , she part in which be the only property my bring he ; and he have a shadowy impression that for he name -- the name of Dedlock -- to be in a cause , and not in the title of that cause , be a most ridiculous accident . but he regard the court of , even if it should involve a occasional delay of justice and a trifling amount of confusion , as a something devise in conjunction with a variety of other something by the perfection of human wisdom for the eternal settlement ( humanly speak ) of everything . and he be upon the whole of a fix opinion that to give the sanction of he countenance to any complaint respect it would be to encourage some person in the lower class to rise up somewhere -- like . " as a few fresh affidavit have be put upon the file , " say , " and as they be short , and as I proceed upon the troublesome principle of begging leave to possess my client with any new proceedings in a cause " -- cautious man , take no more responsibility than necessary -- " and further , as I see you be go to , I have bring they in my pocket . " ( be go to too , by the by , but the delight of the fashionable intelligence be in he lady . ) take out he papers , ask permission to place they on a golden talisman of a table at my 's elbow , put on he spectacle , and begin to read by the light of a shaded lamp . " . between -- ' " my Lady interrupt , request he to miss as many of the formal horror as he can . glance over he spectacle and begin again lower down . my Lady carelessly and scornfully abstract she attention . in a great chair look at the file and appear to have a stately liking for the legal repetition and prolixity as range among the national bulwark . it happen that the fire be hot where my Lady sit and that the hand - screen be more beautiful than useful , be priceless but small . my lady , change she position , see the papers on the table -- look at they nearer -- look at they nearer still -- ask impulsively , " who copy that ? " stop short , surprised by my 's animation and she unusual tone . " be it what you people call law - hand ? " she ask , look full at he in she careless way again and toy with she screen . " not quite . probably " -- examine it as he speak -- " the legal character which it have be acquire after the original hand be form . why do you ask ? " " anything to vary this detestable monotony . oh , go on , do ! " read again . the heat be greater ; my screen she face . doze , start up suddenly , and cry , " Eh ? what do you say ? " " I say I be afraid , " say , who have risen hastily , " that be ill . " " Faint , " my
my Lady murmur with white lip , " only that ; but it be like the faintness of death . do not speak to I . , and take I to my room ! " retire into another chamber ; bell ring , foot shuffle and patter , silence ensue . mercury at last beg to return . " better now , " quoth , motion the lawyer to sit down and read to he alone . " I have be quite alarm . I never know my Lady swoon before . but the weather be extremely try , and she really have be bore to death down at we place in . " chapter III a progress I have a great deal of difficulty in begin to write my portion of these page , for I know I be not clever . I always know that . I can remember , when I be a very little girl indeed , I use to say to my doll when we be alone together , " now , Dolly , I be not clever , you know very well , and you must be patient with I , like a dear ! " and so she use to sit prop up in a great arm - chair , with she beautiful complexion and rosy lip , stare at I -- or not so much at I , I think , as at nothing -- while I busily stitch away and tell she every one of my secret . my dear old doll ! I be such a shy little thing that I seldom da to open my lip , and never da to open my heart , to anybody else . it almost make I cry to think what a relief it use to be to I when I come home from school of a day to run upstairs to my room and say , " oh , you dear faithful Dolly , I know you would be expect I ! " and then to sit down on the floor , lean on the elbow of she great chair , and tell she all I have notice since we part . I have always rather a noticing way -- not a quick way , oh , no !-- a silent way of noticing what pass before I and think I should like to understand it better . I have not by any means a quick understanding . when I love a person very tenderly indeed , it seem to brighten . but even that may be my vanity . I be bring up , from my earliest remembrance -- like some of the princess in the fairy story , only I be not charme -- by my godmother . at least , I only know she as such . she be a good , good woman ! she go to church three time every , and to morn prayer on and , and to lecture whenever there be lecture ; and never miss . she be handsome ; and if she have ever smile , would have be ( I use to think ) like a angel -- but she never smile . she be always grave and strict . she be so very good herself , I think , that the badness of other people make she fry all she life . I feel so different from she , even make every allowance for the difference between a child and a woman ; I feel so poor , so trifling , and so far off that I never could be unrestrained with she -- no , could never even love she as I wish . it make I very sorry to consider how good she be and how unworthy of she I be , and I use ardently to hope that I might have a better heart ; and I talk it over very often with the dear old doll , but I never love my godmother as I ought to have love she and as I feel I must have love she if I have be a better girl . this make I , I dare say , more timid and retire than I naturally be and cast I upon as the only friend with whom I feel at ease . but something happen when I be still quite a little thing that help it very much . I have never hear my mama speak of . I have never hear of my papa either , but I feel more interested about my mama . I have never wear a black frock , that I could recollect . I have never be show my mama 's grave . I have never be tell where it be . yet I have never be teach to pray for any relation but my godmother . I have more than once approach this subject of my thought with , we only servant , who take my light away when I be in bed ( another very good woman , but austere to I ) , and she have only say , " Esther , good night ! " and go away and leave I . although there be seven girl at the neighbour school where I be a day boarder , and although they call I little , I know none of they at home . all of they be older than I , to be sure ( I be the youngest there by a good deal ) , but there seem to be some other separation between we besides that , and besides they be far more clever than I be and know much more than I do . one of they in the first week of my go to the school ( I remember it very well ) invite I home to a little party , to my great joy . but
but my godmother write a stiff letter decline for I , and I never go . I never go out at all . it be my birthday . there be holiday at school on other birthday -- none on mine . there be rejoicing at home on other birthday , as I know from what I hear the girl relate to one another -- there be none on mine . my birthday be the most melancholy day at home in the whole year . I have mention that unless my vanity should deceive I ( as I know it may , for I may be very vain without suspect it , though indeed I do not ) , my comprehension be quicken when my affection be . my disposition be very affectionate , and perhaps I might still feel such a wound if such a wound could be receive more than once with the quickness of that birthday . dinner be over , and my godmother and I be sit at the table before the fire . the clock tick , the fire click ; not another sound have be hear in the room or in the house for I do not know how long . I happen to look timidly up from my stitching , across the table at my godmother , and I see in she face , look gloomily at I , " it would have be far better , little , that you have have no birthday , that you have never be bear ! " I break out cry and sobb , and I say , " oh , dear godmother , tell I , pray do tell I , do die on my birthday ? " " no , " she return . " ask I no more , child ! " " oh , do pray tell I something of she . do now , at last , dear godmother , if you please ! what do I do to she ? how do I lose she ? why be I so different from other child , and why be it my fault , dear godmother ? no , no , no , do not go away . oh , speak to I ! " I be in a kind of fright beyond my grief , and I catch hold of she dress and be knee to she . she have be say all the while , " let I go ! " but now she stand still . she darken face have such power over I that it stop I in the midst of my vehemence . I put up my trembling little hand to clasp hers or to beg she pardon with what earnestness I might , but withdraw it as she look at I , and lay it on my fluttering heart . she raise I , sit in she chair , and stand I before she , say slowly in a cold , low voice -- I see she knit brow and point finger -- " you mother , , be you disgrace , and you be hers . the time will come -- and soon enough -- when you will understand this better and will feel it too , as no one save a woman can . I have forgive she " -- but she face do not relent -- " the wrong she do to I , and I say no more of it , though it be greater than you will ever know -- than any one will ever know but I , the sufferer . for yourself , unfortunate girl , orphan and degrad from the first of these evil anniversaries , pray daily that the sins of other be not visit upon you head , accord to what be write . forget you mother and leave all other people to forget she who will do she unhappy child that greatest kindness . now , go ! " she check I , however , as I be about to depart from she -- so frozen as I be !-- and add this , " submission , self - denial , diligent work , be the preparations for a life begin with such a shadow on it . you be different from other child , , because you be not bear , like they , in common sinfulness and wrath . you be set apart . " I go up to my room , and crept to bed , and lay my doll 's cheek against mine wet with tear , and hold that solitary friend upon my bosom , cry myself to sleep . Imperfect as my understanding of my sorrow be , I know that I have bring no joy at any time to anybody 's heart and that I be to no one upon what be to I . dear , dear , to think how much time we pass alone together afterwards , and how often I repeat to the doll the story of my birthday and confide to she that I would try as hard as ever I could to repair the fault I have be bear with ( of which I confessedly feel guilty and yet innocent ) and would strive as I grow up to be industrious , content , and kind - hear and to do some good to some one , and win some love to myself if I could . I hope it be not self - indulgent to shed these tear as I think of it . I be very thankful , I be very cheerful , but I can not quite help they come to my eye . there ! I have wip they away now and can go on again properly . I feel the distance between my godmother and myself so much more after the birthday , and feel so sensible of fill
fill a place in she house which ought to have be empty , that I find she more difficult of approach , though I be fervently grateful to she in my heart , than ever . I feel in the same way towards my school companion ; I feel in the same way towards , who be a widow ; and oh , towards she daughter , of whom she be proud , who come to see she once a fortnight ! I be very retired and quiet , and try to be very diligent . one sunny afternoon when I have come home from school with my book and portfolio , watch my long shadow at my side , and as I be glid upstairs to my room as usual , my godmother look out of the parlour - door and call I back . sit with she , I find -- which be very unusual indeed -- a stranger . a portly , important - look gentleman , dress all in black , with a white cravat , large gold watch seal , a pair of gold eye - glass , and a large seal - ring upon he little finger . " this , " say my godmother in a undertone , " be the child . " then she say in she naturally stern way of speak , " this be , . " the gentleman put up he eye - glass to look at I and say , " come here , my dear ! " he shook hand with I and ask I to take off my bonnet , look at I all the while . when I have comply , he say , " ah ! " and afterwards " yes ! " and then , take off he eye - glass and fold they in a red case , and lean back in he arm -chair , turn the case about in he two hand , he give my godmother a nod . upon that , my godmother say , " you may go upstairs , ! " and I make he my curtsy and leave he . it must have be two year afterwards , and I be almost fourteen , when one dreadful night my godmother and I sit at the fireside . I be read aloud , and she be listen . I have come down at nine o'clock as I always do to read the to she , and be read from . how we saviour stoop down , write with he finger in the dust , when they bring the sinful woman to he . " so when they continue ask he , he lift up himself and say unto they , ' he that be without sin among you , let he first cast a stone at she ! ' " I be stop by my godmother 's rising , put she hand to she head , and cry out in a awful voice from quite another part of the book , " ' watch ye , therefore , lest come suddenly he find you sleep . and what I say unto you , I say unto all , watch ! ' " in a instant , while she stand before I repeat these word , she fall down on the floor . I have no need to cry out ; she voice have sound through the house and be hear in the street . she be laid upon she bed . for more than a week she lay there , little alte outwardly , with she old handsome resolute frown that I so well know carve upon she face . many and many a time , in the day and in the night , with my head upon the pillow by she that my whisper might be plainer to she , I kiss she , thank she , pray for she , ask she for she blessing and forgiveness , entreate she to give I the least sign that she know or hear I . no , no , no . she face be immovable . to the very last , and even afterwards , she fry remain unsoftened . on the day after my poor good godmother be bury , the gentleman in black with the white neckcloth reappear . I be send for by , and find he in the same place , as if he have never go away . " my name be , " he say ; " you may remember it , my child ; and , 's . " I reply that I remember to have see he once before . " pray be seat -- here near I . do not distress yourself ; it be of no use . , I need not inform you who be acquaint with the late 's affair , that she mean die with she and that this young lady , now she aunt be dead -- " " my aunt , sir ! " " it be really of no use carry on a deception when no object be to be gain by it , " say smoothly , " aunt in fact , though not in law . do not distress yourself ! do not weep ! do not tremble ! , we young friend have no doubt heard of -- the -- a -- and . " " never , " say . " be it possible , " pursue , put up he eye - glass , " that we young friend -- I beg you will not distress yourself ! -- never hear of and ! " I shook my head , wonder even what it be . " not of and ? " say , look over he glass at I and softly turn the case about and about as if he be pet something .
. " not of one of the greatest Chancery suits know ? not of and -- the -- a -- in itself a monument of Chancery practice . in which ( I would say ) every difficulty , every contingency , every masterly fiction , every form of procedure know in that court , be represent over and over again ? it be a cause that could not exist out of this free and great country . I should say that the aggregate of cost in and , " -- I be afraid he address himself to she because I appear inattentive " -- amount at the present hour to from - ty to seven - ty thousand pound ! " say , lean back in he chair . I feel very ignorant , but what could I do ? I be so entirely unacquainted with the subject that I understand nothing about it even then . " and she really never hear of the cause ! " say . " surprise ! " " , sir , " return , " who be now among the -- " " I hope so , I be sure , " say politely . " -- only to know what would be serviceable to she . and she know , from any teaching she have have here , nothing more . " " well ! " say . " upon the whole , very proper . now to the point , " address I . " , you sole relation ( in fact that be , for I be bound to observe that in law you have none ) be deceased and it naturally not be to be expect that -- " " oh , dear no ! " say quickly . " quite so , " assent ; " -- that . should charge herself with you maintenance and support ( I beg you will not distress yourself ) , you be in a position to receive the renewal of a offer which I be instruct to make to some two year ago and which , though reject then , be understand to be renewable under the lamentable circumstance that have since occur . now , if I avow that I represent , in and and otherwise , a highly humane , but at the same time singular , man , shall I compromise myself by any stretch of my professional caution ? " say , lean back in he chair again and look calmly at we both . he appear to enjoy beyond everything the sound of he own voice . I could not wonder at that , for it be mellow and full and give great importance to every word he uttere . he listen to himself with obvious satisfaction and sometimes gently beat time to he own music with he head or reound a sentence with he hand . I be very much impress by he -- even then , before I know that he form himself on the model of a great lord who be he client and that he be generally call . " , " he pursue , " be aware of the -- I would say , desolate -- position of we young friend , offer to place she at a first - rate establishment where she education shall be complete , where she comfort shall be secure , where she reasonable want shall be anticipate , where she shall be eminently qualified to discharge she duty in that station of life unto which it have pleas -- shall I say ? -- to call she . " my heart be fill so full , both by what he say and by he affect manner of say it , that I be not able to speak , though I try . " , " he go on , " make no condition beyond express he expectation that we young friend will not at any time remove herself from the establishment in question without he knowledge and concurrence . that she will faithfully apply herself to the acquisition of those accomplishment , upon the exercise of which she will be ultimately dependent . that she will tread in the path of virtue and honour , and -- the -- a -- so forth . " I be still less able to speak than before . " now , what do we young friend say ? " proceed . " take time , take time ! I pause for she reply . but take time ! " what the destitute subject of such a offer try to say , I need not repeat . what she do say , I could more easily tell , if it be worth the telling . what she feel , and will feel to she die hour , I could never relate . this interview take place at , where I have pass ( as far as I know ) my whole life . on that day week , amply provide with all necessary , I leave it , inside the stagecoach , for . be too good to feel any emotion at parting , but I be not so good , and weep bitterly . I think that I ought to have know she better after so many year and ought to have make myself enough of a favourite with she to make she sorry then . when she give I one could part kiss upon my forehead , like a thaw - drop from the stone porch -- it be a very frosty day -- I feel so miserable and self - reproachful that I cling to she and tell she it be my fault , I know , that she could say good - bye so easily ! " no , ! " she return . " it be you misfortune ! " the coach be at the
the little lawn - gate -- we have not come out until we hear the wheel -- and thus I leave she , with a sorrowful heart . she go in before my box be lift to the coach - roof and shut the door . as long as I could see the house , I look back at it from the window through my tear . my godmother have leave all the little property she possess ; and there be to be a sale ; and a old hearth - rug with ros on it , which always see to I the first thing in the world I have ever see , be hang outside in the frost and snow . a day or two before , I have wrap the dear old doll in she own shawl and quietly lay she -- I be half asham to tell it -- in the garden - earth under the tree that shade my old window . I have no companion left but my bird , and he I carry with I in he cage . when the house be out of sight , I sit , with my bird - cage in the straw at my foot , forward on the low seat to look out of the high window , watch the frosty tree , that be like beautiful piece of spar , and the field all smooth and white with last night 's snow , and the sun , so red but yield so little heat , and the ice , dark like metal where the skater and slider have brush the snow away . there be a gentleman in the coach who sit on the opposite seat and look very large in a quantity of wrapping , but he sit gaze out of the other window and take no notice of I . I think of my dead godmother , of the night when I read to she , of she frown so fixedly and sternly in she bed , of the strange place I be go to , of the people I should find there , and what they would be like , and what they would say to I , when a voice in the coach give I a terrible start . it say , " what the de-vil be you cry for ? " I be so frightene that I lose my voice and could only answer in a whisper , " I , sir ? " for of course I know it must have be the gentleman in the quantity of wrapping , though he be still look out of he window . " yes , you , " he say , turn round . " I do not know I be cry , sir , " I falter . " but you be ! " say the gentleman . " look here ! " he come quite opposite to I from the other corner of the coach , brush one of he large furry cuff across my eye ( but without hurt I ) , and show I that it be wet . " there ! now you know you be , " he say . " do not you ? " " yes , sir , " I say . " and what be you cry for ? " say the gentleman , " do not you want to go there ? " " where , sir ? " " where ? why , wherever you be go , " say the gentleman . " I be very glad to go there , sir , " I answer . " well , then ! look glad ! " say the gentleman . I think he be very strange , or at least that what I could see of he be very strange , for he be wrap up to the ching , and he face be almost hide in a fur cap with broad fur strap at the side of he head fasten under he ching ; but I be compose again , and not afraid of he . so I tell he that I think I must have be cry because of my godmother 's death and because of be not be sorry to part with I . " ! " say the gentleman . " let she fly away in a high wind on a broomstick ! " I begin to be really afraid of he now and look at he with the greatest astonishment . but I think that he have pleasant eye , although he keep on muttering to himself in a angry manner and call name . after a little while he open he outer wrapper , which appear to I large enough to wrap up the whole coach , and put he arm down into a deep pocket in the side . " now , look here ! " he say . " in this paper , " which be nicly fold , " be a piece of the best plum -cake that can be get for money -- sugar on the outside a inch thick , like fat on mutton chop . here be a little pie ( a gem this be , both for size and quality ) , make in . and what do you suppose it be make of ? Liver of fat geese . there be a pie ! now let 's see you eat th'ey . " " thank you , sir , " I reply ; " thank you very much indeed , but I hope you will not be offend -- they be too rich for I . " " Floore again ! " say the gentleman , which I do not at all understand , and throw they both out of window . he do not speak to I any more until he get out of the
the coach a little way short of , when he advise I to be a good girl and to be studious , and shake hand with I . I must say I be relieve by he departure . we leave he at a milestone . I often walk past it afterwards , and never for a long time without think of he and half expect to meet he . but I never do ; and so , as time go on , he pass out of my mind . when the coach stop , a very neat lady look up at the window and say , " . " " no , ma 'am , . " " that be quite right , " say the lady , " . " I now understand that she introduce herself by that name , and beg 's pardon for my mistake , and point out my box at she request . under the direction of a very neat maid , they be put outside a very small green carriage ; and then , the maid , and I get inside and be drive away . " everything be ready for you , , " say , " and the scheme of you pursuit have be arrange in exact accordance with the wish of you guardian , . " " of -- do you say , ma 'am ? " " of you guardian , , " say . I be so bewilder that think the cold have be too severe for I and lent I she smell - bottle . " do you know my -- guardian , , ? " I ask after a good deal of hesitation . " not personally , , " say ; " merely through he solicitor , . and , of . a very superior gentleman , . truly eloquent indeed . some of he period quite majestic ! " I feel this to be very true but be too confused to attend to it . we speedy arrival at we destination , before I have time to recover myself , increase my confusion , and I never shall forget the uncertain and the unreal air of everything at ( 's house ) that afternoon ! but I soon become used to it . I be so adapt to the routine of before long that I seem to have be there a great while and almost to have dream rather than really liv my old life at my godmother 's . nothing could be more precise , exact , and orderly than . there be a time for everything all round the dial of the clock , and everything be do at its appointed moment . we be twelve boarder , and there be two miss Donnys , twin . it be understand that I would have to depend , by and by , on my qualification as a governess , and I be not only instruct in everything that be teach at , but be very soon engage in help to instruct other . although I be treat in every other respect like the rest of the school , this single difference be make in my case from the first . as I begin to know more , I teach more , and so in course of time I have plenty to do , which I be very fond of do because it make the dear girl fond of I . at last , whenever a new pupil come who be a little downcast and unhappy , she be so sure -- indeed I do not know why -- to make a friend of I that all new -comer be confide to my care . they say I be so gentle , but I be sure they be ! I often think of the resolution I have make on my birthday to try to be industrious , content , and true - hear and to do some good to some one and win some love if I could ; and indeed , indeed , I feel almost asham to have do so little and have win so much . I pass at six happy , quiet year . I never see in any face there , thank heaven , on my birthday , that it would have be better if I have never be bear . when the day come round , it bring I so many token of affectionate remembrance that my room be beautiful with they from 's day to . in those six year I have never be away except on visit at holiday time in the neighbourhood . after the first six month or so I have take 's advice in reference to the propriety of writing to to say that I be happy and grateful , and with she approval I have write such a letter . I have receive a formal answer acknowledge its receipt and say , " we note the contents thereof , which shall be duly communicate to we client . " after that I sometimes hear and she sister mention how regular my account be pay , and about twice a year I venture to write a similar letter . I always receive by return of post exactly the same answer in the same round hand , with the signature of and in another writing , which I suppose to be 's . it seem so curious to I to be oblige to write all this about myself ! as if this narrative be the narrative of my life ! but my little body will soon fall into the background now . six quiet year ( I find I be say it for the second time ) I have pass at , see in those around I , as it might be in a look - glass , every stage of my own growth and
and change there , when , one morning , I receive this letter . I omit the date . , 's , and our clt be abt to rece into he house , under a order of the of , a Ward of the in this cause , for whom he wish to secure a elgble compn , direct we to inform you that he will be glad of you serce in the afsd capacity . we have arrng for you be for , carriage free , pr eight o'clock coach from , on morning next , to , , , where one of we clk will be in wait to convey you to we offe as above . we be , madam , you obedt , and oh , never , never , never shall I forget the emotion this letter cause in the house ! it be so tender in they to care so much for I , it be so gracious in that father who have not forget I to have make my orphan way so smooth and easy and to have inclin so many youthful nature towards I , that I could hardly bear it . not that I would have have they less sorry -- I be afraid not ; but the pleasure of it , and the pain of it , and the pride and joy of it , and the humble regret of it be so blend that my heart see almost break while it be full of rapture . the letter give I only five day ' notice of my removal . when every minute add to the proof of love and kindness that be give I in those five day , and when at last the morning come and when they take I through all the room that I might see they for the last time , and when some cry , " , dear , say good - bye to I here at my bedside , where you first spoke so kindly to I ! " and when other ask I only to write they name , " with 's love , " and when they all surround I with they parting present and cling to I wee and cry , " what shall we do when dear , dear 's gone ! " and when I try to tell they how forbear and how good they have all been to I and how I bless and thanke they every one , what a heart I have ! and when the two grieve as much to part with I as the least among they , and when the maid say , " bless you , miss , wherever you go ! " and when the ugly lame old gardener , who I think have hardly notice I in all those year , come pante after the coach to give I a little nosegay of geranium and tell I I have be the light of he eye -- indeed the old man say so !-- what a heart I have then ! and could I help it if with all this , and the come to the little school , and the unexpected sight of the poor child outside wave they hat and bonnet to I , and of a grey - hair gentleman and lady whose daughter I have help to teach and at whose house I have visit ( who be say to be the proudest people in all that country ) , care for nothing but call out , " good - bye , . may you be very happy ! " --could I help it if I be quite bow down in the coach by myself and say " oh , I be so thankful , I be so thankful ! " many time over ! but of course I soon consider that I must not take tear where I be go after all that have be do for I . therefore , of course , I make myself sob less and persuade myself to be quiet by say very often , " , now you really must ! this will not do ! " I cheer myself up pretty well at last , though I be afraid I be longer about it than I ought to have be ; and when I have cool my eye with lavender water , it be time to watch for . I be quite persuade that we be there when we be ten mile off , and when we really be there , that we should never get there . however , when we begin to jolt upon a stone pavement , and particularly when every other conveyance seem to be run into we , and we seem to be run into every other conveyance , I begin to believe that we really be approach the end of we journey . very soon afterwards we stop . a young gentleman who have ink himself by accident address I from the pavement and say , " I be from and 's , miss , of 's . " " if you please , sir , " say I . he be very obliging , and as he hand I into a fly after superintend the removal of my box , I ask he whether there be a great fire anywhere ? for the street be so full of dense bry smoke that scarcely anything be to be see . " oh , dear no , miss , " he say . " this be a particular . " I have never hear of such a thing . " a fog , miss , " say the young gentleman . " oh , indeed ! " say I . we drive slowly through the dirtiest and darkest street that ever be see in the world ( I think ) and in such a
a distracting state of confusion that I wonder how the people keep they sense , until we pass into sudden quietude under a old gateway and drive on through a silent square until we come to a odd nook in a corner , where there be a entrance up a steep , broad flight of stair , like a entrance to a church . and there really be a churchyard outside under some cloister , for I see the gravestone from the staircase window . this be and 's . the young gentleman show I through a outer office into 's room -- there be no one in it -- and politely put a arm -chair for I by the fire . he then call my attention to a little looking - glass hang from a nail on one side of the chimney - piece . " in case you should wish to look at yourself , miss , after the journey , as you be go before the Chancellor . not that it be requisite , I be sure , " say the young gentleman civilly . " go before the Chancellor ? " I say , start for a moment . " only a matter of form , miss , " return the young gentleman . " be in court now . he leave he compliment , and would you partake of some refreshment " -- there be biscuit and a decanter of wine on a small table -- " and look over the paper , " which the young gentleman give I as he speak . he then stir the fire and leave I . everything be so strange -- the stranger from its be night in the day - time , the candle burn with a white flame , and look raw and cold -- that I read the word in the newspaper without know what they mean and find myself read the same word repeatedly . as it be of no use go on in that way , I put the paper down , take a peep at my bonnet in the glass to see if it be neat , and look at the room , which be not half light , and at the shabby , dusty table , and at the pile of writing , and at a bookcase full of the most inexpressive - look book that ever have anything to say for themselves . then I go on , think , think , think ; and the fire go on , burn , burn , burn ; and the candle go on flickering and guttering , and there be no snuffer -- until the young gentleman by and by bring a very dirty pair -- for two hour . at last come . he be not alter , but he be surprised to see how altered I be and appear quite pleased . " as you be go to be the companion of the young lady who be now in the 's private room , , " he say , " we think it well that you should be in attendance also . you will not be discompose by the , I dare say ? " " no , sir , " I say , " I do not think I shall , " really not see on consideration why I should be . so give I he arm and we go round the corner , under a colonnade , and in at a side door . and so we come , along a passage , into a comfortable sort of room where a young lady and a young gentleman be stand near a great , loud - roar fire . a screen be interpose between they and it , and they be lean on the screen , talk . they both look up when I come in , and I see in the young lady , with the fire shin upon she , such a beautiful girl ! with such rich golden hair , such soft blue eye , and such a bright , innocent , trust face ! " , " say , " this be . " she come to meet I with a smile of welcome and she hand extend , but seem to change she mind in a moment and kiss I . in short , she have such a natural , captivating , win manner that in a few minute we be sit in the window - seat , with the light of the fire upon we , talk together as free and happy as could be . what a load off my mind ! it be so delightful to know that she could confide in I and like I ! it be so good of she , and so encourage to I ! the young gentleman be she distant cousin , she tell I , and he name . he be a handsome youth with a ingenuous face and a most engaging laugh ; and after she have call he up to where we sit , he stand by we , in the light of the fire , talk gaily , like a light - hear boy . he be very young , not more than nineteen then , if quite so much , but nearly two year older than she be . they be both orphan and ( what be very unexpected and curious to I ) have never meet before that day . we all three come together for the first time in such a unusual place be a thing to talk about , and we talk about it ; and the fire , which have leave off roaring , wink it be red eye at we -- as say -- like a drowsy old Chancery lion . we converse in a low tone because a full - dress gentleman in a bag
bag wig frequently come in and out , and when he do so , we could hear a drawling sound in the distance , which he say be one of the counsel in we case address the . he tell that the would be up in five minute ; and presently we hear a bustle and a tread of foot , and say that the court have risen and he lordship be in the next room . the gentleman in the bag wig open the door almost directly and request to come in . upon that , we all go into the next room , first , with my darling -- it be so natural to I now that I can not help write it ; and there , plainly dress in black and sit in a arm -chair at a table near the fire , be he lordship , whose robe , trim with beautiful gold lace , be throw upon another chair . he give we a search look as we enter , but he manner be both courtly and kind . the gentleman in the bag wig laid bundle of papers on he lordship 's table , and he lordship silently select one and turn over the leave . " , " say the . " ? " present she , and he lordship beg she to sit down near he . that he admire she and be interested by she even I could see in a moment . it touch I that the home of such a beautiful young creature should be represent by that dry , official place . the , at he best , appear so poor a substitute for the love and pride of parent . " the in , " say the , still turn over leave , " be of . " " of , my lord , " say . " a dreary name , " say the . " but not a dreary place at present , my lord , " say . " and , " say he lordship , " be in -- " " , my lord . " " of be not marry ? " say he lordship . " he be not , my lord , " say . a pause . " yong be present ? " say the , glance towards he . bow and step forward . " ! " say the , turn over more leave . " of , my lord , " observ in a low voice , " if I may venture to remind you lordship , provide a suitable companion for -- " " for ? " I think ( but I be not quite sure ) I hear he lordship say in a equally low voice and with a smile . " for . this be the young lady . . " he lordship give I a indulgent look and acknowledge my curtsy very graciously . " be not related to any party in the cause , I think ? " " no , my lord . " lean over before it be quite say and whisper . he lordship , with he eyes upon he papers , listen , nod twice or thrice , turn over more leave , and do not look towards I again until we be go away . now retir , and with he , to where I be , near the door , leave my pet ( it be so natural to I that again I can not help it ! ) sit near the , with whom he lordship speak a little part , ask she , as she tell I afterwards , whether she have well reflecte on the propose arrangement , and if she think she would be happy under the roof of of , and why she think so ? presently he rise courteously and release she , and then he speak for a minute or two with , not seate , but stand , and altogether with more ease and less ceremony , as if he still know , though he be , how to go straight to the candour of a boy . " very well ! " say he lordship aloud . " I shall make the order . of have choose , so far as I may judge , " and this be when he look at I , " a very good companion for the young lady , and the arrangement altogether seem the best of which the circumstance admit . " he dismiss we pleasantly , and we all go out , very much oblige to he for be so affable and polite , by which he have certainly lose no dignity but see to we to have gai some . when we get under the colonnade , remember that he must go back for a moment to ask a question and leave we in the fog , with the 's carriage and servants wait for he to come out . " well ! " say . " that be over ! and where do we go next , ? " " do not you know ? " I say . " not in the least , " say he . " and do not you know , my love ? " I ask . " no ! " say she . " do not you ? " " not at all ! " say I . we look at one another , half laugh at we be like the child in the wood , when a curious little old woman in a squeezed bonnet and carry a reticule come curtsying and smile up to we with a air of great ceremony . " oh ! " say she . " the wards in ! have - ry happy , I be sure , to have the honour ! it
it be a good oman for , and hope , and beauty when they find themselves in this place , and do not know what be to come of it . " " ! " whisper , not think she could hear he . " right ! mad , young gentleman , " she return so quickly that he be quite abashed . " I be a ward myself . I be not mad at that time , " curtsy low and smile between every little sentence . " I have youth and hope . I believe , beauty . it matter very little now . neither of the three serve or save I . I have the honour to attend court regularly . with my document . I expect a judgment . shortly . on the day of . I have discover that the sixth seal mention in the Revelation be the great seal . it have be open a long time ! pray accept my blessing . " as be a little frightened , I say , to humour the poor old lady , that we be much oblige to she . " ye - es ! " she say mincingly . " I imagine so . and here be . with this document ! how do you honourable worship do ? " " quite well , quite well ! now do not be troublesome , that be a good soul ! " say , lead the way back . " by no means , " say the poor old lady , keep up with and I . " anything but troublesome . I shall confer estate on both -- which be not be troublesome , I trust ? I expect a judgment . shortly . on the day of . this be a good oman for you . accept my blessing ! " she stop at the bottom of the steep , broad flight of stair ; but we look back as we go up , and she be still there , say , still with a curtsy and a smile between every little sentence , " . and hope . and beauty . and . and ! ! pray accept my blessing ! " we be to pass the night , tell we when we arrive in he room , at 's ; and then he turn to I and say he take it for grant I know who be . " I really do not , sir , " I return . " perhaps -- or -- " but no , they know nothing whatever about . " in - deed ! , " say , stand with he back to the fire and cast he eye over the dusty hearth - rug as if it be 's biography , " be a lady of very remarkable strength of character who devote herself entirely to the public . she have devote herself to a extensive variety of public subject at various time and be at present ( until something else attract she ) devote to the subject of , with a view to the general cultivation of the coffee berry -- and the native -- and the happy settlement , on the bank of the african rivers , of we superabundant home population . , who be desirous to aid any work that be consider likely to be a good work and who be much seek after by philanthropist , have , I believe , a very high opinion of . " , adjust he cravat , then look at we . " and , ? " suggest . " ah ! , " say , " be -- a -- I do not know that I can describe he to you better than by say that he be the husband of . " " a nonentity , sir ? " say with a droll look . " I do not say that , " return gravely . " I can not say that , indeed , for I know nothing whatever of . I never , to my knowledge , have the pleasure of see . he may be a very superior man , but he be , so to speak , merge -- merge -- in the more shining qualitie of he wife . " proceed to tell we that as the road to would have be very long , dark , and tedious on such a evening , and as we have be travel already , have himself propose this arrangement . a carriage would be at 's to convey we out of town early in the forenoon of to -morrow . he then ring a little bell , and the young gentleman come in . Addresse he by the name of , inquire whether 's box and the rest of the baggage have be " send round . " say yes , they have be send round , and a coach be wait to take we round too as soon as we please . " then it only remain , " say , shak hand with we , " for I to express my lively satisfaction in ( good day , ! ) the arrangement this day conclude and my ( good - bye to you , ! ) lively hope that it will conduce to the happiness , the ( glad to have have the honour of make you acquaintance , ! ) welfare , the advantage in all point of view , of all concerned ! Guppy , see the party safely there . " " where be ' there , ' ? " say as we go downstairs . " no distance , " say ; " round in , you know . " " I can not say I know where it be , for I come from Winchester and be strange in . " " only round
round the corner , " say . " we just twist up , and cut along , and there we be in four minute ' time , as near as a toucher . this be about a particular now , be not it , miss ? " he seem quite delighted with it on my account . " the fog be very dense indeed ! " say I . " not that it affect you , though , I be sure , " say , put up the step . " on the contrary , it seem to do you good , miss , judge from you appearance . " I know he mean well in pay I this compliment , so I laugh at myself for blushing at it when he have shut the door and get upon the box ; and we all three laugh and chat about we inexperience and the strangeness of until we turn up under a archway to we destination -- a narrow street of high house like a oblong cistern to hold the fog . there be a confused little crowd of people , principally child , gather about the house at which we stop , which have a tarnished brass plate on the door with the inscription JELLYBY . " do not be frightene ! " say , look in at the coach - window . " one of the young Jellybys be and get he head through the area railing ! " " oh , poor child , " say I ; " let I out , if you please ! " " pray be careful of yourself , miss . the young Jellybys be always up to something , " say . I make my way to the poor child , who be one of the dirtiest little unfortunate I ever see , and find he very hot and frightened and cry loudly , fix by the neck between two iron railing , while a milkman and a beadle , with the kindest intention possible , be endeavour to drag he back by the leg , under a general impression that he skull be compressible by those mean . as I find ( after pacify he ) that he be a little boy with a naturally large head , I think that perhaps where he head could go , he body could follow , and mention that the best mode of extrication might be to push he forward . this be so favourably receive by the milkman and beadle that he would immediately have be push into the area if I have not hold he pinafore while and run down through the kitchen to catch he when he should be release . at last he be happily get down without any accident , and then he begin to beat Guppy with a hoop - stick in quite a frantic manner . nobody have appear belong to the house except a person in patten , who have be pok at the child from below with a broom ; I do not know with what object , and I do not think she do . I therefore suppose that . be not at home , and be quite surprised when the person appear in the passage without the patten , and go up to the back room on the first floor before and I , announce we as , " they two young lady , ! " we pass several more child on the way up , whom it be difficult to avoid tread on in the dark ; and as we come into 's presence , one of the poor little thing fell downstair -- down a whole flight ( as it sound to I ) , with a great noise . , whose face reflect none of the uneasiness which we could not help show in we own face as the dear child 's head record its passage with a bump on every stair -- afterwards say he count seven , besides one for the landing -- receive we with perfect equanimity . she be a pretty , very diminutive , plump woman of from forty to fifty , with handsome eyes , though they have a curiious habit of seem to look a long way off . as if -- I be quote again -- they could see nothing nearer than ! " I be very glad indeed , " say . in a agreeable voice , " to have the pleasure of receive you . I have a great respect for , and no one in whom he be interested can be a object of indifference to I . " we express we acknowledgment and sit down behind the door , where there be a lame invalid of a sofa . have very good hair but be too much occupy with she african duty to brush it . the shawl in which she have be loosely muff drop onto she chair when she advanc to we ; and as she turn to resume she seat , we could not help notice that she dress do not nearly meet up the back and that the open space be rail across with a lattice - work of stay - lace -- like a summer - house . the room , which be strew with paper and nearly fill by a great writing - table cover with similar litter , be , I must say , not only very untidy but very dirty . we be oblige to take notice of that with we sense of sight , even while , with we sense of hearing , we follow the poor child who have tumble downstairs : I think into the back kitchen , where somebody seem to stifle he . but what principally struck we be a jaded and unhealthy - look though by no means plain girl at the writing
writing - table , who sit bite the feather of she pen and stare at we . I suppose nobody ever be in such a state of ink . and from she tumble hair to she pretty foot , which be disfigure with frayed and break satin slipper trodden down at heel , she really seem to have no article of dress upon she , from a pin upward , that be in its proper condition or its right place . " you find I , my dear , " say , snuff the two great office candles in tin candlestick , which make the room taste strongly of hot tallow ( the fire have go out , and there be nothing in the grate but ash , a bundle of wood , and a poker ) , " you find I , my dear , as usual , very busy ; but that you will excuse . the african project at present employ my whole time . it involve I in correspondence with public body and with private individual anxious for the welfare of they species all over the country . I be happy to say it be advancing . we hope by this time next year to have from a hundred and fifty to two hundred healthy family cultivating coffee and educate the native of - , on the left bank of the . " as say nothing , but look at I , I say it must be very gratifying . " it be gratify , " say . " it involve the devotion of all my energie , such as they be ; but that be nothing , so that it succeed ; and I be more confident of success every day . do you know , , I almost wonder that you never turn you thought to . " this application of the subject be really so unexpected to I that I be quite at a loss how to receive it . I hint that the climate -- " the finest climate in the world ! " say . " indeed , ma 'am ? " " certainly . with precaution , " say . " you may go into , without precaution , and be run over . you may go into , with precaution , and never be run over . just so with . " I say , " no doubt . " I mean as to . " if you would like , " say , put a number of papers towards we , " to look over some remark on that head , and on the general subject , which have be extensively circulate , while I finish a letter I be now dictat to my eldest daughter , who be my amanuensis -- " the girl at the table leave off bite she pen and make a return to we recognition , which be half bashful and half sulky . " -- I shall then have finish for the present , " proceed with a sweet smile , " through my work be never do . where be you , ? " " ' present she compliment to , and beg -- ' " say . " ' and beg , ' " say , dictat , " 'to inform he , in reference to he letter of inquiry on the african project --' no , ! not on my account ! " ( so self - name ) be the unfortunate child who have fall downstairs , who now interrupt the correspondence by present himself , with a strip of plaster on he forehead , to exhibit he wounded knee , in which and I do not know which to pity most -- the bruise or the dirt . merely add , with the serene composure with which she say everything , " go along , you naughty ! " and fix she fine eye on again . however , as she at once proceed with she dictation , and as I interrupt nothing by do it , I venture quietly to stop poor Peepy as he be go out and to take he up to nurse . he look very much astonished at it and at 's kiss he , but soon fall fast asleep in my arm , sobb at longer and longer interval , until he be quiet . I be so occupied with Peepy that I lose the letter in detail , though I derive such a general impression from it of the momentous importance of , and the utter insignificance of all other place and thing , that I feel quite asham to have think so little about it . " six o'clock ! " say . " and we dinner hour be nominally ( for we dine at all hour ) five ! Caddy , show and they room . you will like to make some change , perhaps ? you will excuse I , I know , be so much occupi . oh , that very bad child ! pray put he down , ! " I beg permission to retain he , truly say that he be not at all troublesome , and carry he upstairs and lay he on my bed . and I have two upper room with a door of communication between . they be excessively bare and disorderly , and the curtain to my window be fasten up with a fork . " you would like some hot water , would not you ? " say , look round for a jug with a handle to it , but look in vain . " if it be not be troublesome , " say we . " oh , it be not the trouble , " return ; " the question be , if there be any . " the evening be so very cold and the room
room have such a marshy smell that I must confess it be a little miserable , and be half cry . we soon laugh , however , and be busily unpack when come back to say that she be sorry there be no hot water , but they could not find the kettle , and the boiler be out of order . we beg she not to mention it and make all the haste we could to get down to the fire again . but all the little child have come up to the landing outside to look at the phenomenon of lie on my bed , and we attention be distract by the constant apparition of nos and finger in situation of danger between the hinge of the door . it be impossible to shut the door of either room , for my lock , with no knob to it , look as if it want to be wound up ; and though the handle of 's go round and round with the greatest smoothness , it be attend with no effect whatever on the door . therefore I propose to the child that they should come in and be very good at my table , and I would tell they the story of while I dress ; which they do , and be as quiet as mouse , include , who awoke opportunely before the appearance of the wolf . when we go downstairs we find a mug with " a from " on it light up in the staircase window with a float wick , and a young woman , with a swell face bound up in a flannel bandage blow the fire of the draw - room ( now connect by a open door with 's room ) and chok dreadfully . it smoke to that degree , in short , that we all sit coughing and cry with the window open for half a hour , during which , with the same sweetness of temper , direct letter about . she be so employ was , I must say , a great relief to I , for tell we that he have wash he hand in a pie - dish and that they have find the kettle on he dressing - table , and he make laugh so that they make I laugh in the most ridiculous manner . after seven o'clock we go down to dinner , carefully , by 's advice , for the stair - carpet , besides be very deficient in stair - wire , be so torn as to be absolute trap . we have a fine cod -fish , a piece of roast beef , a dish of cutlet , and a pudding ; a excellent dinner , if it have have any cooking to speak of , but it be almost raw . the young woman with the flannel bandage wait , and drop everything on the table wherever it happen to go , and never move it again until she put it on the stair . the person I have see in patten , who I suppose to have be the cook , frequently come and skirmish with she at the door , and there appear to be ill will between they . all through dinner -- which be long , in consequence of such accident as the dish of potatoe be mislay in the coal skuttle and the handle of the corkscrew come off and strike the young woman in the ching -- . preserve the evenness of she disposition . she tell we a great deal that be interesting about - and the native , and receive so many letter that , who sit by she , see four envelope in the gravy at once . some of the letter be proceeding of lady 's committee or resolution of lady ' meeting , which she read to we ; other be application from people excit in various way about the cultivation of coffee , and native ; other require answer , and these she send she eldest daughter from the table three or four time to write . she be full of business and undoubtedly be , as she have tell we , devote to the cause . I be a little curious to know who a mild bald gentleman in spectacle be , who drop into a vacant chair ( there be no top or bottom in particular ) after the fish be take away and seem passively to submit himself to - but not to be actively interested in that settlement . as he never speak a word , he might have be a native but for he complexion . it be not until we leave the table and he remain alone with that the possibility of he be ever enter my head . but he be ; and a loquacious young man call , with large shining knob for temples and he hair all brush to the back of he head , who come in the evening , and tell he be a philanthropist , also inform she that he call the matrimonial alliance of with the union of mind and matter . this young man , besides have a great deal to say for himself about and a project of he for teach the coffee colonist to teach the native to turn piano - forte leg and establish a export trade , delight in draw . Jellyby out by save , " I believe now , . Jellyby , you have receive as many as from one hundred and fifty to two hundred letter respect in a single day , have you not ? " or , " if my memory do not deceive I , , you once mention that you have send off five thousand circular from one post-office at one time ? " --always repeat 's answer to we
we like a interpreter . during the whole evening , sit in a corner with he head against the wall as if he be subject to low spirit . it seem that he have several time open he mouth when alone with after dinner , as if he have something on he mind , but have always shut it again , to 's extreme confusion , without say anything . , sit in quite a nest of waste paper , drank coffee all the evening and dictate at interval to she eldest daughter . she also hold a discussion with , of which the subject seem to be -- if I understand it -- the brotherhood of humanity , and give utterance to some beautiful sentiment . I be not so attentive a auditor as I might have wish to be , however , for and the other child come fulocking about and I in a corner of the drawing - room to ask for another story ; so we sit down among they and tell they in whisper " Puss in " and I do not know what else until , accidentally remember they , send they to bed . as cry for I to take he to bed , I carry he upstairs , where the young woman with the flannel bandage charge into the midst of the little family like a dragon and overturn they into crib . after that I occupy myself in make we room a little tidy and in coax a very cross fire that have be light to burn , which at last it do , quite brightly . on my return downstairs , I feel that . look down upon I rather for be so frivolous , and I be sorry for it , though at the same time I know that I have no higher pretension . it be nearly midnight before we find a opportunity of go to bed , and even then we leave among she papers drink coffee and bite the feather of she pen . " what a strange house ! " say when we get upstairs . " how curious of my cousin to send we here ! " " my love , " say I , " it quite confuse I . I want to understand it , and I can not understand it at all . " " what ? " ask with she pretty smile . " all this , my dear , " say I . " it must be very good of . to take such pain about a scheme for the benefit of native -- and yet -- and the housekeeping ! " laugh and put she arm about my neck as I stand look at the fire , and tell I I be a quiet , dear , good creature and have win she heart . " you be so thoughtful , , " she say , " and yet so cheerful ! and you do so much , so unpretendingly ! you would make a home out of even this house . " my simple darling ! she be quite unconscious that she only praise herself and that it be in the goodness of she own heart that she make so much of I ! " may I ask you a question ? " say I when we have sit before the fire a little while . " five hundred , " say . " you cousin , . I owe so much to he . would you mind describe he to I ? " Shak she golden hair , turn she eye upon I with such laugh wonder that I be full of too , partly at she beauty , partly at she surprise . " ! " she cry . " my dear ! " " you want a description of my cousin ? " " my dear , I never see he . " " and I never see he ! " return . well , to be sure ! no , she have never see he . yoing as she be when she mama di , she remember how the tear would come into she eye when she speak of he and of the noble generosity of he character , which she have say be to be trust above all earthly thing ; and trust it . she cousin have write to she a few month ago --" a plain , honest letter , " say -- propose the arrangement we be now to enter on and tell she that " in time it might heal some of the wound make by the miserable Chancery suit . " she have reply , gratefully accept he proposal . have receive a similar letter and have make a similar response . he have see once , but only once , five year ago , at school . he have tell , when they be lean on the screen before the fire where I find they , that he recollect he as " a bluff , rosy fellow . " this be the utmost description could give I . it set I think so that when be asleep , I still remain before the fire , wonder and wonder about , and wonder and wonder that yesterday morning should seem so long ago . I do not know where my thought have wander when they be recall by a tap at the door . I open it softly and find Jellyby shiver there with a broken candle in a broken candlestick in one hand and a egg -cup in the other . " good night ! " she say very sulkily . " good night ! " say I . " may I come in ? " she shortly and unexpectedly ask I in the same sulky way . " certainly , " say I . " do
do not wake . " she would not sit down , but stand by the fire dip she inky middle finger in the egg -cup , which contain vinegar , and smear it over the ink stain on she face , frown the whole time and look very gloomy . " I wish be dead ! " she say on a sudden . I be go to remonstrate . " I do ! " she say " do not talk to I , . I hate it and detest it . it be a beast ! " I tell she she be tired , and I be sorry . I put my hand upon she head , and touch she forehead , and say it be hot now but would be cool to -morrow . she still stand pouting and frown at I , but presently put down she egg - cup and turn softly towards the bed where lay . " she be very pretty ! " she say with the same knit brow and in the same uncivil manner . I assent with a smile . " a orphan . be not she ? " " yes . " " but know a quantity , I suppose ? can dance , and play music , and s ? she can talk , I suppose , and do geography , and glob , and needlework , and everything ? " " no doubt , " say I . " I can not , " she return . " I can not do anything hardly , except write . I be always write for Ma . I wonder you two be not asham of yourselves to come in this afternoon and see I able to do nothing else . it be like you ill nature . yet you think yourselves very fine , I dare say ! " I could see that the poor girl be near cry , and I resume my chair without speak and look at she ( I hope ) as mildly as I feel towards she . " it be disgraceful , " she say . " you know it be . the whole house be disgraceful . the child be disgraceful . I be disgraceful . 's miserable , and no wonder ! Priscilla drink -- she be always drink . it be a great shame and a great story of you if you say you do not smell she to - day . it be as bad as a public - house , wait at dinner ; you know it be ! " " my dear , I do not know it , " say I . " you do , " she say very shortly . " you sha not say you do not . you do ! " " oh , my dear ! " say I . " if you will not let I speak -- " " you be speak now . you know you be . do not tell story , . " " my dear , " say I , " as long as you will not hear I out --" " I do not want to hear you out . " " oh , yes , I think you do , " say I , " because that would be so very unreasonable . I do not know what you tell I because the servant do not come near I at dinner ; but I do not doubt what you tell I , and I be sorry to hear it . " " you need not make a merit of that , " say she . " no , my dear , " say I . " that would be very foolish . " she be still stand by the bed , and now stoop down ( but still with the same discontented face ) and kiss . that do , she come softly back and stand by the side of my chair . she bosom be heaive in a distressful manner that I greatly pitie , but I think it better not to speak . " I wish I be dead ! " she break out . " I wish we be all dead . it would be a great deal better for we . " in a moment afterwards , she knelt on the ground at my side , hide she face in my dress , passionately beg my pardon , and wept . I comforte she and would have raise she , but she cry no , no ; she want to stay there ! " you use to teach girl , " she say , " if you could only have teach I , I could have lear not from you ! I be so very miserable , and I like you so much ! " I could not persuade she to sit by I or to do anything but move a rag stool to where she be knee , and take that , and still hold my dress in the same manner . by degree the poor tired girl fell asleep , and then I contrive to raise she head so that it should rest on my lap , and to cover we both with shawl . the fire go out , and all night long she slumber thus before the ashy grate . at first I be painfully awake and vainly try to lose myself , with my eye close , among the scene of the day . at length , by slow degree , they become indistinct and mingled . I begin to lose the identity of the sleeper rest on I . now it be , now one of my old read friend from whom I could not believe I have so recently part . now it be the little mad woman wear out with curtsying and smile ,
, now some one in authority at . Lastly , it be no one , and I be no one . the purblind day be feebly strugg with the fog when I open my eye to encounter those of a dirty - face little spectre fix upon I . have scal he crib , and crept down in he bed - gown and cap , and be so cold that he tooth be chatter as if he have cut they all . a adventure although the morning be raw , and although the fog still seem heavy -- I say seem , for the window be so encrust with dirt that they would have make midsummer sunshine dim -- I be sufficiently forewarn of the discomfort within door at that early hour and sufficiently curious about to think it a good idea on the part of when she propose that we should go out for a walk . " ma will not be down for ever so long , " she say , " and then it be a chance if breakfast 's ready for a hour afterwards , they dawdle so . as to , he get what he can and go to the office . he never have what you would call a regular breakfast . leave he out the loaf and some milk , when there be any , overnight . sometimes there be not any milk , and sometimes the cat drink it . but I be afraid you must be tired , , and perhaps you would rather go to bed . " " I be not at all tired , my dear , " say I , " and would much prefer to go out . " " if you be sure you would , " return , " I will get my thing on . " say she would go too , and be soon astir . I make a proposal to , in default of be able to do anything better for he , that he should let I wash he and afterwards lay he down on my bed again . to this he submit with the best grace possible , star at I during the whole operation as if he never have been , and never could again be , so astonished in he life -- look very miserable also , certainly , but make no complaint , and go snugly to sleep as soon as it be over . at first I be in two minds about take such a liberty , but I soon reflect that nobody in the house be likely to notice it . what with the bustle of dispatche and the bustle of get myself ready and help , I be soon quite in a glow . we find try to warm herself at the fire in the writing - room , which be then light with a smutty parlour candlestick , throw the candle in to make it burn better . everything be just as we have leave it last night and be evidently intend to remain so . below - stair the dinner - cloth have not be take away , but have be leave ready for breakfast . Crumb , dust , and waste - paper be all over the house . some pewter pot and a milk - can hang on the area railing ; the door stand open ; and we meet the cook round the corner come out of a public - house , wip she mouth . she mention , as she pass we , that she have be to see what o'clock it be . but before we meet the cook , we meet , who be dance up and down to warm he foot . he be agreeably surprised to see we stirr so soon and say he would gladly share we walk . so he take care of , and and I go first . I may mention that have relapse into she sulky manner and that I really should not have think she like I much unless she have tell I so . " where would you wish to go ? " she ask . " anywhere , my dear , " I reply . " anywhere 's nowhere , " say , stop perversely . " let we go somewhere at any rate , " say I . she then walk I on very fast . " I do not care ! " she say . " now , you be my witness , , I say I do not care -- but if he be to come to we house with he great , shining , lumpy forehead night after night till he be as old as , I would not have anything to say to he . such Ass as he and make of themselves ! " " my dear ! " I remonstrate , in allusion to the epithet and the vigorous emphasis set upon it . " you duty as a child -- " " oh ! do not talk of duty as a child , ; where 's ma 's duty as a parent ? all make over to the public and , I suppose ! then let the public and show duty as a child ; it be much more they affair than mine . you be shocked , I dare say ! very well , so be I shocke too ; so we be both shocked , and there be a end of it ! " she walk I on faster yet . " but for all that , I say again , he may come , and come , and come , and I will not have anything to say to he . I can not bear he . if there be any stuff in the world that I hate and detest , it be the stuff
stuff he and Ma talk . I wonder the very paving - stone opposite we house can have the patience to stay there and be a witness of such inconsistency and contradiction as all that sound nonsense , and 's management ! " I could not but understand she to refer to , the young gentleman who have appear after dinner yesterday . I be save the disagreeable necessity of pursue the subject by and come up at a round pace , laugh and ask we if we mean to run a race . thus interrupt , become silent and walk moodily on at my side while I admire the long succession and variety of street , the quantity of people already go to and , the number of vehicle pass and repasse , the busy preparation in the setting forth of shop window and the sweeping out of shop , and the extraordinary creature in rag secretly grope among the swept - out rubbish for pin and other refuse . " so , cousin , " say the cheerful voice of to behind I . " we be never to get out of ! we have come by another way to we place of meeting yesterday , and -- by the Great seal , here be the old lady again ! " truly , there she be , immediately in front of we , curtsy , and smile , and say with she yesterday 's air of patronage , " the wards in ! have - ry happy , I be sure ! " " you be out early , ma 'am , " say I as she curtsy to I . " ye - ! I usually walk here early . before the court sits . it be retire . I collect my thought here for the business of the day , " say the old lady mincingly . " the business of the day require a great deal of thought . Chancery justice be so have -ry difficult to follow . " " who be this , ? " whisper , draw my arm tighter through she own . the little old lady 's hearing be remarkably quick . she answer for herself directly . " a suitor , my child . at you service . I have the honour to attend court regularly . with my document . have I the pleasure of address another of the youthful party in ? " say the old lady , recovere herself , with she head on one side , from a very low curtsy . , anxious to ato for he thoughtlessness of yesterday , good - naturedly explain that be not connect with the suit . " ! " say the old lady . " she do not expect a judgment ? she will still grow old . but not so old . oh , dear , no ! this be the garden of 's . I call it my garden . it be quite a bower in the summer - time . where the bird se melodiously . I pass the greater part of the long vacation here . in contemplation . you find the long vacation exceedingly long , do not you ? " we say yes , as she seem to expect we to say so . " when the leave be fall from the tree and there be no more flower in bloom to make up into nosegay for the 's court , " say the old lady , " the vacation be fulfil and the sixth seal , mention in the Revelation , again prevail . pray come and see my lodging . it will be a good oman for I . , and hope , and beauty be very seldom there . it be a long , long time since I have a visit from either . " she have take my hand , and lead I and away , beckon and to come too . I do not know how to excuse myself and look to for aid . as he be half amused and half curious and all in doubt how to get rid of the old lady without offence , she continue to lead we away , and he and continue to follow , we strange conductress inform we all the time , with much smiling condescension , that she liv close by . it be quite true , as it soon appeare . she live so close by that we have not time to have do humoure she for a few moment before she be at home . Slipp we out at a little side gate , the old lady stop most unexpectedly in a narrow back street , part of some court and lane immediately outside the wall of the inn , and say , " this be my lodging . pray walk up ! " she have stop at a shop over which be write , and . also , in long thing letter , , in . in one part of the window be a picture of a red paper mill at which a cart be unload a quantity of sack of old rag . in another be the inscription . in another , - . in another , . in another , waste - paper Bing . in another , Lady ' and 's . everything seem to be buy and nothing to be sell there . in all part of the window be quantity of dirty bottle -- black bottle , medicine bottle , ginger - beer and soda - water bottle , pickle bottle , wine bottle , ink bottle ; I be remind by mention the latter that the shop have in several little particular the air of be in a legal neighbourhood and of being , as it be , a dirty hanger - on and disown relation of the
the law . there be a great many ink bottle . there be a little tottering bench of shabby old volume outside the door , label " , all at 9 . " some of the inscription I have enumerate be write in law - hand , like the papers I have see in and 's office and the letter I have so long receive from the firm . among they be one , in the same writing , have nothing to do with the business of the shop , but announce that a respectable man a forty - five want engrossing or copy to execute with neatness and dispatch : address to , care of , within . there be several second - hand bag , blue and red , hang up . a little way within the shop - door lay heap of old crackled parchment scroll and discoloure and dog 's - eare law - papers . I could have fancie that all the rusty key , of which there must have be hundred huddle together as old iron , have once belong to door of room or strong chest in lawyer 's offix . the litter of rag tumble partly into and partly out of a one - leg wooden scale , hang without any counterpoise from a beam , might have be counsellor ' band and gowns tear up . one have only to fancy , as whisper to and I while we all stood look in , that yonder bone in a corner , pile together and pick very clean , be the bone of client , to make the picture complete . as it be still foggy and dark , and as the shop be blind besides by the wall of 's , intercept the light within a couple of yard , we should not have see so much but for a lighted lantern that a old man in spectacle and a hairy cap be carry about in the shop . turn towards the door , he now catch sight of we . he be short , cadaverous , and wither , with he head sink sideway between he shoulders and the breath issue in visible smoke from he mouth as if he be on fire within . he throat , ching , and eyebrow be so frosted with white hair and so gnarl with vein and pucker skin that he look from he breast upward like some old root in a fall of snow . " hi , hi ! " say the old man , come to the door . " have you anything to sell ? " we naturally draw back and glance at we conductress , who have be try to open the house - door with a key she have take from she pocket , and to whom now say that as we have have the pleasure of see where she liv , we would leave she , be press for time . but she be not to be so easily leave . she become so fantastically and pressingly earnest in she entreaty that we would walk up and see she apartment for a instant , and be so bent , in she harmless way , on lead I in , as part of the good oman she desire , that I ( whatever the other might do ) see nothing for it but to comply . I suppose we be all more or less curiious ; at any rate , when the old man add he persuasion to hers and say , " aye , aye ! please she ! it will not take a minute ! come in , come in ! come in through the shop if t'other door 's out of order ! " we all go in , stimulate by 's laugh encouragement and rely on he protection . " my landlord , , " say the little old lady , condescende to he from she lofty station as she present he to we . " he be call among the neighbour the . he shop be call the court of . he be a very eccentric person . he be very odd . oh , I assure you he be very odd ! " she shook she head a great many time and tap she forehead with she finger to express to we that we must have the goodness to excuse he , " for he be a little -- you know -- m ! " say the old lady with great stateliness . the old man overheard , and laugh . " it be true enough , " he say , go before we with the lantern , " that they call I the and call my shop Chancery . and why do you think they call I the and my shop Chancery ? " " I do not know , I be sure ! " say rather carelessly . " you see , " say the old man , stop and turn round , " they -- hi ! here be lovely hair ! I have get three sack of lady 's hair below , but none so beautiful and fine as this . what colour , and what texture ! " " that will do , my good friend ! " say , strongly disapprove of he have draw one of 's tress through he yellow hand . " you can admire as the rest of we do without take that liberty . " the old man dart at he a sudden look which even call my attention from , who , start and blush , be so remarkably beautiful that she seem to fix the wander attention of the little old lady herself . but as interpose and laughingly say she could only feel proud of such genuine admiration , shrink into he former self as suddenly as he
he have leape out of it . " you see , I have so many thing here , " he resume , hold up the lantern , " of so many kind , and all as the neighbour think ( but they know nothing ) , waste away and go to rack and ruin , that that be why they have give I and my place a christening . and I have so many old parchmentse and papers in my stock . and I have a liking for rust and must and cobweb . and all be fish that come to my net . and I can not abear to part with anything I once lay hold of ( or so my neighbour think , but what do they know ? ) or to alter anything , or to have any sweeping , nor scouring , nor cleaning , nor repairing go on about I . that be the way I have get the ill name of . I do not mind . I go to see my noble and learn brother pretty well every day , when he sit in the Inn . he do not notice I , but I notice he . there be no great odd betwixt we . we both grub on in a muddle . hi , ! " a large grey cat leape from some neighbour shelf on he shoulder and start we all . " hi ! show th'ey how you scratch . hi ! , my lady ! " say she master . the cat leape down and rip at a bundle of rag with she tigerish claw , with a sound that it set my tooth on edge to hear . " she would do as much for any one I be to set she on , " say the old man . " I deal in cat - skins among other general matter , and hers be offer to I . it be a very fine skin , as you may see , but I do not have it stripp off ! that war not like Chancery practice though , say you ! " he have by this time lead we across the shop , and now open a door in the back part of it , lead to the house -entry . as he stand with he hand upon the lock , the little old lady graciously observe to he before pass out , " that will do , . you mean well , but be tiresome . my young friend be press for time . I have none to spare myself , have to attend court very soon . my young friend be the wards in . " " ! " say the old man with a start . " and . the great suit , , " return he lodger . " hi ! " exclaim the old man in a tone of thoughtful amazement and with a wider stare than before . " think of it ! " he seem so rapt all in a moment and look so curiously at we that say , " why , you appear to trouble yourself a good deal about the cause before you noble and learn brother , the other ! " " yes , " say the old man abstractedly . " sure ! you name now will be -- " " . " " , " he repeat , slowly check off that name upon he forefinger ; and each of the other he go on to mention upon a separate finger . " yes . there be the name of , and the name of , and the name of , too , I think . " " he know as much of the cause as the real salaried ! " say , quite astonished , to and I . " aye ! " say the old man , come slowly out of he abstraction . " yes ! --you will excuse I , be relate ; but he be never know about court by any other name , and be as well know there as -- she be now , " nodd slightly at he lodger . " be often in here . he get into a restless habit of stroll about when the cause be on , or expect , talk to the little shopkeeper and tell th'ey to keep out of , whatever they do . ' for , ' say he , ' it be be ground to bit in a slow mill ; it be be roast at a slow fire ; it be be sting to death by single be ; it be be drown by drop ; it be go mad by grain . ' he be as near make away with himself , just where the young lady stand , as near could be . " we listen with horror . " he come in at the door , " say the old man , slowly point a imaginary track along the shop , " on the day he do it -- the whole neighbourhood have say for month before that he would do it , of a certainty sooner or later -- he come in at the door that day , and walk along there , and sit himself on a bench that stand there , and ask I ( you will judge I be a mortal sight younger then ) to fetch he a pint of wine . ' for , ' say he , ' Krook , I be much depressed ; my cause be on again , and I think I be nearer judgment than I ever be . ' I have not a mind to leave he alone ; and I persuade he to go to the tavern over the way there , t'other side my lane ( I mean ) ;
; and I follow and look in at the window , and see he , comfortable as I think , in the arm -chair by the fire , and company with he . I have not hardly get back here when I hear a shot go echo and ratt right away into the inn . I run out -- neighbours run out -- twenty of we cry at once , ' ! ' " the old man stop , look hard at we , look down into the lantern , blow the light out , and shut the lantern up . " we be right , I need not tell the present hearer . hi ! to be sure , how the neighbourhood pour into court that afternoon while the cause be on ! how my noble and learn brother , and all the rest of th'ey , grub and muddle away as usual and try to look as if they have not hear a word of the last fact in the case or as if they have -- oh , dear I !-- nothing at all to do with it if they have hear of it by any chance ! " 's colour have entirely leave she , and be scarcely less pale . could I wonder , judge even from my emotion , and I be no party in the suit , that to heart so untried and fresh it be a shock to come into the inheritance of a protract misery , attend in the mind of many people with such dreadful recollection . I have another uneasiness , in the application of the painful story to the poor half - wit creature who have bring we there ; but , to my surprise , she see perfectly unconscious of that and only lead the way upstairs again , inform we with the toleration of a superior creature for the infirmity of a common mortal that she landlord be " a little m , you know ! " she live at the top of the house , in a pretty large room , from which she have a glimpse of 's . this seem to have be she principal inducement , originally , for take up she residence there . she could look at it , she say , in the night , especially in the moonshine . she room be clean , but very , very bare . I notice the scantiest necessary in the way of furniture ; a few old print from book , of Chancellor and barrister , wafer against the wall ; and some half - dozen reticle and work - bag , " contain document , " as she inform we . there be neither coal nor ash in the grate , and I see no article of clothing anywhere , nor any kind of food . upon a shelf in a open cupboard be a plate or two , a cup or two , and so forth , but all dry and empty . there be a more affecting mean in she pinched appearance , I think as I look round , than I have understood before . " Extremely honoure , I be sure , " say we poor hostess with the greatest suavity , " by this visit from the wards in . and very much indebt for the oman . it be a retired situation . consider . I be limit as to situation . in consequence of the necessity of attend on the Chancellor . I have live here many year . I pass my day in court , my evening and my night here . I find the night long , for I sleep but little and think much . that be , of course , unavoidable , be in . I be sorry I can not offer chocolate . I expect a judgment shortly and shall then place my establishment on a superior footing . at present , I do not mind confess to the wards in ( in strict confidence ) that I sometimes find it difficult to keep up a genteel appearance . I have feel the cold here . I have feel something sharper than cold . it matter very little . pray excuse the introduction of such mean topic . " she partly draw aside the curtain of the long , low garret window and call we attention to a number of bird - cage hang there , some contain several bird . there be lark , linnet , and goldfinch -- I should think at least twenty . " I begin to keep the little creature , " she say , " with a object that the wards will readily comprehend . with the intention of restore they to liberty . when my judgament should be give . ye - es ! they die in prison , though . they life , poor silly thing , be so short in comparison with Chancery proceedings that , one by one , the whole collection have die over and over again . I doubt , do you know , whether one of these , though they be all young , will live to be free ! have - ry mortifying , be it not ? " although she sometimes ask a question , she never seem to expect a reply , but ramble on as if she be in the habit of do so when no one but herself be present . " indeed , " she pursue , " I positively doubt sometimes , I do assure you , whether while matter be still unsettled , and the sixth or great still prevail , I may not one day be find lying stark and senseless here , as I have find so many bird ! " , answer what he see in 's compassionate eye , take the opportunity of lay
lay some money , softly and unobserved , on the chimney - piece . we all draw nearer to the cage , feign to examine the bird . " I can not allow they to s much , " say the little old lady , " for ( you will think this curiious ) I find my mind confuse by the idea that they be singe while I be follow the argument in court . and my mind require to be so very clear , you know ! another time , I will tell you they name . not at present . on a day of such good oman , they shall se as much as they like . in honour of , " a smile and curtsy , " hope , " a smile and curtsy , " and beauty , " a smile and curtsy . " there ! we will let in the full light . " the bird begin to stir and chirp . " I can not admit the air freely , " say the little old lady -- the room be close , and would have be the better for it --" because the cat you see downstairs , call , be greedy for they life . she crouch on the parapet outside for hour and hour . I have discover , " whisper mysteriously , " that she natural cruelty be sharpen by a jealous fear of they regain they liberty . in consequence of the judgament I expect be shortly give . she be sly and full of malice . I half believe , sometimes , that she be no cat , but the wolf of the old say . it be so very difficult to keep she from the door . " some neighbour bell , remind the poor soul that it be half - past nine , do more for we in the way of bring we visit to a end than we could easily have do for ourselves . she hurriedly take up she little bag of document , which she have laid upon the table on come in , and ask if we be also go into court . on we answer no , and that we would on no account detain she , she open the door to attend we downstair . " with such a oman , it be even more necessary than usual that I should be there before the come in , " say she , " for he might mention my case the first thing . I have a presentiment that he will mention it the first thing this morning " she stop to tell we in a whisper as we be go down that the whole house be fill with strange lumber which she landlord have buy piecemeal and have no wish to sell , in consequence of be a little m . this be on the first floor . but she have make a previous stoppage on the second floor and have silently point at a dark door there . " the only other lodger , " she now whisper in explanation , " a law - writer . the child in the lane here say he have sell himself to the devil . I do not know what he can have do with the money . Hush ! " she appear to mistrust that the lodger might hear she even there , and repeat " ! " go before we on tiptoe as though even the sound of she footstep might reveal to he what she have say . pass through the shop on we way out , as we have pass through it on we way in , we find the old man store a quantity of packet of waste - paper in a kind of well in the floor . he seem to be work hard , with the perspiration stand on he forehead , and have a piece of chalk by he , with which , as he put each separate package or bundle down , he make a crooke mark on the panelling of the wall . and , and , and the little old lady have go by he , and I be go when he touch I on the arm to stay I , and chalk the letter j upon the wall -- in a very curious manner , begin with the end of the letter and shape it backward . it be a capital letter , not a print one , but just such a letter as any clerk in Messrs . and 's office would have make . " can you read it ? " he ask I with a keen glance . " surely , " say I . " it be very plain . " " what be it ? " " j . " with another glance at I , and a glance at the door , he rub it out and turn a " a " in it be place ( not a capital letter this time ) , and say , " what be that ? " I tell he . he then rubb that out and turn the letter " r , " and ask I the same question . he go on quickly until he have form in the same curiious manner , begin at the end and bottom of the letter , the word , without once leave two letter on the wall together . " what do that spell ? " he ask I . when I tell he , he laugh . in the same odd way , yet with the same rapidity , he then produce singly , and rub out singly , the letter form the word . these , in some astonishment , I also read ; and he laugh again . " hi ! " say the old man
man , lay aside the chalk . " I have a turn for copying from memory , you see , miss , though I can neither read nor write . " he look so disagreeable and he cat look so wickedly at I , as if I be a blood - relation of the bird upstairs , that I be quite relieve by 's appear at the door and say , " , I hope you be not bargain for the sale of you hair . do not be tempt . three sack below be quite enough for ! " I lose no time in wish good morning and join my friend outside , where we part with the little old lady , who give we she bless with great ceremony and renew she assurance of yesterday in reference to she intention of settling estate on and I . before we finally turn out of those lane , we look back and see stand at he shop - door , in he spectacle , look after we , with he cat upon he shoulder , and she tail stick up on one side of he hairy cap like a tall feather . " quite a adventure for a morning in ! " say with a sigh . " ah , cousin , cousin , it be a weary word this Chancery ! " " it be to I , and have be ever since I can remember , " return . " I be grieve that I should be the enemy -- as I suppose I be -- of a great number of relation and other , and that they should be my enemy -- as I suppose they be -- and that we should all be ruin one another without know how or why and be in constant doubt and discord all we life . it seem very strange , as there must be right somewhere , that a honest judge in real earnest have not be able to find out through all these year where it be . " " ah , cousin ! " say . " , indeed ! all this wasteful , wanton chess - play be very strange . to see that compose court yesterday jogge on so serenely and to think of the wretchedness of the piece on the board give I the headache and the heartache both together . my head ach with wonder how it happen , if man be neither fools nor rascal ; and my heart ach to think they could possibly be either . but at all event , -- I may call you ? " " of course you may , cousin . " " at all event , will work none of its bad influence on . we have happily be bring together , thanks to we good kinsman , and it can not divide we now ! " " never , I hope , cousin ! " say gently . give my arm a squeeze and I a very significant look . I smile in return , and we make the rest of the way back very pleasantly . in half a hour after we arrival , appear ; and in the course of a hour the various thing necessary for breakfast straggle one by one into the dining - room . I do not doubt that . have go to bed and get up in the usual manner , but she present no appearance of have change she dress . she be greatly occupy during breakfast , for the morning 's post bring a heavy correspondence relative to - , which would occasion she ( she say ) to pass a busy day . the child tumble about , and notche memoranda of they accident in they leg , which be perfect little calendar of distress ; and be lose for a hour and a half , and bring home from Newgate market by a policeman . the equable manner in which sustain both he absence and he restoration to the family circle surprise we all . she be by that time perseveringly dictat to , and be fast relapse into the inky condition in which we have find she . at one o'clock a open carriage arrive for we , and a cart for we luggage . charge we with many remembrance to she good friend ; leave she desk to see we depart , kiss I in the passage , and stand bite she pen and sobb on the step ; Peepy , I be happy to say , be asleep and spare the pain of separation ( I be not without misgiving that he have go to Newgate market in search of I ) ; and all the other child get up behind the barouche and fall off , and we see they , with great concern , scatter over the surface of as we roll out of its precinct . at the day have brighten very much , and still brighten as we go westward . we go we way through the sunshine and the fresh air , wonder more and more at the extent of the street , the brilliancy of the shop , the great traffic , and the crowd of people whom the pleasanter weather seem to have bring out like many - coloured flower . by and by we begin to leave the wonderful city and to proceed through suburb which , of themselves , would have make a pretty large town in my eye ; and at last we get into a real country road again , with windmill , rick - yard , milestone , farmer ' waggon , scent of old hay , swing sign , and horse trough : tree , field , and hedge - row . it be delightful to see the green landscape before we and the immense metropoli behind
behind ; and when a waggon with a train of beautiful horse , furnish with red trapping and clear - sound bell , come by we with its music , I believe we could all three have sung to the bell , so cheerful be the influence around . " the whole road have be remind I of my nameake , " say , " and that waggon be the finishing touch . ! what be the matter ? " we have stop , and the waggon have stop too . it be music change as the horse come to a stand , and subsid to a gentle tinkling , except when a horse toss he head or shook himself and sprinkle off a little shower of bell - ringing . " we postilion be look after the waggoner , " say , " and the waggoner be come back after we . good day , friend ! " the waggoner be at we coach - door . " why , here be a extraordinary thing ! " add , look closely at the man . " he have get you name , , in he hat ! " he have all we name in he hat . Tuck within the band be three small note -- one address to , one to , one to I . these the waggoner deliver to each of we respectively , read the name aloud first . in answer to 's inquiry from whom they come , he briefly answer , " master , sir , if you please " ; and put on he hat again ( which be like a soft bowl ) , crack he whip , re-awaken he music , and go melodiously away . " be that 's waggon ? " say , call to we post - boy . " yes , sir , " he reply . " go to . " we open the note . be a counterpart of the other and contain these word in a solid , plain hand . " I look forward , my dear , to we meeting easily and without constraint on either side . I therefore have to propose that we meet as old friend and take the past for grant . it will be a relief to you possibly , and to I certainly , and so my love to you . " " I have perhaps less reason to be surprised than either of my companion , have never yet enjoy a opportunity of thanke one who have be my benefactor and sole earthly dependence through so many year . I have not consider how I could thank he , my gratitude lie too deep in my heart for that ; but I now begin to consider how I could meet he without thanke he , and feel it would be very difficult indeed . the note revive in and a general impression that they both have , without quite know how they come by it , that they cousin could never bear acknowledgment for any kindness he perform and that sooner than receive any he would resort to the most singular expedient and evasion or would even run away . dimly remember to have hear she mother tell , when she be a very little child , that he have once do she a act of uncommon generosity and that on she go to he house to thank he , he happen to see she through a window come to the door , and immediately escape by the back gate , and be not hear of for three month . this discourse lead to a great deal more on the same theme , and indeed it last we all day , and we talk of scarcely anything else . if we do by any chance diverge into another subject , we soon return to this , and wonder what the house would be like , and when we should get there , and whether we should see as soon as we arrive or after a delay , and what he would say to we , and what we should say to he . all of which we wonder about , over and over again . the roads be very heavy for the horse , but the pathway be generally good , so we alight and walk up all the hill , and like it so well that we prolonge we walk on the level ground when we get to the top . at there be other horse wait for we , but as they have only just be fed , we have to wait for they too , and get a long fresh walk over a common and a old battle - field before the carriage come up . these delay so protract the journey that the short day be spend and the long night have close in before we come to , near to which town be , we know . by that time we be so anxious and nervous that even confess , as we rattle over the stone of the old street , to feel a irrational desire to drive back again . as to and I , whom he have wrap up with great care , the night be sharp and frosty , we tremble from head to foot . when we turn out of the town , round a corner , and tell we that the post -boy , who have for a long time sympathize with we heighten expectation , be look back and nodd , we both stand up in the carriage ( hold lest she should be jolt down ) and gaze round upon the open country and the starlight night for we destination . there be a light sparkl on the top of a hill before we , and the driver , point to it with
with he whip and cry , " that be ! " put he horse into a canter and take we forward at such a rate , uphill though it be , that the wheel send the road drift fly about we head like spray from a water-mill . presently we lose the light , presently see it , presently lose it , presently see it , and turn into a avenue of tree and canter up towards where it be beam brightly . it be in a window of what seem to be a old - fashioned house with three peak in the roof in front and a circular sweep lead to the porch . a bell be ring as we draw up , and amidst the sound of its deep voice in the still air , and the distant barking of some dog , and a gush of light from the open door , and the smoking and steaming of the heat horse , and the quicken beating of we own heart , we alight in no inconsiderable confusion . " , my love , , my dear , you be welcome . I rejoice to see you ! , if I have a hand to spare at present , I would give it you ! " the gentleman who say these word in a clear , bright , hospitable voice have one of he arm round 's waist and the other round mine , and kiss we both in a fatherly way , and bear we across the hall into a ruddy little room , all in a glow with a blazing fire . here he kiss we again , and open he arm , make we sit down side by side on a sofa ready draw out near the hearth . I feel that if we have be at all demonstrative , he would have run away in a moment . " now , ! " say he . " I have a hand at liberty . a word in earnest be as good as a speech . I be heartily glad to see you . you be at home . warm yourself ! " shook he by both hand with a intuitive mixture of respect and frankness , and only say ( though with a earnestness that rather alarme I , I be so afraid of 's suddenly disappearing ) , " you be very kind , sir ! we be very much oblige to you ! " laid aside he hat and coat and come up to the fire . " and how do you like the ride ? and how do you like , my dear ? " say to . while be speak to he in reply , I glance ( I need not say with how much interest ) at he face . it be a handsome , lively , quick face , full of change and motion ; and he hair be a silvered iron -grey . I take he to be nearer sixty than fifty , but he be upright , hearty , and robust . from the moment of he first speak to we he voice have connect itself with a association in my mind that I could not define ; but now , all at once , a something sudden in he manner and a pleasant expression in he eye recal the gentleman in the stagecoach six year ago on the memorable day of my journey to . I be certain it be he . I never be so frightened in my life as when I make the discovery , for he catch my glance , and appear to read my thought , give such a look at the door that I think we have lose he . however , I be happy to say he remain where he be , and ask I what I think of . " she exert herself very much for , sir , " I say . " Nobly ! " return . " but you answer like . " whom I have not hear . " you all think something else , I see . " " we rather think , " say I , glance at and , who entreate I with they eye to speak , " that perhaps she be a little unmindful of she home . " " Floore ! " cry . I be rather alarm again . " well ! I want to know you real thought , my dear . I may have send you there on purpose . " " we think that , perhaps , " say I , hesitat , " it be right to begin with the obligation of home , sir ; and that , perhaps , while those be overlook and neglect , no other duty can possibly be substitute for they . " " the little , " say , come to my relief , " be really -- I can not help express myself strongly , sir -- in a devil of a state . " " she mean well , " say hastily . " the wind 's in the east . " " it be in the north , sir , as we come down , " observe . " my dear , " say , pok the fire , " I will take a oath it be either in the east or go to be . I be always conscious of a uncomfortable sensation now and then when the wind be blow in the east . " " Rheumatism , sir ? " say . " I dare say it be , . I believe it be . and so the little -- I have my doubt about th'ey -- be in a -- oh , , yes , it be easterly ! " say . he have take two or three undecided turn
turn up and down while utter these broken sentence , retain the poker in one hand and rub he hair with the other , with a good - natured vexation at once so whimsical and so lovable that I be sure we be more delighted with he than we could possibly have express in any word . he give a arm to and a arm to I , and bid bring a candle , be lead the way out when he suddenly turn we all back again . " those little Jellybys . could not you --do not you -- now , if it have raine sugar-plum , or three - corner raspberry tart , or anything of that sort ! " say . " oh , cousin -- " hastily begin . " good , my pretty pet . I like cousin . , perhaps , be better . " " then , cousin -- " laughingly begin again . " , ha ! very good indeed ! " say with great enjoyment . " sound uncommonly natural . yes , my dear ? " " it do better than that . it raine . " " aye ? " say . " what do do ? " " why , cousin , " say , clasp she hand upon he arm and shake she head at I across he -- for I want she to be quiet -- " be they friend directly . nurse they , coax they to sleep , wash and dress they , tell they story , keep they quiet , buy they keepsake " -- my dear girl ! I have only go out with after he be find and give he a little , tiny horse !-- " and , cousin , she soften poor , the eldest one , so much and be so thoughtful for I and so amiable ! no , no , I will not be contradict , Esther dear ! you know , you know , it be true ! " the warm - hear darling lean across she cousin and kiss I , and then look up in he face , boldly say , " at all event , cousin , I will thank you for the companion you have give I . " I feel as if she challenge he to run away . but he do not . " where do you say the wind be , ? " ask . " in the north as we come down , sir . " " you be right . there be no east in it . a mistake of mine . come , girl , come and see you home ! " it be one of those delightfully irregular house where you go up and down step out of one room into another , and where you come upon more room when you think you have see all there be , and where there be a bountiful provision of little hall and passage , and where you find still older cottage - room in unexpected place with lattice window and green growth press through they . , which we enter first , be of this kind , with a up - and - down roof that have more corner in it than I ever count afterwards and a chimney ( there be a wood fire on the hearth ) pave all around with pure white tile , in every one of which a bright miniature of the fire be blazing . out of this room , you go down two step into a charme little sitting - room look down upon a flower - garden , which room be henceforth to belong to and I . out of this you go up three step into 's bedroom , which have a fine broad window command a beautiful view ( we see a great expanse of darkness lie underneath the star ) , to which there be a hollow window - seat , in which , with a spring - lock , three dear Adas might have be lose at once . out of this room you pass into a little gallery , with which the other best room ( only two ) communicate , and so , by a little staircase of shallow step with a number of corner stair in it , consider its length , down into the hall . but if instead of go out at 's door you come back into my room , and go out at the door by which you have enter it , and turn up a few crooked step that branch off in a unexpected manner from the stair , you lose yourself in passage , with mangles in they , and three - corner table , and a native hindu chair , which be also a sofa , a box , and a bedstead , and look in every form something between a bamboo skeleton and a great bird - cage , and have be bring from nobody know by whom or when . from these you come on 's room , which be part library , part sitting - room , part bedroom , and see indeed a comfortable compound of many room . out of that you go straight , with a little interval of passage , to the plain room where slept , all the year round , with he window open , he bedstead without any furniture stand in the middle of the floor for more air , and he cold bath gap for he in a smaller room adjoin . out of that you come into another passage , where there be back - stair and where you could hear the horse be rub down outside the stable and be tell to " hold up " and " get over , " as they slipp about very much on the uneven
uneven stone . or you might , if you come out at another door ( every room have at least two door ) , go straight down to the hall again by half - a - dozen step and a low archway , wonder how you get back there or have ever get out of it . the furniture , old - fashioned rather than old , like the house , be as pleasantly irregular . 's sleeping - room be all flower -- in chintz and paper , in velvet , in needlework , in the brocade of two stiff courtly chair which stand , each attend by a little page of a stool for greater state , on either side of the fire - place . we sit - room be green and have fram and glaze upon the wall number of surprising and surprised bird , stare out of picture at a real trout in a case , as bry and shine as if it have be serve with gravy ; at the death of ; and at the whole process of prepare tea in , as depict by chinese artist . in my room there be oval engraving of the month -- lady haymak in short waists and large hat tie under the ching , for ; smooth - legged nobleman point with cocked - hat to village steeple , for . half - length portrait in crayon abound all through the house , but be so disperse that I find the brother of a youthful officer of mine in the china - closet and the grey old age of my pretty young bride , with a flower in she bodice , in the breakfast - room . as substitute , I have four angels , of 's reign , take a complacent gentleman to heaven , in festoon , with some difficulty ; and a composition in needlework represent fruit , a kettle , and a alphabet . all the movable , from the wardrobe to the chair and table , hanging , glassis , even to the pincushion and scent - bottle on the dressing - table , display the same quaint variety . they agree in nothing but they perfect neatness , they display of the whitest linen , and they storing - up , wheresoever the existence of a drawer , small or large , render it possible , of quantity of rose - leave and sweet lavender . such , with its illuminated window , soften here and there by shadow of curtain , shin out upon the starlight night ; with its light , and warmth , and comfort ; with it be hospitable jingle , at a distance , of preparation for dinner ; with the face of its generous master brighten everything we see ; and just wind enough without to sound a low accompaniment to everything we hear , be we first impression of . " I be glad you like it , " say when he have bring we round again to 's sitting - room . " it make no pretension , but it be a comfortable little place , I hope , and will be more so with such bright young look in it . you have barely half a hour before dinner . there be no one here but the finest creature upon earth -- a child . " " more child , ! " say . " I do not mean literally a child , " pursue ; " not a child in year . he be grow up -- he be at least as old as I be -- but in simplicity , and freshness , and enthusiasm , and a fine guileless inaptitude for all worldly affair , he be a perfect child . " we feel that he must be very interesting . " he know , " say . " he be a musical man , a amateur , but might have be a professional . he be a artist too , a amateur , but might have be a professional . he be a man of attainment and of captivat manners . he have be unfortunate in he affair , and unfortunate in he pursuits , and unfortunate in he family ; but he do not care -- he be a child ! " " do you imply that he have child of he own , sir ? " inquire . " yes , ! half - a - dozen . more ! Nearer a dozen , I should think . but he have never look after they . how could he ? he want somebody to look after he . he be a child , you know ! " say . " and have the child look after themselves at all , sir ? " inquire . " why , just as you may suppose , " say , he countenance suddenly fall . " it be say that the child of the very poor be not bring up , but drag up . 's child have tumble up somehow or other . the wind 's get round again , I be afraid . I feel it rather ! " observ that the situation be expose on a sharp night . " it be expose , " say . " no doubt that be the cause . have a exposed sound . but you be come my way . come along ! " we luggage have arrive and be all at hand , I be dress in a few minute and engage in put my worldly good away when a maid ( not the one in attendance upon , but another , whom I have not see ) bring a basket into my room with two bunch of key in it , all label . " for you , miss , if you please , " say
say she . " for I ? " say I . " the housekeeping key , miss . " I show my surprise , for she add with some little surprise on she own part , " I be tell to bring they as soon as you be alone , miss . , if I do not deceive myself ? " " yes , " say I . " that be my name . " " the large bunch be the housekeeping , and the little bunch be the cellar , miss . any time you be pleased to appoint to - morrow morning , I be to show you the pressis and thing they belong to . " I say I would be ready at half - past six , and after she be go , stand look at the basket , quite lost in the magnitude of my trust . find I thus and have such a delightful confidence in I when I show she the key and tell she about they that it would have be insensibility and ingratitude not to feel encouraged . I know , to be sure , that it be the dear girl 's kindness , but I like to be so pleasantly cheat . when we go downstairs , we be present to , who be stand before the fire tell how fond he use to be , in he school - time , of football . he be a little bright creature with a rather large head , but a delicate face and a sweet voice , and there be a perfect charm in he . all he say be so free from effort and spontaneous and be say with such a captivat gaiety that it be fascinating to hear he talk . be of a more slender figure than and have a richer complexion , with browner hair , he look younger . indeed , he have more the appearance in all respects of a damaged young man than a well - preserve elderly one . there be a easy negligence in he manner and even in he dress ( he hair carelessly dispose , and he neckkerchief loose and flow , as I have see artist paint they own portrait ) which I could not separate from the idea of a romantic youth who have undergone some unique process of depreciation . it struck I as be not at all like the manner or appearance of a man who have advanc in life by the usual road of year , car , and experience . I gather from the conversation that have be educate for the medical profession and have once liv , in he professional capacity , in the household of a german prince . he tell we , however , that as he have always be a mere child in point of weight and measure and have never know anything about they ( except that they disgust he ) , he have never be able to prescribe with the requisite accuracy of detail . in fact , he say , he have no head for detail . and he tell we , with great humour , that when he be want to bleed the prince or physic any of he people , he be generally find lie on he back in bed , read the newspaper or make fancy - sketch in pencil , and could not come . the prince , at last , object to this , " in which , " say , in the frankest manner , " he be perfectly right , " the engagement terminate , and Skimpole have ( as he add with delightful gaiety ) " nothing to live upon but love , fall in love , and married , and surround himself with rosy cheek . " he good friend Jarndyce and some other of he good friend then help he , in quicker or slower succession , to several opening in life , but to no purpose , for he must confess to two of the oldest infirmity in the world : one be that he have no idea of time , the other that he have no idea of money . in consequence of which he never keep a appointment , never could transact any business , and never know the value of anything ! well ! so he have get on in life , and here he be ! he be very fond of read the papers , very fond of make fancy - sketch with a pencil , very fond of nature , very fond of art . all he ask of society be to let he live . that be not much . he want be few . give he the papers , conversation , music , mutton , coffee , landscape , fruit in the season , a few sheet of - board , and a little claret , and he ask no more . he be a mere child in the world , but he do not cry for the moon . he say to the world , " go you several way in peace ! wear red coat , blue coat , lawn sleeve ; put pens behind you ear , wear apron ; go after glory , holiness , commerce , trade , any object you prefer ; only -- let live ! " all this and a great deal more he tell we , not only with the utmost brilliancy and enjoyment , but with a certain vivacious candour -- speak of himself as if he be not at all he own affair , as if be a third person , as if he know that have he singularity but still have he claim too , which be the general business of the community and must not be slighte . he be quite enchant . if I feel at
at all confused at that early time in endeavouring to reconcile anything he say with anything I have think about the duty and accountability of life ( which I be far from sure of ) , I be confuse by not exactly understand why he be free of they . that he be free of they , I scarcely doubt ; he be so very clear about it himself . " I covet nothing , " say in the same light way . " Possession be nothing to I . here be my friend 's excellent house . I feel obliged to he for possesse it . I can sketch it and alter it . I can set it to music . when I be here , I have sufficient possession of it and have neither trouble , cost , nor responsibility . my steward 's name , in short , be , and he can not cheat I . we have be mention . there be a bright - eye woman , of a strong will and immense power of business detail , who throw herself into object with surprising ardour ! I do not regret that I have not a strong will and a immense power of business detail to throw myself into object with surprising ardour . I can admire she without envy . I can sympathize with the object . I can dream of they . I can lie down on the grass -- in fine weather -- and float along a african river , embrace all the native I meet , as sensible of the deep silence and sketch the dense overhange tropical growth as accurately as if I be there . I do not know that it be of any direct use my do so , but it be all I can do , and I do it thoroughly . then , for heaven 's sake , have , a confid child , petition you , the world , a agglomeration of practical people of business habit , to let he live and admire the human family , do it somehow or other , like good soul , and suffer he to ride he rocking - horse ! " it be plain enough that have not be neglectful of the adjuration . 's general position there would have render it so without the addition of what he presently say . " it be only you , the generous creature , whom I envy , " say , address we , he new friend , in a impersonal manner . " I envy you you power of do what you do . it be what I should revel in myself . I do not feel any vulgar gratitude to you . I almost feel as if you ought to be grateful to I for give you the opportunity of enjoy the luxury of generosity . I know you like it . for anything I can tell , I may have come into the world expressly for the purpose of increase you stock of happiness . I may have be bear to be a benefactor to you by sometimes give you a opportunity of assist I in my little perplexity . why should I regret my incapacity for detail and worldly affairs when it lead to such pleasant consequence ? I do not regret it therefore . " of all he playful speech ( playful , yet always fully mean what they express ) none seem to be more to the taste of than this . I have often new temptation , afterwards , to wonder whether it be really singular , or only singular to I , that he , who be probably the most grateful of mankind upon the least occasion , should so desire to escape the gratitude of other . we be all enchant . I feel it a merit tribute to the engage qualitie of and that , see they for the first time , should he so unreserved and should lay himself out to be so exquisitely agreeable . they ( and especially ) be naturally pleased , for similar reason , and consider it no common privilege to be so freely confide in by such a attractive man . the more we listen , the more gaily talk . and what with he fine hilarious manner and he engage candour and he genial way of lightly toss he own weakness about , as if he have say , " I be a child , you know ! you be design people compare with I " ( he really make I consider myself in that light ) " but I be gay and innocent ; forget you worldly art and play with I ! " the effect be absolutely dazzling . he be so full of feel too and have such a delicate sentiment for what be beautiful or tender that he could have win a heart by that alone . in the evening , when I be prepare to make tea and be touch the piano in the adjoining room and softly hum a tune to she cousin , which they have happen to mention , he come and sit down on the sofa near I and so spoke of that I almost love he . " she be like the morning , " he say . " with that golden hair , those blue eye , and that fresh bloom on she cheek , she be like the summer morning . the bird here will mistake she for it . we will not call such a lovely young creature as that , who be a joy to all mankind , a orphan . she be the child of the universe . " , I find , be stand near we with he hand behind he and a attentive smile upon he face . " the universe , " he
he observ , " make rather a indifferent parent , I be afraid . " " oh ! I do not know ! " cry buoyantly . " I think I do know , " say . " well ! " cry . " you know the world ( which in you sense be the universe ) , and I know nothing of it , so you shall have you way . but if I have mine , " glance at the cousin , " there should be no bramble of sordo reality in such a path as that . it should be strew with rose ; it should lie through bower , where there be no spring , autumn , nor winter , but perpetual summer . age or change should never wither it . the base word money should never be breath near it ! " patt he on the head with a smile , as if he have be really a child , and pass a step or two on , and stop a moment , glance at the young cousins . he look be thoughtful , but have a benignant expression in it which I often ( how often ! ) see again , which have long be engraven on my heart . the room in which they be , communicate with that in which he stand , be only light by the fire . sit at the piano ; stand beside she , bend down . upon the wall , they shadow blend together , surround by strange form , not without a ghostly motion catch from the unsteady fire , though reflec from motionless object . touch the note so softly and sang so low that the wind , sigh away to the distant hill , be as audible as the music . the mystery of the future and the little clue afforde to it by the voice of the present seem express in the whole picture . but it be not to recall this fancy , well as I remember it , that I recall the scene . first , I be not quite unconscious of the contrast in respect of meaning and intention between the silent look direct that way and the flow of word that have proceed it . secondly , though 's glance as he withdraw it rest for but a moment on I , I feel as if in that moment he confide to I -- and know that he confide to I and that I receive the confidence -- he hope that and might one day enter on a dearer relationship . could play on the piano and the violoncello , and he be a composer -- have compose half a opera once , but get tired of it -- and play what he compose with taste . after tea we have quite a little concert , in which -- who be enthrall by 's singe and tell I that she seem to know all the song that ever be write -- and , and I be the audience . after a little while I miss first and , and while I be think how could stay away so long and lose so much , the maid who have give I the key look in at the door , say , " if you please , miss , could you spare a minute ? " when I be shut out with she in the hall , she say , hold up she hand , " oh , if you please , miss , say would you come upstairs to 's room . he have be take , miss ! " " ? " say I . " take , miss . , " say the maid . I be apprehensive that he illness might be of a dangerous kind , but of course I beg she to be quiet and not disturb any one and collect myself , as I follow she quickly upstairs , sufficiently to consider what be the best remedy to be apply if it should prove to be a fit . she throw open a door and I go into a chamber , where , to my unspeakable surprise , instead of find stretch upon the bed or prostrate on the floor , I find he stand before the fire smile at , while , with a face of great embarrassment , look at a person on the sofa , in a white great - coat , with smooth hair upon he head and not much of it , which he be wipe smoother and make less of with a pocket - handkerchief . " , " say hurriedly , " I be glad you be come . you will be able to advise we . we friend -- do not be alarm !-- be arrest for debt . " " and really , my dear , " say with he agreeable candour , " I never be in a situation in which that excellent sense and quiet habit of method and usefulness , which anybody must observe in you who have the happiness of be a quarter of a hour in you society , be more needed . " the person on the sofa , who appear to have a cold in he head , give such a very loud snort that he start I . " be you arrest for much , sir ? " I inquire of . " my dear , " say he , shak he head pleasantly , " I do not know . some pound , odd shilling , and halfpence , I think , be mention . " " it be twenty - four pound , sixteen , and sevenpence ha' penny , " observ the stranger . " that be wot it be . " " and it sound -- somehow it sound , " say
say , " like a small sum ? " the strange man say nothing but make another snort . it be such a powerful one that it seem quite to lift he out of he seat . " , " say to I , " have a delicacy in apply to my cousin because he have lately -- I think , sir , I understand you that you have lately -- " " oh , yes ! " return , smile . " though I forget how much it be and when it be . would readily do it again , but I have the epicure - like feeling that I would prefer a novelty in help , that I would rather , " and he look at and I , " develop generosity in a new soil and in a new form of flower . " " what do you think will be best , ? " say , aside . I venture to inquire , generally , before reply , what would happen if the money be not produce . " , " say the strange man , coolly put he handkerchief into he hat , which be on the floor at he foot . " or Coavinse . " " may I ask , sir , what be -- " " Coavinse ? " say the strange man . " a ' ouse . " and I look at one another again . it be a most singular thing that the arrest be we embarrassment and not 's . he observ we with a genial interest , but there seem , if I may venture on such a contradiction , nothing selfish in it . he have entirely washed he hand of the difficulty , and it have become ours . " I think , " he suggest , as if good - naturedly to help we out , " that be party in a suit concerning ( as people say ) a large amount of property , or he beautiful cousin , or both , could sign something , or make over something , or give some sort of undertaking , or , or bond ? I do not know what the business name of it may be , but I suppose there be some instrument within they power that would settle this ? " " not a bit on it , " say the strange man . " really ? " return . " that seem odd , now , to one who be no judge of these thing ! " " or even , " say the stranger grufinitely , " I tell you , not a bit on it ! " " keep you temper , my good fellow , keep you temper ! " gently reason with he as he make a little drawing of he head on the fly - leaf of a book . " do not be ruffle by you occupation . we can separate you from you office ; we can separate the individual from the pursuit . we be not so prejudice as to suppose that in private life you be otherwise than a very estimable man , with a great deal of poetry in you nature , of which you may not be conscious . " the stranger only answer with another violent snort , whether in acceptance of the poetry - tribute or in disdainful rejection of it , he do not express to I . " now , my dear , and my dear , " say gaily , innocently , and confidingly as he look at he drawing with he head on one side , " here you see I utterly incapable of help myself , and entirely in you hand ! I only ask to be free . the butterfly be free . mankind will surely not deny to Harold Skimpole what it concede to the butterfly ! " " my dear , " say in a whisper , " I have ten pound that I receive from . I must try what that will do . " I possess fifteen pound , odd shilling , which I have save from my quarterly allowance during several year . I have always think that some accident might happen which would throw I suddenly , without any relation or any property , on the world and have always try to keep some little money by I that I might not be quite penniless . I tell of my have this little store and have no present need of it , and I ask he delicately to inform , while I should be go to fetch it , that we would have the pleasure of pay he debt . when I come back , kiss my hand and see quite touch . not on he own account ( I be again aware of that perplex and extraordinary contradiction ) , but on ours , as if personal consideration be impossible with he and the contemplation of we happiness alone affect he . , begge I , for the greater grace of the transaction , as he say , to settle with Coavinse ( as now jocularly call he ) , I count out the money and receive the necessary acknowledgment . this , too , delighte . he compliment be so delicately administer that I blush less than I might have do and settle with the stranger in the white coat without make any mistake . he put the money in he pocket and shortly say , " well , then , I will wish you a good evening , miss . " my friend , " say , stand with he back to the fire after give up the sketch when it be half finish , " I should like to ask you something , without offence . " I think the reply be ,
, " Cut away , then ! " " do you know this morning , now , that you be come out on this errand ? " say . " know would it yes' day aft' noon at tea - time , " say . " it do not affect you appetite ? do not make you at all uneasy ? " " not a bit , " say . " I know would if you wos miss to - day , you would not be miss to - morrow . a day make no such odd . " " but when you come down here , " proceed , " it be a fine day . the sun be shin , the wind be blow , the light and shadows be pass across the field , the bird be singe . " " nobody say they war not , in my hearing , " return Coavinse . " no , " observ . " but what do you think upon the road ? " " Wot do you mean ? " grow Coavinse with a appearance of strong resentment . " think ! I have get enough to do , and little enough to get for it without think . think ! " ( with profound contempt ) . " then you do not think , at all event , " proceed , " to this effect : ' love to see the sun shine , love to hear the wind blow , love to watch the change light and shadows , love to hear the bird , those chorister in 's great cathedral . and do it seem to I that I be about to deprive of he share in such possession , which be he only birthright ! ' you think nothing to that effect ? " " I -- certainly -- do -- not , " say Coavinse , whose doggedness in utterly renounce the idea be of that intense kind that he could only give adequate expression to it by put a long interval between each word , and accompany the last with a jerk that might have dislocate he neck . " very odd and very curious , the mental process be , in you man of business ! " say thoughtfully . " thank you , my friend . good night . " as we absence have be long enough already to seem strange downstair , I return at once and find sit at work by the fireside talk to she cousin . presently appear , and shortly after he . I be sufficientely engage during the remainder of the evening in take my first lesson in backgammon from , who be very fond of the game and from whom I wish of course to learn it as quickly as I could in order that I might be of the very small use of be able to play when he have no better adversary . but I think , occasionally , when play some fragment of he own composition or when , both at the piano and the violoncello , and at we table , he preserve with a absence of all effort he delightful spirit and he easy flow of conversation , that and I seem to retain the transfer impression of have be arrest since dinner and that it be very curious altogether . it be late before we separate , for when be go at eleven o'clock , go to the piano and rattle hilariously that the best of all way to lengthen we day be to steal a few hour from night , my dear ! it be past twelve before he take he candle and he radiant face out of the room , and I think he might have keep we there , if he have see fit , until daybreak . and be linger for a few moment by the fire , wonder whether . have yet finish she dictation for the day , when , who have be out of the room , return . " oh , dear I , what be this , what be this ! " he say , rub he head and walk about with he good - humoure vexation . " what be this they tell I ? , my boy , , my dear , what have you be do ? why do you do it ? how could you do it ? how much apiece be it ? the wind 's round again . I feel it all over I ! " we neither of we quite know what to answer . " come , , come ! I must settle this before I sleep . how much be you out of pocket ? you two make the money up , you know ! why do you ? how could you ? oh , , yes , it be due -- must be ! " " really , sir , " say , " I do not think it would be honourable in I to tell you . rely upon we -- " " bless you , my dear boy ! he rely upon everybody ! " say , give he head a great rub and stop short . " indeed , sir ? " " everybody ! and he will be in the same scrape again next week ! " say , walk again at a great pace , with a candle in he hand that have go out . " he be always in the same scrape . he be bear in the same scrape . I verily believe that the announcement in the newspaper when he mother be confine be last , at she residence in , . Skimpole of a son in difficulty . ' " laugh heartily but add , " , sir , I do not want to shake he confidence or to
to break he confidence , and if I submit to you better knowledge again , that I ought to keep he secret , I hope you will consider before you press I any more . of course , if you do press I , sir , I shall know I be wrong and will tell you . " " well ! " cry , stop again , and make several absent endeavour to put he candlestick in he pocket . " I -- here ! take it away , my dear . I do not know what I be about with it ; it be all the wind -- invariably have that effect -- I will not press you , ; you may be right . but really -- to get hold of you and -- and to squeeze you like a couple of tender yong 's orang ! it will blow a gale in the course of the night ! " he be now alternately put he hand into he pocket as if he be go to keep they there a long time , and take they out again and vehemently rub they all over he head . I venture to take this opportunity of hinting that , be in all such matter quite a child -- " Eh , my dear ? " say , catch at the word . " be quite a child , sir , " say I , " and so different from other people -- " " you be right ! " say , brighten . " you woman 's wit hit the mark . he be a child -- a absolute child . I tell you he be a child , you know , when I first mention he . " certainly ! certainly ! we say . " and he be a child . now , be not he ? " ask , brighten more and more . he be indeed , we say . " when you come to think of it , it be the height of childishness in you -- I mean I -- " say , " to regard he for a moment as a man . you can not make he responsible . the idea of with design or plans , or knowledge of consequence ! , ha , ha ! " it be so delicious to see the clouds about he bright face clearing , and to see he so heartily pleased , and to know , as it be impossible not to know , that the source of he pleasure be the goodness which be torture by condemning , or mistrusting , or secretly accuse any one , that I see the tear in 's eye , while she echo he laugh , and feel they in my own . " why , what a cod 's head and shoulder I be , " say , " to require reminding of it ! the whole business show the child from begin to end . nobody but a child would have think of singl you two out for party in the affair ! nobody but a child would have think of you have the money ! if it have be a thousand pound , it would have be just the same ! " say with he whole face in a glow . we all confirm it from we night 's experience . " to be sure , to be sure ! " say . " however , , , and you too , , for I do not know that even you little purse be safe from he inexperience -- I must have a promise all round that nothing of this sort shall ever be do any more . no advance ! not even sixpence . " we all promise faithfully , with a merry glance at I touch he pocket as if to remind I that there be no danger of we transgresse . " as to , " say , " a habitable doll 's house with good board and a few tin people to get into debt with and borrow money of would set the boy up in life . he be in a child have sleep by this time , I suppose ; it be time I should take my craftier head to my more worldly pillow . good night , my dear . bless you ! " he pee in again , with a smile face , before we have light we candle , and say , " oh ! I have be look at the weather - cock . I find it be a false alarm about the wind . it be in the south ! " and go away singing to himself . and I agree , as we talk together for a little while upstairs , that this caprice about the wind be a fiction and that he use the pretence to account for any disappointment he could not conceal , rather than he would blame the real cause of it or disparage or depreciate any one . we think this very characteristic of he eccentric gentleness and of the difference between he and those petulant people who make the weather and the wind ( particularly that unlucky wind which he have chosen for such a different purpose ) the stalking - horse of they splenetic and gloomy humours . indeed , so much affection for he have be add in this one evening to my gratitude that I hope I already begin to understand he through that mingled feeling . any seem inconsistency in or in . Jellyby I could not expect to be able to reconcile , have so little experience or practical knowledge . neither do I try , for my thought be busy when I be alone , with and and with the confidence I have seem to receive concern they . my fancy
fancy , make a little wild by the wind perhaps , would not consent to be all unselfish , either , though I would have persuade it to be so if I could . it wander back to my godmother 's house and come along the intervening track , raise up shadowy speculation which have sometimes tremble there in the dark as to what have of my earliest history -- even as to the possibility of he be my father , though that idle dream be quite gone now . it be all go now , I remember , get up from the fire . it be not for I to muse over bygone , but to act with a cheerful spirit and a grateful heart . so I say to myself , " , , ! , my dear ! " and give my little basket of housekeeping key such a shake that they sound like little bell and ring I hopefully to bed . the Ghost 's sleep , and while wake , it be still wet weather down at the place in . the rain be ever fall -- drip , drip , drip -- by day and night upon the broad flag terrace - pavement , the Ghost 's walk . the weather be so very bad down in that the liveliest imagination can scarcely apprehend its ever be fine again . not that there be any superabundant life of imagination on the spot , for be not here ( and , truly , even if he be , would not do much for it in that particular ) , but be in with my Lady ; and solitude , with dusky wing , sits brood upon . there may be some motion of fancy among the lower animal at . the horse in the stable -- the long stable in a barren , red - brick court - yard , where there be a great bell in a turret , and a clock with a large face , which the pigeon who live near it and who love to perch upon its shoulders seem to be always consult -- they may contemplate some mental picture of fine weather on occasion , and may be better artist at they than the grooms . the old roan , so famous for cross -country work , turn he large eyeball to the grate window near he rack , may remember the fresh leave that glisten there at other time and the scent that stream in , and may have a fine run with the hound , while the human helper , clear out the next stall , never stirs beyond he pitchfork and birch - broom . the grey , whose place be opposite the door and who with a impatient rattle of he halter prick he ear and turn he head so wistfully when it be open , and to whom the opener say , " Woa grey , then , steady ! Noabody want you to - day ! " may know it quite as well as the man . the whole seemingly monotonous and uncompanionable half - dozen , stable together , may pass the long wet hour when the door be shut in livelier communication than be hold in the servants 's hall or at the , or may even beguile the time by improve ( perhaps corrupt ) the pony in the loose - box in the corner . so the mastiff , do in he kennel in the court - yard with he large head on he paws , may think of the hot sunshine when the shadow of the stable - building tire he patience out by change and leave he at one time of the day no broader refuge than the shadow of he own house , where he sit on end , pante and grow short , and very much want something to worry besides himself and he chain . so now , half - waking and all - winking , he may recall the house full of company , the coach - house full of vehicle , the stable full of horse , and the out - building full of attendant upon horse , until he be undecided about the present and come forth to see how it be . then , with that impatient shake of himself , he may growl in the spirit , " , rain , rain ! nothing but rain -- and no family here ! " as he go in again and lie down with a gloomy yawn . so with the dog in the kennel - building across the park , who have they restless fit and whose doleful voice when the wind have be very obstinate have even make it know in the house itself -- upstairs , downstairs , and in my 's chamber . they may hunt the whole country - side , while the raindrop be patter round they inactivity . so the rabbit with they self - betraie tail , frisk in and out of hole at root of tree , may be lively with idea of the breezy day when they ear be blow about or of those season of interest when there be sweet young plant to gnee . the turkey in the poultry - yard , always troublead with a class - grievance ( probably ) , may be reminiscent of that summer morning wrongfully take from he when he get into the lane among the felled tree , where there be a barn and barley . the discontented goose , who stoop to pass under the old gateway , twenty foot high , may gabble out , if we only know it , a waddling preference for weather when the gateway cast its shadow on the ground . be this as it may , there be not much fancy otherwise stirr at .
. if there be a little at any odd moment , it go , like a little noise in that old echoing place , a long way and usually lead off to ghost and mystery . it have raine so hard and rain so long down in that , the old housekeeper at , have several time take off she spectacle and clean they to make certain that the drop be not upon the glassis . might have be sufficientely assure by hear the rain , but that she be rather deaf , which nothing will induce she to believe . she be a fine old lady , handsome , stately , wonderfully neat , and have such a back and such a stomacher that if she stay should turn out when she die to have be a broad old - fashioned family fire - grate , nobody who know she would have cause to be surprised . affects little . the house be there in all weathers , and the house , as she express it , " be what she look at . " she sit in she room ( in a side passage on the ground floor , with a arch window command a smooth quadrangle , adorn at regular interval with smooth round tree and smooth round block of stone , as if the tree be go to play at bowl with the stone ) , and the whole house repose on she mind . she can open it on occasion and be busy and flutter , but it be shut up now and lie on the breadth of 's iron - bound bosom in a majestic sleep . it be the next difficult thing to a impossibility to imagine without , but she have only be here fifty year . ask she how long , this rainy day , and she shall answer " fifty year , three month , and a fortnight , by the blessing of heaven , if I live till . " die some time before the decease of the pretty fashion of pig -tail , and modestly hide he own ( if he take it with he ) in a corner of the churchyard in the park near the mouldy porch . he be bear in the market - town , and so be he young widow . she progress in the family begin in the time of the last and originate in the still - room . the present representative of the Dedlock be a excellent master . he suppose all he dependent to be utterly bereft of individual character , intention , or opinion , and be persuade that he be bear to supersede the necessity of they have any . if he be to make a discovery to the contrary , he would be simply stun -- would never recover himself , most likely , except to gasp and die . but he be a excellent master still , hold it a part of he state to be so . he have a great liking for ; he say she be a most respectable , creditable woman . he always shake hand with she when he come down to and when he go away ; and if he be very ill , or if he be knock down by accident , or run over , or place in any situation expressive of a Dedlock at a disadvantage , he would say if he could speak , " leave I , and send here ! " feel he dignity , at such a pass , safer with she than with anybody else . have know trouble . she have have two son , of whom the younger ran wild , and go for a soldier , and never come back . even to this hour , . 's calm hand lose they composure when she speak of he , and unfold themselves from she stomacher , hover about she in a agitated manner as she say what a likely lad , what a fine lad , what a gay , good - humoured , clever lad he be ! she second son would have be provide for at and would have be make steward in due season , but he take , when he be a schoolboy , to construct steam - engine out of saucepan and set bird to draw they own water with the least possible amount of labour , so assist they with artful contrivance of hydraulic pressure that a thirsty canary have only , in a literal sense , to put he shoulder to the wheel and the job be done . this propensity give great uneasiness . she feel it with a mother 's anguish to be a move in the direction , well know that have that general impression of a aptitude for any art to which smoke and a tall chimney might be consider essential . but the doom young rebel ( otherwise a mild youth , and very persevering ) , show no sign of grace as he get older but , on the contrary , construct a model of a power - loom , she be fain , with many tear , to mention he backsliding to the baronet . " , " say , " I can never consent to argue , as you know , with any one on any subject . you have better get rid of you boy ; you have better get he into some . the iron country farther north be , I suppose , the congenial direction for a boy with these tendency . " Farther north he go , and farther north he grow up ; and if ever see he when he come to to visit he mother , or ever think of he afterwards , it be certain that he only regard he as one of a body of some
some odd thousand conspirator , swarthy and grim , who be in the habit of turn out by torchlight two or three night in the week for unlawful purpose . nevertheless , 's son have , in the course of nature and art , grow up , and establish himself , and married , and call unto he 's grandson , who , be out of he apprenticeship , and home from a journey in far country , whither he be send to enlarge he knowledge and complete he preparations for the venture of this life , stand lean against the chimney - piece this very day in 's room at . " and , again and again , I be glad to see you , ! and , once again , I be glad to see you , ! " say . " you be a fine young fellow . you be like you poor uncle . ah ! " 's hand unquiet , as usual , on this reference . " they say I be like my father , grandmother . " " like he , also , my dear -- but most like you poor uncle ! and you dear father . " fold she hand again . " he be well ? " " Thriive , grandmother , in every way . " " I be thankful ! " be fond of she son but have a plaintive feeling towards he , much as if he be a very honourable soldier who have go over to the enemy . " he be quite happy ? " say she . " . " " I be thankful ! so he have bring you up to follow in he way and have send you into foreign country and the like ? well , he know best . there may be a world beyond Wold that I do not understand . though I be not young , either . and I have see a quantity of good company too ! " " grandmother , " say the young man , change the subject , " what a very pretty girl that be I find with you just now . you call she ? " " yes , child . she be daughter of a widow in the village . Maid be so hard to teach , now - a - day , that I have put she about I young . she be a apt scholar and will do well . she show the house already , very pretty . she live with I at my table here . " " I hope I have not drive she away ? " " she suppose we have family affair to speak about , I dare say . she be very modest . it be a fine quality in a young woman . and scarcer , " say , expand she stomacher to its utmost limit , " than it formerly be ! " the young man incline he head in acknowledgment of the precept of experience . listen . " wheel ! " say she . they have long be audible to the younger ears of she companion . " what wheel on such a day as this , for gracious sake ? " after a short interval , a tap at the door . " come in ! " a dark - eyed , dark - haired , shy , village beauty come in -- so fresh in she rosy and yet delicate bloom that the drop of rain which have beat on she hair look like the dew upon a flower fresh gather . " what company be this , ? " say . " it be two young man in a gig , ma 'am , who want to see the house -- yes , and if you please , I tell they so ! " in quick reply to a gesture of dissent from the housekeeper . " I go to the hall - door and tell they it be the wrong day and the wrong hour , but the young man who be drive take off he hat in the wet and beg I to bring this card to you . " " read it , my dear , " say the housekeeper . be so shy as she give it to he that they drop it between they and almost knock they forehead together as they pick it up . be shyer than before . " " be all the information the card yield . " Guppy ! " repeat , " ! Nonsense , I never hear of he ! " " if you please , he tell I that ! " say . " but he say that he and the other young gentleman come from only last night by the mail , on business at the magistrate ' meeting , ten mile off , this morning , and that as they business be soon over , and they have hear a great deal say of , and really do not know what to do with themselves , they have come through the wet to see it . they be lawyer . he say he be not in 's office , but he be sure he may make use of 's name if necessary . " find , now she leave off , that she have be make quite a long speech , be shyer than ever . now , be , in a manner , part and parcel of the place , and besides , be suppose to have make 's . the old lady relax , consent to the admission of the visitor as a favour , and dismisse . the grandson , however , be smite by a sudden wish to see the house himself , propose to join the party . the grandmother , who be pleased that he
he should have that interest , accompany he -- though to do he justice , he be exceedingly unwilling to trouble she . " Much oblige to you , ma 'am ! " say , divest himself of he wet dreadnotch in the hall . " we lawyer do not often get a out , and when we do , we like to make the most of it , you know . " the old housekeeper , with a gracious severity of deportment , wave she hand towards the great staircase . and he friend follow ; and she grandson follow they ; a young gardener go before to open the shutter . as be usually the case with people who go over house , and he friend be dead beat before they have well begin . they straggle about in wrong place , look at wrong thing , do not care for the right thing , gape when more room be open , exhibit profound depression of spirit , and be clearly knock up . in each successive chamber that they enter , Rouncewell , who be as upright as the house itself , rest apart in a window - seat or other such nook and listen with stately approval to 's exposition . she grandson be so attentive to it that be shyer than ever -- and prettier . thus they pass on from room to room , raise the pictured Dedlock for a few brief minute as the young gardener admit the light , and reconsign they to they grave as he shut it out again . it appear to the afflict and he inconsolable friend that there be no end to the Dedlock , whose family greatness seem to consist in they never have do anything to distinguish themselves for seven hundred year . even the long drawing - room of can not revive 's spirit . he be so low that he droop on the threshold and have hardly strength of mind to enter . but a portrait over the chimney - piece , paint by the fashionable artist of the day , act upon he like a charm . he recover in a moment . he stare at it with uncommon interest ; he seem to be fix and fascinate by it . " dear I ! " say . " who be that ? " " the picture over the fire - place , " say , " be the portrait of the present . it be consider a perfect likeness , and the best work of the master . " " Blest , " say , star in a kind of dismay at he friend , " if I can ever have see she . yet I know she ! have the picture be engrave , miss ? " " the picture have never be engrave . have always refuse permission . " " well ! " say in a low voice . " I will be shoot if it be not very curious how well I know that picture ! so that be , be it ! " " the picture on the right be the present . the picture on the left be he father , the late . " have no eye for either of these magnate . " it be unaccountable to I , " he say , still star at the portrait , " how well I know that picture ! I be dash , " add , look round , " if I do not think I must have have a dream of that picture , you know ! " as no one present take any especial interest in 's dream , the probability be not pursue . but he still remain so absorb by the portrait that he stand immovable before it until the young gardener have close the shutter , when he come out of the room in a dazed state that be a odd though a sufficient substitute for interest and follow into the succeeding room with a confused stare , as if he be look everywhere for again . he see no more of she . he see she room , which be the last shown , as be very elegant , and he look out of the window from which she look out , not long ago , upon the weather that bore she to death . all thing have a end , even house that people take infinite pain to see and be tired of before they begin to see they . he have come to the end of the sight , and the fresh village beauty to the end of she description ; which be always this : " the terrace below be much admired . it be call , from a old story in the family , the Ghost 's walk . " " no ? " say , greedily curious . " what be the story , miss ? be it anything about a picture ? " " pray tell we the story , " say in a half whisper . " I do not know it , sir . " be shyer than ever . " it be not related to visitor ; it be almost forgotten , " say the housekeeper , advancing . " it have never be more than a family anecdote . " " you will excuse my ask again if it have anything to do with a picture , ma 'am , " observe , " because I do assure you that the more I think of that picture the better I know it , without know how I know it ! " the story have nothing to do with a picture ; the housekeeper can guarantee that . be oblige to she for the information and be , moreover , generally oblige . he retire with he friend , guide down
down another staircase by the young gardener , and presently be hear to drive away . it be now dusk . can trust to the discretion of she two young hearer and may tell they how the terrace come to have that ghostly name . she seat herself in a large chair by the fast - darkening window and tell they : " in the wicked day , my dear , of Charles the first -- I mean , of course , in the wicked day of the rebel who leagu themselves against that excellent king -- be the owner of . whether there be any account of a ghost in the family before those day , I can not say . I should think it very likely indeed . " hold this opinion because she consider that a family of such antiquity and importance have a right to a ghost . she regard a ghost as one of the privileges of the upper class , a genteel distinction to which the common people have no claim . " , " say , " be , I have no occasion to say , on the side of the bless martyr . but it be suppose that he , who have none of the family blood in she vein , favour the bad cause . it be say that she have relation among 's enemy , that she be in correspondence with they , and that she give they information . when any of the country gentleman who follow he 's cause meet here , it be say that my be always nearer to the door of they council - room than they suppose . do you hear a sound like a footstep pass along the terrace , ? " draw nearer to the housekeeper . " I hear the rain-drip on the stone , " reply the young man , " and I hear a curiious echo -- I suppose a echo -- which be very like a halt step . " the housekeeper gravely nods and continue : " partly on account of this division between they , and partly on other account , and he lead a troubled life . she be a lady of a haughty temper . they be not well suite to each other in age or character , and they have no child to moderate between they . after she favourite brother , a young gentleman , be kill in the civil wars ( by 's near kinsman ) , she feeling be so violent that she hate the race into which she have marry . when the be about to ride out from in the king 's cause , she be suppose to have more than once steal down into the stable in the dead of night and lam they horse ; and the story be that once at such a hour , she husband see she glid down the stair and follow she into the stall where he own favourite horse stood . there he seize she by the wrist , and in a struggle or in a fall or through the horse be frightene and lash out , she be lam in the hip and from that hour begin to pine away . " the housekeeper have drop she voice to a little more than a whisper . " she have be a lady of a handsome figure and a noble carriage . she never complain of the change ; she never speak to any one of be crippl or of be in pain , but day by day she try to walk upon the terrace , and with the help of the stone balustrade , go up and down , up and down , up and down , in sun and shadow , with greater difficulty every day . at last , one afternoon she husband ( to whom she have never , on any persuasion , open she lip since that night ) , stand at the great south window , see she drop upon the pavement . he hasten down to raise she , but she repulse he as he bend over she , and look at he fixedly and coldly , say , 'I will die here where I have walk . and I will walk here , though I be in my grave . I will walk here until the pride of this house be humble . and when calamity or when disgrace be come to it , let the Dedlocks listen for my step ! ' " look at . in the deepen gloom look down upon the ground , half frightened and half shy . " there and then she die . and from those day , " say , " the name have come down -- the Ghost 's walk . if the tread be a echo , it be a echo that be only hear after dark , and be often unheard for a long while together . but it come back from time to time ; and so sure as there be sickness or death in the family , it will be hear then . " " and disgrace , grandmother -- " say . " never come to , " return the housekeeper . she grandson apologize with " true . true . " " that be the story . whatever the sound be , it be a worry sound , " say , get up from she chair ; " and what be to be notice in it be that it must be hear . my lady , who be afraid of nothing , admit that when it be there , it must be hear . you can not shut it out . , there be a tall french clock behind you ( place there , 'a purpose ) that have a loud beat when it be in motion and
and can play music . you understand how those thing be manage ? " " pretty well , grandmother , I think . " " set it a - go . " set it a -going -- music and all . " now , come hither , " say the housekeeper . " Hither , child , towards my 's pillow . I be not sure that it be dark enough yet , but listen ! can you hear the sound upon the terrace , through the music , and the beat , and everything ? " " I certainly can ! " " so my say . " covere a of it be interesting when I dress before daylight to peep out of window , where my candle be reflect in the black pane like two beacon , and find all beyond still enshroude in the indistinctness of last night , to watch how it turn out when the day come on . as the prospect gradually reveal itself and disclose the scene over which the wind have wander in the dark , like my memory over my life , I have a pleasure in discover the unknown object that have be around I in my sleep . at first they be faintly discernible in the mist , and above they the later star still glimmer . that pale interval over , the picture begin to enlarge and fill up so fast that at every new peep I could have find enough to look at for a hour . Imperceptibly my candle become the only incongruous part of the morning , the dark place in my room all melt away , and the day shone bright upon a cheerful landscape , prominent in which the old , with its massive tower , throw a softer train of shadow on the view than see compatible with its rugged character . but so from rough outside ( I hope I have learnt ) , serene and gentle influence often proceed . every part of the house be in such order , and every one be so attentive to I , that I have no trouble with my two bunch of key , though what will try to remember the contents of each little store - room drawer and cupboard ; and what will make note on a slate about jam , and pickle , and preserve , and bottle , and glass , and china , and a great many other thing ; and what with be generally a methodical , old - maidish sort of foolish little person , I be so busy that I could not believe it be breakfast - time when I hear the bell ring . away I run , however , and make tea , as I have already be install into the responsibility of the tea - pot ; and then , as they be all rather late and nobody be down yet , I think I would take a peep at the garden and get some knowledge of that too . I find it quite a delightful place -- in front , the pretty avenue and drive by which we have approach ( and where , by the by , we have cut up the gravel so terribly with we wheel that I ask the gardener to roll it ) ; at the back , the flower - garden , with my darling at she window up there , throw it open to smile out at I , as if she would have kiss I from that distance . beyond the flower - garden be a kitchen - garden , and then a paddock , and then a snug little rick - yard , and then a dear little farm - yard . as to the house itself , with its three peak in the roof ; it be various -shaped window , some so large , some so small , and all so pretty ; its ttrellis -work , against the southfro not for rose and honey - suckle , and it be homely , comfortable , welcoming look -- it be , as say when she come out to meet I with she arm through that of its master , worthy of she cousin , a bold thing to say , though he only pinch she dear cheek for it . be as agreeable at breakfast as he have be overnight . there be honey on the table , and it lead he into a discourse about bee . he have no objection to honey , he say ( and I should think he have not , for he seem to like it ) , but he protest against the overweening assumption of bee . he do not at all see why the busy bee should be propose as a model to he ; he suppose the bee like to make honey , or he would not do it -- nobody ask he . it be not necessary for the bee to make such a merit of he taste . if every confectioner go buz about the world bange against everything that come in he way and egotistically call upon everybody to take notice that he be go to he work and must not be interrupt , the world would be quite a unsupportable place . then , after all , it be a ridiculous position to be smoke out of you fortune with brimstone as soon as you have make it . you would have a very mean opinion of a man if he spun cotton for no other purpose . he must say he think a drone the embodiment of a pleasanter and wiser idea . the drone say unaffectedly , " you will excuse I ; I really can not attend to the shop ! I find myself in a world in which there be so much to see
see and so short a time to see it in that I must take the liberty of look about I and beg to be provide for by somebody who do not want to look about he . " this appear to to be the drone philosophy , and he think it a very good philosophy , always suppose the drone to be willing to be on good term with the bee , which , so far as he know , the easy fellow always be , if the consequential creature would only let he , and not be so conceited about he honey ! he pursue this fancy with the lightest foot over a variety of ground and make we all merry , though again he seem to have as serious a meaning in what he say as he be capable of have . I leave they still listen to he when I withdraw to attend to my new duty . they have occupy I for some time , and I be pass through the passage on my return with my basket of key on my arm when call I into a small room next he bed - chamber , which I find to be in part a little library of book and papers and in part quite a little museum of he boot and shoe and hat - boxe . " sit down , my dear , " say . " this , you must know , be the growlery . when I be out of humour , I come and growl here . " " you must be here very seldom , sir , " say I . " oh , you do not know I ! " he return . " when I be deceive or disappoint in -- the wind , and it be easterly , I take refuge here . the growlery be the best - use room in the house . you be not aware of half my humour yet . my dear , how you be trembl ! " I could not help it ; I try very hard , but be alone with that benevolent presence , and meet he kind eye , and feel so happy and so honoure there , and my heart so full -- I kiss he hand . I do not know what I say , or even that I speak . he be disconcert and walk to the window ; I almost believe with a intention of jump out , until he turn and I be reassure by see in he eye what he have go there to hide . he gently patt I on the head , and I sit down . " there ! there ! " he say . " that be over . Pooh ! do not be foolish . " " it shall not happen again , sir , " I return , " but at first it be difficult -- " " ! " he say . " it be easy , easy . why not ? I hear of a good little orphan girl without a protector , and I take it into my head to be that protector . she grow up , and more than justify my good opinion , and I remain she guardian and she friend . what be there in all this ? so , so ! now , we have clear off old score , and I have before I thy pleasant , trusting , trusty face again . " I say to myself , " , my dear , you surprise I ! this really be not what I expect of you ! " and it have such a good effect that I fold my hand upon my basket and quite recover myself . , express he approval in he face , begin to talk to I as confidentially as if I have be in the habit of converse with he every morning for I do not know how long . I almost feel as if I have . " of course , , " he say , " you do not understand this Chancery business ? " and of course I shook my head . " I do not know who do , " he return . " the lawyer have twiste it into such a state of bedevilment that the original merit of the case have long disappear from the face of the earth . it be about a will and the trust under a will -- or it be once . it be about nothing but cost now . we be always appear , and disappear , and swear , and interrogat , and filing , and cross -filing , and argue , and seal , and motioning , and refer , and report , and revolve about the and all he satellite , and equitably waltze ourselves off to dusty death , about cost . that be the great question . all the rest , by some extraordinary means , have melt away . " " but it be , sir , " say I , to bring he back , for he begin to rub he head , " about a will ? " " why , yes , it be about a will when it be about anything , " he return . " a certain , in a evil hour , make a great fortune , and make a great will . in the question how the trust under that will be to be administer , the fortune leave by the will be squander away ; the legatee under the will be reduce to such a miserable condition that they would be sufficiently punish if they have commit a enormous crime in have money leave they , and the will itself be make a dead letter . all through the deplorable cause , everythe that everybody
everybody in it , except one man , know already be refer to that only one man who do not know , it to find out -- all through the deplorable cause , everybody must have copy , over and over again , of everything that have accumulate about it in the way of cartload of papers ( or must pay for they without have they , which be the usual course , for nobody want they ) and must go down the middle and up again through such a infernal country - dance of cost and fee and nonsense and corruption as be never dream of in the wildest vision of a witch 's . equity send question to law , law send question back to equity ; law find it can not do this , equity find it can not do that ; neither can so much as say it can not do anything , without this solicitor instructing and this counsel appear for , and that solicitor instruct and that counsel appear for ; and so on through the whole alphabet , like the history of the apple pie . and thus , through year and year , and live and life , everything go on , constantly begin over and over again , and nothing ever end . and we can not get out of the suit on any term , for we be make party to it , and must be party to it , whether we like it or not . but it will not do to think of it ! when my great uncle , poor , begin to think of it , it be the beginning of the end ! " " the , sir , whose story I have hear ? " he nod gravely . " I be he heir , and this be he house , . when I come here , it be bleak indeed . he have leave the sign of he misery upon it . " " how change it must be now ! " I say . " it have be call , before he time , the peak . he give it it be present name and live here shut up , day and night poring over the wicked heap of papers in the suit and hope against hope to disentangle it from its mystification and bring it to a close . in the meantime , the place become dilapidated , the wind whistle through the crack wall , the rain fall through the broken roof , the weed chok the passage to the rotting door . when I bring what remain of he home here , the brain seem to I to have be blow out of the house too , it be so shatter and ruin . " he walk a little to and fro after say this to himself with a shudder , and then look at I , and brighten , and come and sit down again with he hand in he pocket . " I tell you this be the growlery , my dear . where be I ? " I remind he , at the hopeful change he have make in . " ; true . there be , in that city of there , some property of ours which be much at this day what be then ; I say property of ours , mean of the suit 's , but I ought to call it the property of cost , for cost be the only power on earth that will ever get anything out of it now or will ever know it for anything but a eyesore and a heartsore . it be a street of perishing blind house , with they eye stone out , without a pane of glass , without so much as a window - frame , with the bare blank shutter tumbl from they hinge and fall asunder , the iron rail peel away in flake of rust , the chimney sink in , the stone step to every door ( and every door might be death 's door ) turn stagnant green , the very crutch on which the ruin be prop decaying . although be not in , its master be , and it be stamp with the same seal . these be the 's impression , my dear , all over -- the child know they ! " " how change it be ! " I say again . " why , so it be , " he answer much more cheerfully ; " and it be wisdom in you to keep I to the bright side of the picture . " ( the idea of my wisdom ! ) " these be thing I never talk about or even think about , except in the growlery here . if you consider it right to mention they to and , " look seriously at I , " you can . I leave it to you discretion , . " " I hope , sir -- " say I . " I think you have better call I guardian , my dear . " I feel that I be chok again -- I tax myself with it , " , now , you know you be ! " -- when he feign to say this slightly , as if it be a whim instead of a thoughtful tenderness . but I give the housekeeping key the least shake in the world as a reminder to myself , and fold my hand in a still more determined manner on the basket , look at he quietly . " I hope , guardian , " say I , " that you may not trust too much to my discretion . I hope you may not mistake I . I be afraid it will be a disappointment to you to know that I
I be not clever , but it really be the truth , and you would soon find it out if I have not the honesty to confess it . " he do not seem at all disappointed ; quite the contrary . he tell I , with a smile all over he face , that he know I very well indeed and that I be quite clever enough for he . " I hope I may turn out so , " say I , " but I be much afraid of it , guardian . " " you be clever enough to be the good little woman of we life here , my dear , " he return playfully ; " the little old woman of the child 's ( I do not mean 's ) rhyme : " ' little old woman , and whither so high ? ' 'To sweep the cobweb out of the sky . ' " you will sweep they so neatly out of we sky in the course of you housekeeping , , that one of these day we shall have to abandon the growlery and nail up the door . " this be the beginning of my be call , and , and , and , and , and , and so many name of that sort that my own name soon become quite lose among they . " however , " say , " to return to we gossip . here be , a fine young fellow full of promise . what be to be do with he ? " oh , my goodness , the idea of ask my advice on such a point ! " here he be , , " say , comfortably put he hand into he pocket and stretch out he leg . " he must have a profession ; he must make some choice for himself . there will be a world more wiglomeration about it , I suppose , but it must be do . " " more what , guardian ? " say I . " more wiglomeration , " say he . " it be the only name I know for the thing . he be a ward in , my dear . and will have something to say about it ; master - - a sort of ridiculous sexton , digge grave for the merit of cause in a back room at the end of , -- will have something to say about it ; counsel will have something to say about it ; the Chancellor will have something to say about it ; the satellite will have something to say about it ; they will all have to be handsomely feed , all round , about it ; the whole thing will be vastly ceremonious , wordy , unsatisfactory , and expensive , and I call it , in general , wiglomeration . how mankind ever come to be afflict with wiglomeration , or for whose sin these young people ever fall into a pit of it , I do not know ; so it be . " he begin to rub he head again and to hind that he feel the wind . but it be a delightful instance of he kindness towards I that whether he rub he head , or walk about , or do both , he face be sure to recover its benignant expression as it look at mine ; and he be sure to turn comfortable again and put he hand in he pocket and stretch out he leg . " perhaps it would be best , first of all , " say I , " to ask what he incline to himself . " " exactly so , " he return . " that be what I mean ! you know , just accustom yourself to talk it over , with you tact and in you quiet way , with he and , and see what you all make of it . we be sure to come at the heart of the matter by you means , little woman . " I really be frightene at the thought of the importance I be attaine and the number of thing that be be confide to I . I have not mean this at all ; I have mean that he should speak to . but of course I say nothing in reply except that I would do my best , though I fear ( I reately feel it necessary to repeat this ) that he think I much more sagacious than I be . at which my guardian only laugh the pleasantest laugh I ever hear . " come ! " he say , rise and push back he chair . " I think we may have do with the growlery for one day ! only a concluding word . , my dear , do you wish to ask I anything ? " he look so attentively at I that I look attentively at he and feel sure I understand he . " about myself , sir ? " say I . " yes . " " , " say I , venture to put my hand , which be suddenly colder than I could have wish , in he , " nothing ! I be quite sure that if there be anything I ought to know or have any need to know , I should not have to ask you to tell it to I . if my whole reliance and confidence be not place in you , I must have a hard heart indeed . I have nothing to ask you , nothing in the world . " he draw my hand through he arm and we go away to look for . from that hour I feel quite easy with he , quite unreserved , quite content to know no more , quite
quite happy . we live , at first , rather a busy life at , for we have to become acquainted with many resident in and out of the neighbourhood who know . it seem to and I that everybody know he who want to do anything with anybody else 's money . it amaze we when we begin to sort he letter and to answer some of they for he in the growlery of a morning to find how the great object of the life of nearly all he correspondent appear to be to form themselves into committee for get in and lay out money . the lady be as desperate as the gentleman ; indeed , I think they be even more so . they throw themselves into committee in the most impassioned manner and collect subscription with a vehemence quite extraordinary . it appear to we that some of they must pass they whole life in deal out subscription - card to the whole post-office directory -- shilling card , half - crown card , half - sovereign card , penny card . they want everything . they want wear apparel , they want linen rag , they want money , they want coal , they want soup , they want interest , they want autograph , they want flannel , they want whatever have -- or have not . they objects be as various as they demand . they be go to raise new building , they be go to pay off debt on old building , they be go to establish in a picturesque building ( engraving of propose west elevation attach ) the of , they be go to give a testimonial to , they be go to have they secretary 's portrait pain and present to he mother - in - law , whose deep devotion to he be well know , they be go to get up everything , I really believe , from five hundred thousand tract to a annuity and from a marble monument to a silver tea - pot . they take a multitude of title . they be the of , the daughters of , the sister of all the cardinal virtue separately , the females of , the Lady of a hundred denomination . they appear to be always excited about canvassing and elect . they seem to we poor wit , and accord to they own account , to be constantly poll people by ten of thousand , yet never bring they candidate in for anything . it make we head ache to think , on the whole , what feverish life they must lead . among the ladie who be most distinguished for this rapacious benevolence ( if I may use the expression ) be a , who seem , as I judge from the number of she letter to , to be almost as powerful a correspondent as Jellyby herself . we observ that the wind always change when Mrs . become the subject of conversation and that it invariably interrupt and prevent he go any farther , when he have remark that there be two class of charitable people ; one , the people who do a little and make a great deal of noise ; the other , the people who do a great deal and make no noise at all . we be therefore curious to see Pardiggle , suspect she to be a type of the former class , and be glad when she call one day with she five young son . she be a formidable style of lady with spectacle , a prominent nose , and a loud voice , who have the effect of want a great deal of room . and she really do , for she knocke down little chair with she skirt that be quite a great way off . as only and I be at home , we receive she timidly , for she seem to come in like cold weather and to make the little Pardiggles blue as they follow . " these , young lady , " say . Pardiggle with great volubility after the first salutation , " be my five boy . you may have see they name in a print subscription list ( perhaps more than one ) in the possession of we esteem friend . , my eldest ( twelve ) , be the boy who send out he pocket - money , to the amount of five and threepence , to the . , my second ( ten and a half ) , be the child who contribute two and nine - pence to the . , my third ( nine ) , one and sixpence halfpenny ; , my fourth ( seven ) , eightpence to the ; , my youngest ( five ) , have voluntarily enrol himself in the of , and be pledge never , through life , to use tobacco in any form . " we have never see such dissatisfied child . it be not merely that they be weazen and shrivell -- though they be certainly that too -- but they look absolutely ferocious with discontent . at the mention of the , I could really have suppose to be one of the most baleful member of that tribe , he give I such a savage frown . the face of each child , as the amount of he contribution be mention , darken in a peculiarly vindictive manner , but he be by far the worst . I must except , however , the little recruit into the of , who be stolidly and evenly miserable . " you have be visit , I understand , " say , " at 's ? " we say yes , we have pass one night there . " . , " pursue the lady , always speak in the same demonstrative
demonstrative , loud , hard tone , so that she voice impress my fancy as if it have a sort of spectacle on too -- and I may take the opportunity of remarking that she spectacle be make the less engage by she eye be what call " chok eye , " mean very prominent -- " . be a benefactor to society and deserve a help hand . my boy have contribute to the african project -- , one and six , be the entire allowance of nine week ; , one and a penny halfpenny , be the same ; the rest , accord to they little means . nevertheless , I do not go with in all thing . I do not go with . in she treatment of she young family . it have be notice . it have be observe that she young family be exclude from participation in the object to which she be devoted . she may be right , she may be wrong ; but , right or wrong , this be not my course with my young family . I take they everywhere . " I be afterwards convinced ( and so be ) that from the ill - condition eldest child , these word extort a sharp yell . he turn it off into a yawn , but it begin as a yell . " they attend matin with I ( very prettily do ) at half - past six o'clock in the morning all the year round , include of course the depth of winter , " say rapidly , " and they be with I during the revolve duty of the day . I be a lady , I be a lady , I be a reading lady , I be a lady ; I be on the local Linen box Committee and many general committee ; and my canvassing alone be very extensive -- perhaps no one 's more so . but they be my companion everywhere ; and by these mean they acquire that knowledge of the poor , and that capacity of do charitable business in general -- in short , that taste for the sort of thing -- which will render they in after life a service to they neighbour and a satisfaction to themselves . my young family be not frivolous ; they expend the entire amount of they allowance in subscription , under my direction ; and they have attend as many public meeting and listen to as many lecture , oration , and discussion as generally fall to the lot of few grow people . ( five ) , who , as I mention , have of he own election join the of , be one of the very few child who manifest consciousness on that occasion after a fervid address of two hour from the chairman of the evening . " glower at we as if he never could , or would , forgive the injury of that night . " you may have observed , , " say , " in some of the list to which I have refer , in the possession of we esteem friend , that the name of my young family be conclude with the name of O . . , , one pound . that be they father . we usually observe the same routine . I put down my mite first ; then my young family enrol they contribution , accord to they age and they little means ; and then bring up the rear . be happy to throw in he limited donation , under my direction ; and thus thing be make not only pleasant to ourselves , but , we trust , improve to other . " suppose be to dine with , and suppose be to relieve he mind after dinner to , would , in return , make any confidential communication to ? I be quite confused to find myself think this , but it come into my head . " you be very pleasantly situate here ! " say . we be glad to change the subject , and go to the window , point out the beauty of the prospect , on which the spectacle appear to I to rest with curiious indifference . " you know ? " say we visitor . we be obliged to say that we have not the pleasure of 's acquaintance . " the loss be yours , I assure you , " say . Pardiggle with she commanding deportment . " he be a very fervid , impassioned speaker -- full of fire ! Station in a waggon on this lawn , now , which , from the shape of the land , be naturally adapt to a public meeting , he would improve almost any occasion you could mention for hour and hour ! by this time , young lady , " say , move back to she chair and overturning , as if by invisible agency , a little round table at a considerable distance with my work - basket on it , " by this time you have find I out , I dare say ? " this be really such a confuse question that look at I in perfect dismay . as to the guilty nature of my own consciousness after what I have be think , it must have be express in the colour of my cheek . " find out , I mean , " say , " the prominent point in my character . I be aware that it be so prominent as to be discoverable immediately . I lay myself open to detection , I know . well ! I freely admit , I be a woman of business . I love hard work ; I enjoy hard work . the excitement do I good . I be so accustom and
and inure to hard work that I do not know what fatigue be . " we murmure that it be very astonishing and very gratifying , or something to that effect . I do not think we know what it be either , but this be what we politeness express . " I do not understand what it be to be ti ; you can not tire I if you try ! " say . " the quantity of exertion ( which be no exertion to I ) , the amount of business ( which I regard as nothing ) , that I go through sometimes astonish myself . I have see my young family , and , quite wear out with witnesse it , when I may truly say I have be as fresh as a lark ! " if that dark - visage eldest boy could look more malicious than he have already look , this be the time when he do it . I observ that he double he right fist and deliver a secret blow into the crown of he cap , which be under he left arm . " this give I a great advantage when I be make my round , " say . " if I find a person unwilling to hear what I have to say , I tell that person directly , 'I be incapable of fatigue , my good friend , I be never tire , and I mean to go on until I have do . ' it answer admirably ! , I hope I shall have you assistance in my visiting round immediately , and 's very soon . " at first I try to excuse myself for the present on the general ground of have occupations to attend to which I must not neglect . but as this be a ineffectual protest , I then say , more particularly , that I be not sure of my qualifications . that I be inexperienc in the art of adapt my mind to mind very differently situate , and address they from suitable point of view . that I have not that delicate knowledge of the heart which must be essential to such a work . that I have much to learn , myself , before I could teach other , and that I could not confide in my good intention alone . for these reason I think it best to be as useful as I could , and to render what kind service I could to those immediately about I , and to try to let that circle of duty gradually and naturally expand itself . all this I say with anything but confidence , because be much older than I , and have great experience , and be so very military in she manners . " you be wrong , , " say she , " but perhaps you be not equal to hard work or the excitement of it , and that make a vast difference . if you would like to see how I go through my work , I be now about -- with my young family -- to visit a brickmaker in the neighbourhood ( a very bad character ) and shall be glad to take you with I . Clare also , if she will do I the favour . " and I interchange look , and as we be go out in any case , accept the offer . when we hastily return from put on we bonnet , we find the young family languish in a corner and Pardiggle swee about the room , knock down nearly all the light object it contain . take possession of , and I follow with the family . tell I afterwards that . talk in the same loud tone ( that , indeed , I overhear ) all the way to the brickmaker 's about a exciting contest which she have for two or three year wage against another lady relative to the bringing in of they rival candidate for a pension somewhere . there have be a quantity of printing , and promise , and proxy , and poll , and it appear to have impart great liveliness to all concerned , except the pensioner -- who be not elect yet . I be very fond of be confide in by child and be happy in be usually favour in that respect , but on this occasion it give I great uneasiness . as soon as we be out of door , , with the manner of a little footpad , demand a shilling of I on the ground that he pocket - money be " bone " from he . on my pointing out the great impropriety of the word , especially in connexion with he parent ( for he add sulkily " by she ! " ) , he pinch I and say , " oh , then ! now ! who be you ! you would not like it , I think ? what do she make a sham for , and pretend to give I money , and take it away again ? why do you call it my allowance , and never let I spend it ? " these exasperat question so inflam he mind and the mind of and that they all pinch I at once , and in a dreadfully expert way -- screw up such little piece of my arm that I could hardly forbear cry out . , at the same time , stamp upon my toe . and the bond of , who on account of always have the whole of he little income anticipate stood in fact pledge to abstain from cake as well as tobacco , so swelled with grief and rage when we pass a pastry - cook 's shop that he terrify I by become purple . I never
never undergo so much , both in body and mind , in the course of a walk with young people as from these unnaturally constrain child when they pay I the compliment of be natural . I be glad when we come to the brickmaker 's house , though it be one of a cluster of wretched hovel in a brick - field , with pigsty close to the broken window and miserable little garden before the door grow nothing but stagnant pool . here and there a old tub be put to catch the droppings of rain - water from a roof , or they be banke up with mud into a little pond like a large dirt - pie . at the door and window some man and woman lounge or prowl about , and take little notice of we except to laugh to one another or to say something as we pass about gentlefolk minde they own business and not trouble they head and muddy they shoe with come to look after other people 's . , lead the way with a great show of moral determination and talk with much volubility about the untidy habits of the people ( though I doubt if the best of we could have be tidy in such a place ) , conduct we into a cottage at the farthest corner , the ground - floor room of which we nearly fill . besides ourselves , there be in this damp , offensive room a woman with a black eye , nurse a poor little gas baby by the fire ; a man , all stain with clay and mud and look very dissipated , lie at full length on the ground , smoke a pipe ; a powerful young man fasten a collar on a dog ; and a bold girl do some kind of wash in very dirty water . they all look up at we as we come in , and the woman seem to turn she face towards the fire as if to hide she bruise eye ; nobody give we any welcome . " well , my friend , " say , but she voice have not a friendly sound , I think ; it be much too business - like and systematic . " how do you do , all of you ? I be here again . I tell you , you could not tire I , you know . I be fond of hard work , and be true to my word . " " there a not , " grow the man on the floor , whose head rest on he hand as he star at we , " any more on you to come in , be there ? " " no , my friend , " say , seat herself on one stool and knock down another . " we be all here . " " because I think there war not enough of you , perhaps ? " say the man , with he pipe between he lip as he look round upon we . the young man and the girl both laugh . two friend of the young man , whom we have attract to the doorway and who stand there with they hand in they pocket , echo the laugh noisily . " you can not tire I , good people , " say to these latter . " I enjoy hard work , and the harder you make mine , the better I like it . " " then make it easy for she ! " grow the man upon the floor . " I want it do , and over . I want a end of these libertie take with my place . I want a end of be draw like a badger . now you be a - go to poll -pry and question accord to custom -- I know what you be a - go to be up to . well ! you have not get no occasion to be up to it . I will save you the trouble . be my daughter a - washing ? yes , she be a - washing . look at the water . smell it ! that be wot we drink . how do you like it , and what do you think of gin instead ! a not my place dirty ? yes , it be dirty -- it be nat'rally dirty , and it be nat'rally onwholesome ; and we have have five dirty and onwholesome child , as be all dead infant , and so much the better for they , and for we besides . have I read the little book wot you leave ? no , I can not read the little book wot you leave . there a not nobody here as know how to read it ; and if there wo , it would not be suitable to I . it be a book fit for a babby , and I be not a babby . if you be to leave I a doll , I should not nuss it . how have I be conduct of myself ? why , I have be drink for three day ; and I 'da be drink four if I 'da have the money . do not I never mean for to go to church ? no , I do not never mean for to go to church . I should not be expect there , if I do ; the beadle 's too gan - teel for I . and how do my wife get that black eye ? why , I give it she ; and if she say I do not , she be a lie ! " he have pull he pipe out of he mouth to say all this , and he now turn over on he
he other side and smoke again . , who have be regard he through she spectacle with a forcible composure , calculate , I could not help think , to increase he antagonism , pull out a good book as if it be a constable 's staff and take the whole family into custody . I mean into religious custody , of course ; but she really do it as if she be a inexorable moral policeman carry they all off to a station - house . and I be very uncomfortable . we both feel intrusive and out of place , and we both think that . Pardiggle would have get on infinitely better if she have not have such a mechanical way of take possession of people . the child sulk and stare ; the family take no notice of we whatever , except when the young man make the dog bark , which he usually do when be most emphatic . we both feel painfully sensible that between we and these people there be a iron barrier which could not be remove by we new friend . by whom or how it could be remove , we do not know , but we know that . even what she read and say seem to we to be ill - chosen for such auditor , if it have be impart ever so modestly and with ever so much tact . as to the little book to which the man on the floor have refer , we acquire a knowledge of it afterwards , and say he doubt if could have read it , though he have have no other on he desolate island . we be much relieved , under these circumstance , when leave off . the man on the floor , then turn he head round again , say morosely , " well ! you have do , have you ? " " for to - day , I have , my friend . but I be never fatigue . I shall come to you again in you regular order , " return with demonstrative cheerfulness . " so long as you go now , " say he , fold he arm and shutt he eye with a oath , " you may do wot you like ! " accordingly rise and make a little vortex in the confined room from which the pipe itself very narrowly escape . take one of she young family in each hand , and tell the other to follow closely , and express she hope that the brickmaker and all he house would be improve when she see they next , she then proceed to another cottage . I hope it be not unkind in I to say that she certainly do make , in this a in everything else , a show that be not conciliatory of do charity by wholesale and of deal in it to a large extent . she suppose that we be follow she , but as soon as the space be leave clear , we approach the woman sit by the fire to ask if the baby be ill . she only look at it as it lay on she lap . we have observ before that when she look at it she cover she discoloure eye with she hand , as though she wish to separate any association with noise and violence and ill treatment from the poor little child . , whose gentle heart be move by its appearance , bend down to touch its little face . as she do so , I see what happen and draw she back . the child die . " oh , ! " cry , sinke on she knee beside it . " look here ! oh , , my love , the little thing ! the suffering , quiet , pretty little thing ! I be so sorry for it . I be so sorry for the mother . I never see a sight so pitiful as this before ! oh , baby , baby ! " such compassion , such gentleness , as that with which she bend down weeping and put she hand upon the mother 's might have soften any mother 's heart that ever beat . the woman at first gaze at she in astonishment and then burst into tear . presently I take the light burden from she lap , do what I could to make the baby 's rest the prettier and gentler , laid it on a shelf , and cover it with my own handkerchief . we try to comfort the mother , and we whisper to she what we saviour say of child . she answer nothing , but sit weeping -- weepe very much . when I turn , I find that the young man have take out the dog and be stand at the door look in upon we with dry eye , but quiet . the girl be quiet too and sit in a corner look on the ground . the man have risen . he still smoke he pipe with a air of defiance , but he be silent . a ugly woman , very poorly clothed , hurrie in while I be glance at they , and come straight up to the mother , say , " ! ! " the mother rise on be so address and fall upon the woman 's neck . she also have upon she face and arm the mark of ill usage . she have no kind of about she , but the grace of sympathy ; but when she condol with the woman , and she own tear fell , she want no beauty . I say condol , but she only word be " ! ! " all the rest be in the tone in which she say they . I think
think it very touch to see these two woman , coarse and shabby and beaten , so united ; to see what they could be to one another ; to see how they feel for one another , how the heart of each to each be soften by the hard trials of they life . I think the best side of such people be almost hide from we . what the poor be to the poor be little know , except to themselves and . we feel it better to withdraw and leave they uninterrupted . we steal out quietly and without notice from any one except the man . he be lean against the wall near the door , and find that there be scarcely room for we to pass , go out before we . he seem to want to hide that he do this on we account , but we perceive that he do , and thanke he . he make no answer . be so full of grief all the way home , and , whom we find at home , be so distressed to see she in tear ( though he say to I , when she be not present , how beautiful it be too ! ) , that we arrange to return at night with some little comforts and repeat we visit at the brick - maker 's house . we say as little as we could to , but the wind change directly . accompany we at night to the scene of we morning expedition . on we way there , we have to pass a noisy drinking - house , where a number of man be flock about the door . among they , and prominent in some dispute , be the father of the little child . at a short distance , we pass the young man and the dog , in congenial company . the sister be stand laugh and talk with some other young woman at the corner of the row of cottage , but she seem asham and turn away as we go by . we leave we escort within sight of the brickmaker 's dwelling and proceed by ourselves . when we come to the door , we find the woman who have bring such consolation with she stand there look anxiously out . " it be you , young lady , be it ? " she say in a whisper . " I be a - watch for my master . my heart 's in my mouth . if he be to catch I away from home , he would pretty near murder I . " " do you mean you husband ? " say I . " yes , miss , my master . 's asleep , quite worn out . she be scarcely have the child off she lap , poor thing , these seven day and night , except when I have be able to take it for a minute or two . " as she give way for we , she go softly in and put what we have bring near the miserable bed on which the mother sleep . no effort have be make to clean the room -- it seem in it be nature almost hopeless of be clean ; but the small waxen form from which so much solemnity diffuse itself have be compose afresh , and wash , and neatly dress in some fragment of white linen ; and on my handkerchief , which still cover the poor baby , a little bunch of sweet herb have be lay by the same rough , scarr hand , so lightly , so tenderly ! " May heaven reward you ! " we say to she . " you be a good woman . " " I , young lady ? " she return with surprise . " Hush ! , ! " the mother have moan in she sleep and move . the sound of the familiar voice seem to calm she again . she be quiet once more . how little I think , when I raise my handkerchief to look upon the tiny sleeper underneath and seem to see a halo shine around the child through 's droop hair as she pity bend she head -- how little I think in whose unquiet bosom that handkerchief would come to lie after cover the motionless and peaceful breast ! I only think that perhaps the angel of the child might not be all unconscious of the woman who replace it with so compassionate a hand ; not all unconscious of she presently , when we have take leave , and leave she at the door , by turn look , and listen in terror for herself , and say in she old soothing manner , " , ! " and I do not know how it be I seem to be always write about myself . I mean all the time to write about other people , and I try to think about myself as little as possible , and I be sure , when I find myself come into the story again , I be really vex and say , " dear , dear , you tiresome little creature , I wish you would not ! " but it be all of no use . I hope any one who may read what I write will understand that if these page contain a great deal about I , I can only suppose it must be because I have really something to do with they and can not be keep out . my darling and I read together , and work , and practise , and find so much employment for we time that the winter day fly by we like bright - win bird . generally in the afternoon , and always in the evening , give
give we he company . although he be one of the most restless creature in the world , he certainly be very fond of we society . he be very , very , very fond of . I mean it , and I have better say it at once . I have never see any young people fall in love before , but I find they out quite soon . I could not say so , of course , or show that I know anything about it . on the contrary , I be so demure and use to seem so unconscious that sometimes I consider within myself while I be sit at work whether I be not grow quite deceitful . but there be no help for it . all I have to do be to be quiet , and I be as quiet as a mouse . they be as quiet as mouse too , so far as any word be concerned , but the innocent manner in which they rely more and more upon I as they take more and more to one another be so charme that I have great difficulty in not show how it interest I . " we dear little old woman be such a capital old woman , " would say , come up to meet I in the garden early , with he pleasant laugh and perhaps the least tinge of a blush , " that I can not get on without she . before I begin my harum - scarum day -- grind away at those book and instrument and then gallop up hill and down dale , all the country round , like a highwayman -- it do I so much good to come and have a steady walk with we comfortable friend , that here I be again ! " " you know , , dear , " would say at night , with she head upon my shoulder and the firelight shin in she thoughtful eye , " I do not want to talk when we come upstairs here . only to sit a little while think , with you dear face for company , and to hear the wind and remember the poor sailor at sea -- " ah ! perhaps be go to be a sailor . we have talk it over very often now , and there be some talk of gratify the inclination of he childhood for the sea . have write to a relation of the family , a great , for he interest in 's favour , generally ; and have reply in a gracious manner that he would be happy to advance the prospects of the young gentleman if it should ever prove to be within he power , which be not at all probable , and that my send she compliment to the young gentleman ( to whom she perfectly remember that she be ally by remote consanguinity ) and trust that he would ever do he duty in any honourable profession to which he might devite himself . " so I apprehend it be pretty clear , " say to I , " that I shall have to work my own way . never mind ! plenty of people have have to do that before now , and have do it . I only wish I have the command of a clipping privateer to begin with and could carry off the and keep he on short allowance until he give judgment in we cause . he would find himself grow thing , if he do not look sharp ! " with a buoyancy and hopefulness and a gaiety that hardly ever flag , have a carelessness in he character that quite perplex I , principally because he mistake it , in such a very odd way , for prudence . it enter into all he calculation about money in a singular manner which I do not think I can better explain than by reverting for a moment to we loan to . have ascertaine the amount , either from himself or from , and have place the money in my hand with instruction to I to retain my own part of it and hand the rest to . the number of little act of thoughtless expenditure which justifi by the recovery of he ten pound , and the number of time he talk to I as if he have save or realize that amount , would form a sum in simple addition . " my prudent mother , why not ? " he say to I when he want , without the least consideration , to bestow five pound on the brickmaker . " I make ten pound , clear , out of ' business . " " how be that ? " say I . " why , I get rid of ten pound which I be quite content to get rid of and never expect to see any more . you do not deny that ? " " no , " say I . " very well ! then I come into possession of ten pound -- " " the same ten pound , " I hint . " that have nothing to do with it ! " return . " I have get ten pound more than I expect to have , and consequently I can afford to spend it without be particular . " in exactly the same way , when he be persuade out of the sacrifice of these five pound by be convinced that it would do no good , he carry that sum to he credit and draw upon it . " let I see ! " he would say . " I save five pound out of the brickmaker 's affair , so if I have a good rattle to and back in a post-chaise and put that down at four
four pound , I shall have save one . and it be a very good thing to save one , let I tell you : a penny save be a penny get ! " I believe 's be as frank and generous a nature as there possibly can be . he be ardent and brave , and in the midst of all he wild restlessness , be so gentle that I know he like a brother in a few week . he gentleness be natural to he and would have show itself abundantly even without 's influence ; but with it , he become one of the most winning of companion , always so ready to be interested and always so happy , sanguine , and light - hear . I be sure that I , sit with they , and walk with they , and talk with they , and notice from day to day how they go on , fall deeper and deeper in love , and say nothing about it , and each shyly think that this love be the greatest of secret , perhaps not yet suspect even by the other -- I be sure that I be scarcely less enchanted than they be and scarcely less pleased with the pretty dream . we be go on in this way , when one morning at breakfast receive a letter , and look at the superscription , say , " from ? aye , aye ! " and open and read it with evident pleasure , announce to we in a parenthesis when he be about half - way through , that be " come down " on a visit . now who be Boythorn , we all thought . and I dare say we all think too -- I be sure I do , for one -- would Boythorn at all interfere with what be go forward ? " I go to school with this fellow , , " say , tap the letter as he lay it on the table , " more than five and forty year ago . he be then the most impetuous boy in the world , and he be now the most impetuous man . he be then the loudest boy in the world , and he be now the loudest man . he be then the heartiest and sturdiest boy in the world , and he be now the heartiest and sturdiest man . he be a tremendous fellow . " " in stature , sir ? " ask . " pretty well , , in that respect , " say ; " be some ten year older than I and a couple of inch taller , with he head throw back like a old soldier , he stalwart chest square , he hand like a clean blacksmith 's , and he lung ! there be no simile for he lung . talk , laugh , or snor , they make the beam of the house shake . " as sit enjoy the image of he friend , we observe the favourable oman that there be not the least indication of any change in the wind . " but it be the inside of the man , the warm heart of the man , the passion of the man , the fresh blood of the man , -- and , and little too , for you be all interested in a visitor -- that I speak of , " he pursue . " he language be as sound as he voice . he be always in extreme , perpetually in the superlative degree . in he condemnation he be all ferocity . you might suppose he to be a ogre from what he say , and I believe he have the reputation of one with some people . there ! I tell you no more of he beforehand . you must not be surprised to see he take I under he protection , for he have never forgote that I be a low boy at school and that we friendship begin in he knocke two of my head tyrant 's tooth out ( he say six ) before breakfast . and he man , " to I , " will be here this afternoon , my dear . " I take care that the necessary preparation be make for 's reception , and we look forward to he arrival with some curiosity . the afternoon wear away , however , and he do not appear . the dinner - hour arrive , and still he do not appear . the dinner be put back a hour , and we be sit round the fire with no light but the blaze when the hall - door suddenly burst open and the hall resound with these word , uttere with the greatest vehemence and in a stentorian tone : " we have be misdirect , , by a most abandoned ruffian , who tell we to take the turning to the right instead of to the left . he be the most intolerable scoundrel on the face of the earth . he father must have be a most consummate villain , ever to have such a son . I would have have that fellow shot without the least remorse ! " " do he do it on purpose ? " inquire . " I have not the slightest doubt that the scoundrel have pass he whole existence in misdirecting traveller ! " return the other . " by my soul , I think he the worst - look dog I have ever beheld when he be tell I to take the turning to the right . and yet I stand before that fellow face to face and do not knock he brain out ! " " tooth , you mean ? " say . " ha , ha , ha ! "
" laugh , really make the whole house vibrate . " what , you have not forget it yet ! , ha , ha ! and that be another most consummate vagabond ! by my soul , the countenance of that fellow when he be a boy be the blackest image of perfidy , cowardice , and cruelty ever set up as a scarecrow in a field of scoundrel . if I be to meet that most unparalleled despot in the street to - morrow , I would fall he like a rotten tree ! " " I have no doubt of it , " say . " now , will you come upstairs ? " " by my soul , , " return he guest , who seem to refer to he watch , " if you have be marry , I would have turn back at the garden - gate and go away to the remotest summit of the sooner than I would have present myself at this unseasonable hour . " " not quite so far , I hope ? " say . " by my life and honour , yes ! " cry the visitor . " I would not be guilty of the audacious insolence of keep a lady of the house wait all this time for any earthly consideration . I would infinitely rather destroy myself -- infinitely rather ! " talk thus , they go upstairs , and presently we hear he in he bedroom thunder " , ha , ha! " and again " , ha , ha ! " until the flattest echo in the neighbourhood seem to catch the contagion and to laugh as enjoyingly as he do or as we do when we hear he laugh . we all conceive a prepossession in he favour , for there be a sterling quality in this laugh , and in he vigorous , healthy voice , and in the roundness and fullness with which he utter every word he speak , and in the very fury of he superlative , which seem to go off like blank cannon and hurt nothing . but we be hardly prepared to have it so confirm by he appearance when present he . he be not only a very handsome old gentleman -- upright and stalwart as he have be describe to we -- with a massive grey head , a fine composure of face when silent , a figure that might have become corpulent but for he be so continually in earnest that he give it no rest , and a ching that might have subsid into a double ching but for the vehement emphasis in which it be constantly require to assist ; but he be such a true gentleman in he manner , so chivalrously polite , he face be light by a smile of so much sweetness and tenderness , and it seem so plain that he have nothing to hide , but show himself exactly as he be -- incapable , as say , of anything on a limited scale , and fire away with those blank great gun because he carry no small arm whatever -- that really I could not help look at he with equal pleasure as he sit at dinner , whether he smilingly converse with and I , or be lead by into some great volley of superlative , or throw up he head like a bloodhound and give out that tremendous " , ha , ha ! " " you have bring you bird with you , I suppose ? " say . " by heaven , he be the most astonishing bird in ! " reply the other . " he be the most wonderful creature ! I would not take ten thousand guinea for that bird . I have leave a annuity for he sole support in case he should outlive I . he be , in sense and attachment , a phenomenon . and he father before he be one of the most astonish bird that ever liv ! " the subject of this laudation be a very little canary , who be so tame that he be bring down by 's man , on he forefinger , and after take a gentle flight round the room , alight on he master 's head . to hear presently express the most implacable and passionate sentiment , with this fragile mite of a creature quietly perch on he forehead , be to have a good illustration of he character , I think . " by my soul , , " he say , very gently hold up a bit of bread to the canary to peck at , " if I be in you place I would seize every master in by the throat to - morrow morning and shake he until he money roll out of he pocket and he bone rattle in he skin . I would have a settlement out of somebody , by fair means or by foul . if you would empower I to do it , I would do it for you with the greatest satisfaction ! " ( all this time the very small canary be eat out of he hand . ) " I thank you , Lawrence , but the suit be hardly at such a point at present , " return , laugh , " that it would be greatly advanc even by the legal process of shak the bench and the whole bar . " " there never be such a infernal cauldron as that Chancery on the face of the earth ! " say . " nothing but a mine below it on a busy day in term time , with all its record , rule , and precedent collect in it and every functionary belong to it also , high and low , upward and downward , from its son
son the accountant -General to its father the , and the whole blown to atom with ten thousand hundredweight of gunpowder , would reform it in the least ! " it be impossible not to laugh at the energetic gravity with which he recommend this strong measure of reform . when we laugh , he throw up he head and shake he broad chest , and again the whole country seem to echo to he " , ha , ha ! " it have not the least effect in disturb the bird , whose sense of security be complete and who hopp about the table with its quick head now on this side and now on that , turn its bright sudden eye on its master as if he be no more than another bird . " but how do you and you neighbour get on about the disputed right of way ? " say . " you be not free from the toil of the law yourself ! " " the fellow have bring action against I for trespass , and I have bring action against he for trespass , " return . " by heaven , he be the proudest fellow breathing . it be morally impossible that he name can be . it must be . " " Complimentary to we distant relation ! " say my guardian laughingly to and . " I would beg 's pardon and 's pardon , " resume we visitor , " if I be not reassure by see in the fair face of the lady and the smile of the gentleman that it be quite unnecessary and that they keep they distant relation at a comfortable distance . " " or he keep we , " suggest . " by my soul , " exclaim , suddenly fire another volley , " that fellow be , and he father be , and he grandfather be , the most stiff - necke , arrogant imbecile , pig - head numskull , ever , by some inexplicable mistake of , bear in any station of life but a walking - stick 's ! the whole of that family be the most solemnly conceit and consummate blockhead ! but it be no matter ; he should not shut up my path if he be fifty baronet melte into one and live in a hundred Chesney Wolds , one within another , like the ivory ball in a chinese carving . the fellow , by he agent , or secretary , or somebody , write to I ' , , present he compliment to , and have to call he attention to the fact that the green pathway by the old parsonage - house , now the property of , be 's right of way , be in fact a portion of the park of chesney Wold , and that find it convenient to close up the same . ' I write to the fellow , ' present he compliment to , , and have to call he attention to the fact that he totally deny the whole of 's position on every possible subject and have to add , in reference to close up the pathway , that he will be glad to see the man who may undertake to do it . ' the fellow send a most abandoned villain with one eye to construct a gateway . I play upon that execrable scoundrel with a fire - engine until the breath be nearly drive out of he body . the fellow erect a gate in the night . I chop it down and burn it in the morning . he send he myrmidon to come over the fence and pass and repass . I catch they in humane man trap , fire split pea at they leg , play upon they with the engine -- resolve to free mankind from the insupportable burden of the existence of those lurk ruffian . he bring action for trespass ; I bring action for trespass . he bring action for assault and battery ; I defend they and continue to assault and batterespect , ha , ha ! " to hear he say all this with unimaginable energy , one might have think he the angriest of mankind . to see he at the very same time , look at the bird now perch upon he thumb and softly smooth its feather with he forefinger , one might have think he the gentlest . to hear he laugh and see the broad good nature of he face then , one might have suppose that he have not a care in the world , or a dispute , or a dislike , but that he whole existence be a summer joke . " no , no , " he say , " no close up of my path by any Dedlock ! though I willingly confess , " here he soften in a moment , " that be the most accomplished lady in the world , to whom I would do any homage that a plain gentleman , and no baronet with a head seven hundred year thick , may . a man who join he regiment at twenty and within a week challenge the most imperious and presumptuous coxcomb of a commanding officer that ever draw the breath of life through a tight waist -- and get broke for it -- be not the man to be walk over by all the , dead or alive , locked or unlocked . , ha , ha ! " " nor the man to allow he junior to be walk over either ? " say my guardian . " most assuredly not ! " say , clapp he on the shoulder with a air of protection that have something serious in it , though he laugh . " he will stand by the low boy , always
always . , you may rely upon he ! but speak of this trespass -- with apology to and for the length at which I have pursue so dry a subject -- be there nothing for I from you man and ? " " I think not , ? " say . " nothing , guardian . " " Much oblige ! " say . " have no need to ask , after even my slight experience of 's forethotch for every one about she . " ( they all encourage I ; they be determined to do it . ) " I inquire because , come from , I of course have not yet be in town , and I think some letter might have be send down here . I dare say they will report progress to - morrow morning . " I see he so often in the course of the evening , which pass very pleasantly , contemplate and with a interest and a satisfaction that make he fine face remarkably agreeable as he sit at a little distance from the piano listen to the music -- and he have small occasion to tell we that he be passionately fond of music , for he face show it -- that I ask my guardian as we sit at the backgammon board whether have ever be marry . " no , " say he . " no . " " but he mean to be ! " say I . " how do you find out that ? " he return with a smile . " why , guardian , " I explain , not without redden a little at hazard what be in my thought , " there be something so tender in he manner , after all , and he be so very courtly and gentle to we , and -- " direct he eye to where he be sit as I have just describe he . I say no more . " you be right , little woman , " he answer . " he be all but marry once . long ago . and once . " " do the lady die ? " " no -- but she die to he . that time have have its influence on all he later life . would you suppose he to have a head and a heart full of romance yet ? " " I think , guardian , I might have suppose so . but it be easy to say that when you have tell I so . " " he have never since be what he might have be , " say , " and now you see he in he age with no one near he but he servant and he little yellow friend . it be you throw , my dear ! " I feel , from my guardian 's manner , that beyond this point I could not pursue the subject without change the wind . I therefore forbore to ask any further question . I be interested , but not curious . I think a little while about this old love story in the night , when I be awaken by 's lusty snoring ; and I try to do that very difficult thing , imagine old people young again and invest with the graces of youth . but I fall asleep before I have succeed , and dream of the day when I live in my godmother 's house . I be not sufficientely acquaint with such subject to know whether it be at all remarkable that I almost always dream of that period of my life . with the morning there come a letter from Messrs . and to inform he that one of they clerk would wait upon he at noon . as it be the day of the week on which i pay the bill , and add up my book , and make all the household affair as compact as possible , I remain at home while , , and take advantage of a very fine day to make a little excursion , be to wait for and 's clerk and then be to go on foot to meet they on they return . well ! I be full of business , examine tradesman 's book , add up column , pay money , filing receipt , and I dare say make a great bustle about it when be announce and show in . I have have some idea that the clerk who be to be send down might be the young gentleman who have meet I at the coach - office , and I be glad to see he , because he be associate with my present happiness . I scarcely know he again , he be so uncommonly smart . he have a entirely new suit of glossy clothes on , a shining hat , lilac - kid glove , a neckerchief of a variety of colour , a large hot - house flower in he button - hole , and a thick gold ring on he little finger . besides which , he quite scent the dining - room with bear 's - grease and other perfumery . he look at I with a attention that quite confuse I when I beg he to take a seat until the servant should return ; and as he sit there cross and uncrosse he leg in a corner , and I ask he if he have have a pleasant ride , and hope that be well , I never look at he , but I find he look at I in the same scrutinizing and curiious way . when the request be brotch to he that he would go upstairs to 's room , I mention that he would find lunch prepare for he when he come down , of which hope he
he would partake . he say with some embarrassment , hold the handle of the door , " I have the honour of find you here , miss ? " I reply yes , I should be there ; and he go out with a bow and another look . I think he only awkward and shy , for he be evidently much embarrassed ; and I fancie that the best thing I could do would be to wait until I see that he have everything he want and then to leave he to himself . the lunch be soon bring , but it remain for some time on the table . the interview with be a long one , and a stormy one too , I should think , for although he room be at some distance I hear he loud voice rise every now and then like a high wind , and evidently blow perfect broadsides of denunciation . at last come back , look something the worse for the conference . " my eye , miss , " he say in a low voice , " he be a Tartar ! " " pray take some refreshment , sir , " say I . sit down at the table and begin nervously sharpen the carving - knife on the carving - fork , still look at I ( as I feel quite sure without look at he ) in the same unusual manner . the sharpening last so long that at last I feel a kind of obligation on I to raise my eye in order that I might break the spell under which he seem to labour , of not be able to leave off . he immediately look at the dish and begin to carve . " what will you take yourself , miss ? you will take a morsel of something ? " " no , thank you , " say I . " not I give you a piece of anything at all , miss ? " say Guppy , hurriedly drink off a glass of wine . " nothing , thank you , " say I . " I have only wait to see that you have everything you want . be there anything I can order for you ? " " no , I be much oblige to you , miss , I be sure . I have everythe that I can require to make I comfortable -- at least I -- not comfortable -- I be never that . " he drank off two more glassis of wine , one after another . I think I have better go . " I beg you pardon , miss ! " say , rise when he see I rise . " but would you allow I the favour of a minute 's private conversation ? " not know what to say , I sit down again . " what follow be without prejudice , miss ? " say , anxiously bring a chair towards my table . " I do not understand what you mean , " say I , wonder . " it be one of we law term , miss . you will not make any use of it to my detriment at and or elsewhere . if we conversation should not lead to anything , I be to be as I be and be not to be prejudice in my situation or worldly prospect . in short , it be in total confidence . " " I be at a loss , sir , " say I , " to imagine what you can have to communicate in total confidence to I , whom you have never see but once ; but I should be very sorry to do you any injury . " " thank you , miss . I be sure of it -- that be quite sufficient . " all this time be either plan he forehead with he handkerchief or tightly rub the palm of he left hand with the palm of he right . " if you would excuse my take another glass of wine , miss , I think it might assist I in get on without a continual choke that can not fail to be mutually unpleasant . " he do so , and come back again . I take the opportunity of move well behind my table . " you would not allow I to offer you one , would you miss ? " say , apparently refresh . " not any , " say I . " not half a glass ? " say . " ? no ! then , to proceed . my present salary , , at and 's , be two pound a week . when I first have the happiness of look upon you , it be one fifteen , and have stood at that figure for a lengthened period . a rise of five have since take place , and a further rise of five be guarantee at the expiration of a term not exceed twelve month from the present date . my mother have a little property , which take the form of a small life annuity , upon which she live in a independent though unassuming manner in the . she be eminently calculate for a mother - in - law . she never interfere , be all for peace , and she disposition easy . she have she failings -- as who have not ?-- but I never know she do it when company be present , at which time you may freely trust she with wine , spirit , or malt liquor . my own abode be lodging at , . it be lowly , but airy , open at the back , and consider one of the ' ealthiest outlet . ! in the mildest language , I adore you
you . would you be so kind as to allow I ( as I may say ) to file a declaration -- to make a offer ! " go down on he knee . I be well behind my table and not much frightene . I say , " get up from that ridiculous position immediately , sir , or you will oblige I to break my implied promise and ring the bell ! " " hear I out , miss ! " say , fold he hand . " I can not consent to hear another word , sir , " I return , " unless you get up from the carpet directly and go and sit down at the table as you ought to do if you have any sense at all . " he look piteously , but slowly rise and do so . " yet what a mockery it be , miss , " he say with he hand upon he heart and shake he head at I in a melancholy manner over the tray , " to be station behind food at such a moment . the soul recoil from food at such a moment , miss . " " I beg you to conclude , " say I ; " you have ask I to hear you out , and I beg you to conclude . " " I will , miss , " say . " as I love and honou , so likewise I obey . would that I could make thee the subject of that vow before the shrine ! " " that be quite impossible , " say I , " and entirely out of the question . " " I be aware , " say , lean forward over the tray and regard I , as I again strangely feel , though my eye be not direct to he , with he late intent look , " I be aware that in a worldly point of view , accord to all appearance , my offer be a poor one . but , ! ! no , do not ring -- I have be bring up in a sharp school and be accustom to a variety of general practice . though a young man , I have ferret out evidence , get up case , and see lot of life . Blest with you hand , what mean might I not find of advance you interest and push you fortune ! what might I not get to know , nearly concern you ? I know nothing now , certainly ; but what might I not if I have you confidence , and you set I on ? " I tell he that he address my interest or what he suppose to be my interest quite as unsuccessfully as he address my inclination , and he would now understand that I request he , if he please , to go away immediately . " cruel miss , " say , " hear but another word ! I think you must have see that I be strike with those charms on the day when I wait at the Whytorseller . I think you must have remark that I could not forbear a tribute to those charms when I put up the step of the ' ackney - coach . it be a feeble tribute to thee , but it be well meant . thy image have ever since be fix in my breast . I have walk up and down of a evening opposite 's house only to look upon the brick that once contain thee . this out of to - day , quite a unnecessary out so far as the attendance , which be its pretend object , go , be plan by I alone for thee alone . if I speak of interest , it be only to recommend myself and my respectful wretchedness . love be before it , and be before it . " " I should be pain , , " say I , rise and put my hand upon the bell - rope , " to do you or any one who be sincere the injustice of slighte any honest feeling , however disagreeably express . if you have really mean to give I a proof of you good opinion , though ill - time and misplace , I feel that I ought to thank you . I have very little reason to be proud , and I be not proud . I hope , " I think I add , without very well know what I say , " that you will now go away as if you have never be so exceedingly foolish and attend to Messrs . and 's business . " " half a minute , miss ! " cry , check I as I be about to ring . " this have be without prejudice ? " " I will never mention it , " say I , " unless you should give I future occasion to do so . " " a quarter of a minute , miss ! in case you should think better at any time , however distant -- that be no consequence , for my feeling can never alter -- of anything I have say , particularly what might I not do , , eighty - seven , place , or if remove , or dead ( of blighted hope or anything of that sort ) , care of , three hundred and two , , will be sufficient . " I ring the bell , the servant come , and , lay he write card upon the table and make a deject bow , depart . raise my eye as he go out , I once more see he look at I after he have pass the door . I sit there for another hour
hour or more , finish my book and payment and get through plenty of business . then I arrange my desk , and put everything away , and be so composed and cheerful that I think I have quite dismiss this unexpected incident . but , when I go upstairs to my own room , I surprise myself by begin to laugh about it and then surprise myself still more by begin to cry about it . in short , I be in a flutter for a little while and feel as if a old chord have be more coarsely touch than it ever have be since the day of the dear old doll , long bury in the garden . the law - writer on the eastern border of , that be to say , more particularly in 's , , , law - stationer , pursue he lawful calling . in the shade of 's , at most time a shady place , have deal in all sort of blank form of legal process ; in skin and roll of parchment ; in paper--foolscap , brief , draft , brown , white , whitey - brown , and blott ; in stamps ; in office - quill , pens , ink , - rubber , pounce , pins , pencil , sealing - wax , and wafer ; in red tape and green ferret ; in pocket - book , almanac , diary , and law list ; in string box , ruler , inkstand -- glass and leaden -- pen-knive , scissors , bodkin , and other small office - cutlery ; in short , in article too numerous to mention , ever since he be out of he time and go into partnership with . on that occasion , 's be in a manner revolutionize by the new inscription in fresh paint , Peffer and SNAGSBy , displace the time - honoured and not easily to be decipher legend Peffer only . for smoke , which be the ivy , have so wreathe itself round 's name and clung to he dwelling - place that the affectionate parasite quite overpower the parent tree . be never see in 's now . he be not expect there , for he have be recumbend this quarter of a century in the churchyard of , , with the waggon and hackney - coach roaring past he all the day and half the night like one great dragon . if he ever steal forth when the dragon be at rest to air himself again in 's until admonish to return by the crowing of the sanguine cock in the cellar at the little dairy in , whose idea of daylight it would be curiious to ascertain , since he know from he personal observation next to nothing about it -- if ever do revisit the pale glimpse of 's , which no law - stationer in the trade can positively deny , he come invisibly , and no one be the worse or wiser . in he lifetime , and likewise in the period of 's " time " of seven long year , there dwelt with in the same law - stationering premise a niece - - a short , shrewd niece , something too violently compress about the waist , and with a sharp nose like a sharp autumn evening , inclin to be frosty towards the end . the 's Courtier have a rumour fly among they that the mother of this niece do , in she daughter 's childhood , move by too jealous a solicitude that she figure should approach perfection , lace she up every morning with she maternal foot against the bed - post for a stronger hold and purchase ; and further , that she exhibit internally pint of vinegar and lemon - juice , which acid , they hold , have mount to the nose and temper of the patient . with whichsoever of the many tongue of this frothy report originate , it either never reach or never influence the ear of young , who , have woo and win it be fair subject on he arrival at man 's estate , enter into two partnership at once . so now , in 's , , and the niece be one ; and the niece still cherish she figure , which , however taste may differ , be unquestionably so far precious that there be mighty little of it . and . be not only one bone and one flesh , but , to the neighbour 's think , one voice too . that voice , appear to proceed from alone , be hear in 's Court very often . , otherwise than as he find expression through these dulcet tone , be rarely hear . he be a mild , bald , timid man with a shining head and a scrubby clump of black hair stick out at the back . he tend to meekness and obesity . as he stand at he door in 's Court in he grey shop - coat and black calico sleeve , look up at the cloud , or stand behind a desk in he dark shop with a heavy flat ruler , snipping and slice at sheepskin in company with he two ' prentice , he be emphatically a retiring and unassuming man . from beneath he foot , at such time , as from a shrill ghost unquiet in its grave , there frequently arise complainings and lamentation in the voice already mention ; and haply , on some occasion when these reach a sharper pitch than usual , mention to the ' prentice , " I think my little woman be a - give it to ! " this proper name , so use by , have before now sharpen the wit of the 's Courtier to remark that it ought
ought to be the name of . Snagsby , see that she might with great force and expression be terme a Guster , in compliment to she stormy character . it be , however , the possession , and the only possession except fifty shilling per annum and a very small box indifferently fill with clothing , of a lean young woman from a workhouse ( by some suppose to have be christen ) who , although she be farme or contract for during she grow time by a amiable benefactor of he species resident at , and can not fail to have be develop under the most favourable circumstance , " have fit , " which the parish can not account for . , really a three or four and twenty , but look a round ten year older , go cheap with this unaccountable drawback of fit , and be so apprehensive of be return on the hand of she patron saint that except when she be find with she head in the pail , or the sink , or the copper , or the dinner , or anything else that happen to be near she at the time of she seizure , she be always at work . she be a satisfaction to the parent and guardians of the 'prentice , who feel that there be little danger of she inspire tender emotion in the breast of youth ; she be a satisfaction to , who can always find fault with she ; she be a satisfaction to , who think it a charity to keep she . the law - stationer 's establishament be , in 's eye , a temple of plenty and splendour . she believe the little drawing - room upstairs , always keep , as one may say , with its hair in papers and its pinafore on , to be the most elegant apartment in . the view it command of 's Court at one end ( not to mention a squint into ) and of ' the heriff 's officer 's backyard at the other she regard as a prospect of unequalled beauty . the portrait it display in oil -- and plenty of it too -- of look at and of look at be in she eye as achievement of or . Guster have some recompense for she many privation . refer everything not in the practical mystery of the business to . she manage the money , reproach the tax - gatherer , appoint the time and place of devotion on , license 's entertainment , and acknowledge no responsibility as to what she think fit to provide for dinner , insomuch that she be the high standard of comparison among the neighbouring wive a long way down on both side , and even out in , who in any domestic passage of arm habitually call upon they husband to look at the difference between they ( the wife ' ) position and 's , and they ( the husband ' ) behaviour and 's . Rumou , always fly bat - like about 's and skimm in and out at everybody 's window , do say that be jealous and inquisitive and that be sometimes worried out of house and home , and that if he have the spirit of a mouse he would not stand it . it be even observ that the wife who quote he to they self - willed husband as a shine example in reality look down upon he and that nobody do so with greater superciliousness than one particular lady whose lord be more than suspect of lay he umbrella on she as a instrument of correction . but these vague whispering may arise from 's be in he way rather a meditative and poetical man , love to walk in in the summer - time and to observe how countrify the sparrow and the leave be , also to lounge about the of a afternoon and to remark ( if in good spirit ) that there be old time once and that you would find a stone coffin or two now under that chapel , he will be bound , if you be to dig for it . he solace he imagination , too , by think of the many Chancellor and Vice , and of the roll who be decease ; and he get such a flavour of the country out of tell the two ' prentice how he have hear say that a brook " as clear as crystial " once run right down the middle of , when Turnstile really be a turnstile , lead slap away into the meadow -- get such a flavour of the country out of this that he never want to go there . the day be close in and the gas be lighted , but be not yet fully effective , for it be not quite dark . Snagsby stand at he shop - door look up at the cloud see a crow who be out late skim westward over the slice of sky belong to 's . the crow fly straight across and 's into 's . here , in a large house , formerly a house of state , life . it be let off in set of chamber now , and in those shrunke fragment of its greatness , lawyer lie like maggot in nut . but it be roomy staircase , passage , and antechamber still remain ; and even its paint ceiling , where Allegory , in helmet and celestial linen , sprawl among balustrade and pillars , flower , cloud , and big - leg boy , and make the head ache -- as would seem to be 's object always , more or less . here , among he many box label with transcendent name , life , when not speechlessly at home in country
country - house where the great one of the earth be bore to death . here he be to -day , quiet at he table . a oyster of the old school whom nobody can open . like as he be to look at , so be he apartment in the dusk of the present afternoon . Rusty , out of date , withdraw from attention , able to afford it . heavy , broad - back , old - fashioned , mahogany - and - horsehair chair , not easily lift ; obsolete table with spindle - leg and dusty baize cover ; presentation print of the holder of great title in the last generation or the last but one , environ he . a thick and dingy - carpet muffle the floor where he sit , attend by two candle in old - fashioned silver candlestick that give a very insufficient light to he large room . the titles on the back of he book have retire into the binding ; everything that can have a lock have get one ; no key be visible . very few loose papers be about . he have some manuscript near he , but be not refer to it . with the round top of a inkstand and two broken bit of sealing - wax he be silently and slowly work out whatever train of indecision be in he mind . now the inkstand top be in the middle , now the red bit of sealing - wax , now the black bit . that be not it . Tulkinghorn must gather they all up and begin again . here , beneath the painted ceiling , with foreshorten Allegory stare down at he intrusion as if it mean to swoop upon he , and he cut it dead , have at once he house and office . he keep no staff , only one middle - aged man , usually a little out at elbow , who sit in a high pew in the hall and be rarely overburden with business . be not in a common way . he want no clerk . he be a great reservoir of confidences , not to be so tapped . he client want he ; he be all in all . draft that he require to be draw be draw by special - pleader in the temple on mysterious instruction ; fair copy that he require to be make be make at the stationer ' , expense be no consideration . the middle - aged man in the pew know scarcely more of the affair of the peerage than any crossing - sweeper in . the red bit , the black bit , the inkstand top , the other inkstand top , the little sand - box . so ! you to the middle , you to the right , you to the left . this train of indecision must surely be work out now or never . now ! get up , adjust he spectacle , put on he hat , put the manuscript in he pocket , go out , tell the middle - aged man out at elbow , " I shall be back presently . " very rarely tell he anything more explicit . go , as the crow come -- not quite so straight , but nearly - - to 's , . to 's , - 's , Deeds engross and copy , law - writing execute in all its branch , &c. , & c. , &c . it be somewhere about five or six o'clock in the afternoon , and a balmy fragrance of warm tea hover in 's . it hover about 's door . the hour be early there : dinner at half - past one and supper at half - past nine . be about to descend into the subterranean region to take tea when he look out of he door just now and see the crow who be out late . " master at home ? " Guster be mind the shop , for the ' prentice take tea in the kitchen with and ; consequently , the robe - maker 's two daughter , comb they curl at the two glass in the two second - floor window of the opposite house , be not drive the two ' prentice to distraction as they fondly suppose , but be merely awaken the unprofitable admiration of , whose hair will not grow , and never would , and it be confidently think , never will . " master at home ? " say . master be at home , and will fetch he . Guster disappear , glad to get out of the shop , which she regard with mingled dread and veneration as a storehouse of awful implement of the great torture of the law -- a place not to be enter after the gas be turn off . appear , greasy , warm , herbaceous , and chew . be a bit of bread and butter . say , " bless my soul , sir ! Tulkinghorn ! " " I want half a word with you , . " " certainly , sir ! dear I , sir , why do not you send you young man round for I ? pray walk into the back shop , sir . " have brighten in a moment . the confin room , strong of parchment - grease , be warehouse , counting - house , and copy - office . sit , face round , on a stool at the desk . " and , . " " yes , sir . " turn up the gas and cough behind he hand , modestly anticipate profit . , as a timid man , be accustom to cough with a variety of expression , and so to save word . "
" you copy some affidavit in that cause for I lately . " " yes , sir , we do . " " there be one of they , " say , carelessly feel -- tight , unopenable oyster of the old school !-- in the wrong coat - pocket , " the handwriting of which be peculiar , and I rather like . as I happen to be pass , and think I have it about I , I look in to ask you -- but I have not get it . no matter , any other time will do . ah ! here it be ! I look in to ask you who copy this . " " who copy this , sir ? " say , take it , lay it flat on the desk , and separa all the sheet at once with a twirl and a twist of the left hand peculiar to lawstationer . " we give this out , sir . we be give out rather a large quantity of work just at that time . I can tell you in a moment who copy it , sir , by refer to my book . " take he book down from the safe , make another bolt of the bit of bread and butter which seem to have stop short , eye the affidavit aside , and bring he right forefinger travel down a page of the book , " -- -- . " " ! here we be , sir , " say . " to be sure ! I might have remembe it . this be give out , sir , to a writer who lodge just over on the opposite side of the lane . " have see the entry , find it before the law - stationer , read it while the forefinger be come down the hill . " what do you call he ? Nemo ? " say . " Nemo , sir . here it be . Forty -two folio . give out on the night at eight o'clock , bring in on the morning at half after nine . " " Nemo ! " repeat . " be latin for no one . " " it must be English for some one , sir , I think , " Snagsby submit with he deferential cough . " it be a person 's name . here it be , you see , sir ! Forty - two folio . give out night , eight o'clock ; bring in morning , half after nine . " the tail of 's eye become conscious of the head of Mrs . Snagsby look in at the shop - door to know what he mean by desert he tea . address a explanatory cough to . , as who should say , " my dear , a customer ! " " half after nine , sir , " repeat . " we law- writer , who live by job - work , be a queer lot ; and this may not be he name , but it be the name he go by . I remember now , sir , that he give it in a write advertisement he stick up down at the , and the 's , and the judge ' chamber , and so forth . you know the kind of document , sir -- want employ ? " glance through the little window at the back of ' , the sheriff 's officer 's , where light shine in 's window . Coavinse ' coffee - room be at the back , and the shadow of several gentleman under a cloud loom cloudily upon the blind . take the opportunity of slightly turn he head to glance over he shoulder at he little woman and to make apologetic motion with he mouth to this effect : " Tul - king - horn -- rich -- in - flu-en - tial ! " " have you give this man work before ? " ask . " oh , dear , yes , sir ! work of yours . " " think of more important matter , I forget where you say he liv ? " " across the lane , sir . in fact , he lodge at a -- " make another bolt , as if the bit of bread and buffer be insurmountable " -- at a rag and bottle shop . " " can you show I the place as I go back ? " " with the greatest pleasure , sir ! " pull off he sleeve and he grey coat , pull on he black coat , take he hat from its peg . " oh ! here be my little woman ! " he say aloud . " my dear , will you be so kind as to tell one of the lad to look after the shop while I step across the lane with ? , sir -- I sha not be two minute , my love ! " bend to the lawyer , retire behind the counter , peep at they through the window - blind , go softly into the back office , refer to the entry in the book still lie open . be evidently curious . " you will find that the place be rough , sir , " say , walk deferentially in the road and leave the narrow pavement to the lawyer ; " and the party be very rough . but they be a wild lot in general , sir . the advantage of this particular man be that he never want sleep . he will go at it right on end if you want he to , as long as ever you like . " it be quite dark now , and the gas - lamp have acquire they full effect . Jostl
Jostl against clerk go to post the day 's letter , and against counsel and attorney go home to dinner , and against plaintiff and defendants and suitor of all sort , and against the general crowd , in whose way the forensic wisdom of age have interpose a million of obstacle to the transaction of the commonest business of life ; diive through law and equity , and through that kind mystery , the street mud , which be make of nobody know what and collect about we nobody know whence or how -- we only know in general that when there be too much of it we find it necessary to shovel it away -- the lawyer and the law - stationer come to a rag and bottle shop and general emporium of much disregarded merchandise , lie and be in the shadow of the wall of 's , and keep , as be announce in paint , to all whom it may concern , by one . " this be where he live , sir , " say the law - stationer . " this be where he live , be it ? " say the lawyer unconcernedly . " thank you . " " be you not go in , sir ? " " no , thank you , no ; I be go on to the field at present . good evening . thank you ! " lift he hat and return to he little woman and he tea . but do not go on to the field at present . he go a short way , turn back , come again to the shop of , and enter it straight . it be dim enough , with a blot - head candle or so in the window , and a old man and a cat sit in the back part by a fire . the old man rise and come forward , with another blot - head candle in he hand . " pray be you lodger within ? " " male or female , sir ? " say . " male . the person who do copy . " have ey he man narrowly . know he by sight . have a indistinct impression of he aristocratic repute . " do you wish to see he , sir ? " " yes . " " it be what I seldom do myself , " say with a grin . " shall I call he down ? but it be a weak chance if he would come , sy ! " " I will go up to he , then , " say . " second floor , sir . take the candle . up there ! " , with he cat beside he , stand at the bottom of the staircase , look after . " hi - hi ! " he say when have nearly disappear . the lawyer look down over the hand - rail . the cat expand she wicked mouth and snarl at he . " order , ! Behave yourself to visitor , my lady ! you know what they say of my lodger ? " whisper Krook , go up a step or two . " what do they say of he ? " " they say he have sell himself to the enemy , but you and I know better -- he do not buy . I will tell you what , though ; my lodger be so black - humoured and gloomy that I believe he would as soon make that bargain as any other . do not put he out , sir . that be my advice ! " with a nod go on he way . he come to the dark door on the second floor . he knock , receive no answer , open it , and accidentally extinguish he candle in do so . the air of the room be almost bad enough to have extinguish it if he have not . it be a small room , nearly black with soot , and grease , and dirt . in the rusty skeleton of a grate , pinch at the middle as if poverty have grip it , a red coke fire burnd low . in the corner by the chimney stand a deal table and a broken desk , a wilderness mark with a rain of ink . in another corner a rag old portmanteau on one of the two chair serve for cabinet or wardrobe ; no larger one be need , for it collapse like the cheek of a starve man . the floor be bare , except that one old mat , trode to shred of rope - yarn , lie perish upon the hearth . no curtain veil the darkness of the night , but the discoloured shutter be draw together , and through the two gaunt hole pierce in they , famine might be star in -- the banshee of the man upon the bed . for , on a low bed opposite the fire , a confusion of dirty patchwork , lean - rib ticking , and coarse sack , the lawyer , hesitat just within the doorway , see a man . he lie there , dress in shirt and trousers , with bare foot . he have a yellow look in the spectral darkness of a candle that have gutter down until the whole length of its wick ( still burn ) have double over and leave a tower of winding - sheet above it . he hair be rag , mingl with he whisker and he beard -- the latter , rag too , and grow , like the scum and mist around he , in neglect . Foul and filthy as the room be , foul and filthy as the air be , it be not easy to perceive what fume
fume those be which most oppress the sense in it ; but through the general sickliness and faintness , and the odour of stale tobacco , there come into the lawyer 's mouth the bitter , vapid taste of opium . " Hallo , my friend ! " he cry , and strike he iron candlestick against the door . he think he have awaken he friend . he lie a little turn away , but he eye be surely open . " Hallo , my friend ! " he cry again . " Hallo ! Hallo ! " as he rattle on the door , the candle which have droop so long go out and leave he in the dark , with the gaunt eye in the shutter stare down upon the bed . we dear brother a touch on the lawyer 's wrinkle hand as he stand in the dark room , irresolute , make he start and say , " what be that ? " " it be I , " return the old man of the house , whose breath be in he ear . " can not you wake he ? " " no . " " what have you do with you candle ? " " it be go out . here it be . " take it , go to the fire , stoop over the red ember , and try to get a light . the die ash have no light to spare , and he endeavour be vain . , after a ineffectual call to he lodger , that he will go downstairs and bring a lighted candle from the shop , the old man depart . , for some new reason that he have , do not await he return in the room , but on the stair outside . the welcome light soon shines upon the wall , as come slowly up with he green - eyed cat follow at he heel . " do the man generally sleep like this ? " inquire the lawyer in a low voice . " hi ! I do not know , " say , shak he head and lifte he eyebrow . " I know next to nothing of he habits except that he keep himself very close . " thus whisper , they both go in together . as the light go in , the great eye in the shutter , darkening , seem to close . not so the eyes upon the bed . " save we ! " exclaim . " he be dead ! " drop the heavy hand he have take up so suddenly that the arm swing over the bedside . they look at one another for a moment . " send for some doctor ! call for up the stair , sir . here be poison by the bed ! call out for , will you ? " say , with he lean hand spread out above the body like a vampire 's wing . hurry to the landing and call , " ! Flite ! make haste , here , whoever you be ! Flite ! " follow he with he eye , and while he be call , finds opportunity to steal to the old portmanteau and steal back again . " , , run ! the nearest doctor ! run ! " so address a crazy little woman who be he female lodger , who appear and vanish in a breath , who soon return accompany by a testy medical man bring from he dinner , with a broad , snuffy upper lip and a broad Scotch tongue . " Ey ! bless the heart of ' ye , " say the medical man , look up at they after a moment 's examination . " he be just as dead as ! " ( stand by the old portmanteau ) inquire if he have be dead any time . " any time , sir ? " say the medical gentleman . " it be probable he wull have be dead aboot three hour . " " about that time , I should say , " observe a dark young man on the other side of the bed . " air you in the maydickle prayfession yourself , sir ? " inquire the first . the dark young man say yes . " then I will just tak ' my depairture , " reply the other , " for I be nae gude here ! " with which remark he finish he brief attendance and return to finish he dinner . the dark young surgeon pass the candle across and across the face and carefully examine the law - writer , who have establish he pretension to he name by become indeed no one . " I know this person by sight very well , " say he . " he have purchase opium of I for the last year and a half . be anybody present related to he ? " glance round upon the three bystander . " I be he landlord , " grimly answer , take the candle from the surgeon 's outstretched hand . " he tell I once I be the nearest relation he have . " " he have die , " say the surgeon , " of a over - dose of opium , there be no doubt . the room be strongly flavoure with it . there be enough here now , " take a old tea - pot from , " to kill a dozen people . " " do you think he do it on purpose ? " ask . " take the over -dose ? " " yes ! " almost smack he lip with the unction of a horrible interest . " I can not say . I should think it unlikly , as he have be in the
the habit of take so much . but nobody can tell . he be very poor , I suppose ? " " I suppose he be . he room -- do not look rich , " say , who might have change eye with he cat , as he cast he sharp glance around . " but I have never be in it since he have it , and he be too close to name he circumstance to I . " " do he owe you any rent ? " " six week . " " he will never pay it ! " say the young man , resum he examination . " it be beyond a doubt that he be indeed as dead as ; and to judge from he appearance and condition , I should think it a happy release . yet he must have be a good figure when a youth , and I dare say , good - look . " he say this , not unfeelingly , while sit on the bedstead 's edge with he face towards that other face and he hand upon the region of the heart . " I recollect once think there be something in he manner , uncouth as it be , that denote a fall in life . be that so ? " he continue , look round . reply , " you might as well ask I to describe the lady whose head of hair I have get in sack downstairs . than that he be my lodger for a year and a half and live -- or do not live -- by law- write , I know no more of he . " during this dialogue have stand aloon by the old portmanteau , with he hand behind he , equally remove , to all appearance , from all three kind of interest exhibit near the bed -- from the young surgeon 's professional interest in death , noticeable as be quite apart from he remark on the decease as a individual ; from the old man 's unction ; and the little crazy woman 's awe . he imperturbable face have be as inexpressive as he rusty clothe . one could not even say he have be think all this while . he have show neither patience nor impatience , nor attention nor abstraction . he have show nothing but he shell . as easily might the tone of a delicate musical instrument be infer from its case , as the tone of from he case . he now interpose , address the young surgeon in he unmoved , professional way . " I look in here , " he observe , " just before you , with the intention of give this decease man , whom I never see alive , some employment at he trade of copying . I have hear of he from my stationer -- Snagsby of 's . since no one here know anything about he , it might be as well to send for . ah ! " to the little crazy woman , who have often see he in court , and whom he have often see , and who propose , in frightened dumb - show , to go for the law - stationer . " suppose you do ! " while she be gone , the surgeon abandon he hopeless investigation and cover its subject with the patchwork counterpane . and he interchange a word or two . say nothing , but stand , ever , near the old portmanteau . arrive hastily in he grey coat and he black sleeve . " dear I , dear I , " he say ; " and it have come to this , have it ! bless my soul ! " " can you give the person of the house any information about this unfortunate creature , ? " inquire . " he be in arrear with he rent , it seem . and he must be bury , you know . " " well , sir , " say , cough he apologetic cough behind he hand , " I really do not know what advice I could offer , except send for the beadle . " " I do not speak of advice , " return . " I could advise -- " " no one better , sir , I be sure , " say , with he deferential cough . " I speak of afforde some clue to he connexion , or to where he come from , or to anything concern he . " " I assure you , sir , " say after preface he reply with he cough of general propitiation , " that I no more know where he come from than I know -- " " where he have go to , perhaps , " suggest the surgeon to help he out . a pause . look at the law - stationer . , with he mouth open , look for somebody to speak next . " as to he connexion , sir , " say , " if a person be to say to I , ' Snagsby , here be twenty thousand pound down , ready for you in the of if you will only name one of th'ey ,' I could not do it , sir ! about a year and a half ago -- to the best of my belief , at the time when he first come to lodge at the present rag and bottle shop -- " " that be the time ! " say with a nod . " about a year and a half ago , " say , strengthen , " he come into we place one morning after breakfast , and find my little woman ( which I name . when I use that appellation ) in we shop ,
, produce a specimen of he handwriting and give she to understand that he be in want of copying work to do and be , not to put too fine a point upon it , " a favourite apology for plain speak with , which he always offer with a sort of argumentative frankness , " hard up ! my little woman be not in general partial to stranger , particular -- not to put too fine a point upon it -- when they want anything . but she be rather take by something about this person , whether by he be unshaved , or by he hair be in want of attention , or by what other lady ' reason , I leave you to judge ; and she accept of the specimen , and likewise of the address . my little woman have not a good ear for name , " proceed after consult he cough of consideration behind he hand , " and she consider equally the same as . in consequence of which , she get into a habit of say to I at meal , ' . Snagsby , you have not find any work yet ! ' or ' . Snagsby , why do not you give that eight and thirty Chancery folio in to ? ' or such like . and that be the way he gradually fall into job - work at we place ; and that be the most I know of he except that he be a quick hand , and a hand not sparing of night - work , and that if you give he out , say , five and forty folio on the night , you would have it bring in on the morning . all of which - - " conclude by politely motion with he hat towards the bed , as much as to add , " I have no doubt my honourable friend would confirm if he be in a condition to do it . " " have not you better see , " say to , " whether he have any papers that may enlighten you ? there will be a inquest , and you will be ask the question . you can read ? " " no , I can not , " return the old man with a sudden grin . " , " say , " look over the room for he . he will get into some trouble or difficulty otherwise . be here , I will wait if you make haste , and then I can testify on he behalf , if it should ever be necessary , that all be fair and right . if you will hold the candle for , my friend , he will soon see whether there be anything to help you . " " in the first place , here be a old portmanteau , sir , " say . ah , to be sure , so there be ! do not appear to have see it before , though he be stand so close to it , and though there be very little else , heaven know . the marine - store merchant hold the light , and the law - stationer conduct the search . the surgeon lean against the corner of the chimney -piece ; peep and tremble just within the door . the apt old scholar of the old school , with he dull black breech tie with ribbon at the knee , he large black waistcoat , he long - sleeve black coat , and he wisp of limp white neckerchief tie in the bow the peerage know so well , stand in exactly the same place and attitude . there be some worthless article of clothing in the old portmanteau ; there be a bundle of pawnbroker 's duplicates , those turnpike ticket on the road of poverty ; there be a crumple paper , smell of opium , on which be scrawl rough memoranda -- as , take , such a day , so many grain ; take , such another day , so many more -- begin some time ago , as if with the intention of be regularly continue , but soon leave off . there be a few dirty scrap of newspaper , all refer to coroner ' inquest ; there be nothing else . they search the cupboard and the drawer of the ink - splash table . there be not a morsel of a old letter or of any other write in either . the young surgeon examine the dress on the law - writer . a knife and some odd halfpence be all he find . 's suggestion be the practical suggestion after all , and the beadle must be call in . so the little crazy lodger go for the beadle , and the rest come out of the room . " do not leave the cat there ! " say the surgeon ; " that will not do ! " therefore drive she out before he , and she go furtively downstairs , win she lito tail and lick she lip . " good night ! " say , and go home to and meditation . by this time the news have get into the court . group of its inhabitant assemble to discuss the thing , and the outpost of the army of observation ( principally boy ) be push forward to 's window , which they closely invest . a policeman have already walk up to the room , and walk down again to the door , where he stand like a tower , only condescende to see the boy at he base occasionally ; but whenever he do see they , they quail and fall back . , who have not be for some week on speak term with . in consequence for a unpleasantness
unpleasantness originating in young Perkins ' have " fetch " young " a crack , " renew she friendly intercourse on this auspicious occasion . the potboy at the corner , who be a privileged amateur , as possesse official knowledge of life and have to deal with drunken man occasionally , exchange confidential communication with the policeman and have the appearance of a impregnable youth , unassailable by truncheon and unconfinable in station - house . people talk across the court out of window , and bare - head scout come hurrie in from Lane to know what be the matter . the general feeling seem to be that it be a blessing not make away with first , mingl with a little natural disappointment that he be not . in the midst of this sensation , the beadle arrive . the beadle , though generally understand in the neighbourhood to be a ridiculous institution , be not without a certain popularity for the moment , if it be only as a man who be go to see the body . the policeman consider he a imbecile civilian , a remnant of the barbarous watchman time , but give he admission as something that must be borne with until government shall abolish he . the sensation be heighten as the tiding spread from mouth to mouth that the beadle be on the ground and have go in . by and by the beadle come out , once more intensify the sensation , which have rather languish in the interval . he be understand to be in want of witness for the inquest to - morrow who can tell the coroner and jury anything whatever respecte the decease . be immediately refer to innumerable people who can tell nothing whatever . be make more imbecile by be constantly inform that 's son " be a law - writer he - self and know he better than anybody , " which son of 's appear , on inquiry , to be at the present time aboard a vessel bound for , three month out , but consider accessible by telegraph on application to the Lord of the Admiralty . go into various shop and parlour , examine the inhabitant , always shutt the door first , and by exclusion , delay , and general idiotcy exasperat the public . policeman see to smile to potboy . public lose interest and undergoe reaction . Taunt the beadle in shrill youthful voice with have boil a boy , choruse fragment of a popular song to that effect and import that the boy be make into soup for the workhouse . policeman at last find it necessary to support the law and seize a vocalist , who be release upon the flight of the rest on condition of he get out of this then , come , and cut it -- a condition he immediately observe . so the sensation die off for the time ; and the unmoved policeman ( to whom a little opium , more or less , be nothing ) , with he shining hat , stiff stock , inflexible great - coat , stout belt and bracelet , and all thing fitting , pursue he lounge way with a heavy tread , beat the palm of he white glove one against the other and stop now and then at a street - corner to look casually about for anything between a lose child and a murder . under cover of the night , the feeble - minded beadle come flitt about with he summonse , in which every juror 's name be wrongly spelt , and nothing rightly spelt but the beadle 's own name , which nobody can read or want to know . the summonse serve and he witness forewarn , the beadle go to 's to keep a small appointment he have make with certain pauper , who , presently arrive , be conduct upstairs , where they leave the great eye in the shutter something new to stare at , in that last shape which earthly lodging take for no one -- and for every one . and all that night the coffin stand ready by the old portmanteau ; and the lonely figure on the bed , whose path in life have lain through five and forty year , lie there with no more track behind he that any one can trace than a desert infant . next day the court be all alive -- be like a fair , as Perkins , more than reconcile to , say in amicable conversation with that excellent woman . the coroner be to sit in the first - floor room at the 's Arms , where the take place twice a week and where the chair be fill by a gentleman of professional celebrity , face by , the comic vocalist , who hope ( accord to the bill in the window ) that he friend will rally round he and support first - rate talent . the 's Arms do a brisk stroke of business all the morning . even child so require sustain under the general excitement that a pieman who have establish himself for the occasion at the corner of the court say he brandy - ball go off like smoke . what time the beadle , hover between the door of 's establishment and the door of the 's Arm , show the curiosity in he keep to a few discreet spirit and accept the compliment of a glass of ale or so in return . at the appointed hour arrive the coroner , for whom the juryman be wait and who be receive with a salute of skittle from the good dry skittle - ground attach to the 's Arms . the coroner frequent more public - house than any man alive . the smell of sawdust , beer , tobacco -
- smoke , and spirit be inseparable in he vocation from death in its most awful shapes . he be conduct by the beadle and the landlord to the meeting room , where he put he hat on the piano and take a Windsor - chair at the head of a long table form of several short table put together and ornament with glutinous ring in endless involution , make by pot and glass . as many of the jury as can crowd together at the table sit there . the rest get among the spittoon and pipe or lean against the piano . over the coroner 's head be a small iron garland , the pendant handle of a bell , which rather give the majesty of the court the appearance of go to be hang presently . call over and swear the jury ! while the ceremony be in progress , sensation be create by the entrance of a chubby little man in a large shirt - collar , with a moist eye and a inflam nose , who modestly take a position near the door as one of the general public , but seem familiar with the room too . a whisper circulate that this be . it be consider not unlikely that he will get up a imitation of the coroner and make it the principal feature of the meeting in the evening . " well , gentleman -- " the coroner begin . " Silence there , will you ! " say the beadle . not to the coroner , though it might appear so . " well , gentlemen , " resume the coroner . " you be impanell here to inquire into the death of a certain man . evidence will be give before you as to the circumstance attend that death , and you will give you verdict accord to the -- skittle ; they must be stop , you know , beadle !--evidence , and not accord to anything else . the first thing to be do be to view the body . " " make way there ! " cry the beadle . so they go out in a loose procession , something after the manner of a straggling funeral , and make they inspection in 's back second floor , from which a few of the juryman retire pale and precipitately . the beadle be very careful that two gentleman not very neat about the cuff and button ( for whose accommodation he have provide a special little table near the coroner in the meeting room ) should see all that be to be see . for they be the public chronicler of such inquirie by the line ; and he be not superior to the universal human infirmity , but hope to read in print what " , the active and intelligent beadle of the district , " say and do and even aspire to see the name of as familiarly and patronizingly mention as the name of the hangman be , accord to the latest example . be wait for the coroner and jury on they return . , also . be receive with distinction and seat near the coroner between that high judicial officer , a bagatelle - board , and the coal - box . the inquiry proceed . the jury learn how the subject of they inquiry die , and learn no more about he . " a very eminent solicitor be in attendance , gentlemen , " say the coroner , " who , I be inform , be accidentally present when discovery of the death be make , but he could only repeat the evidence you have already hear from the surgeon , the landlord , the lodger , and the law - stationer , and it be not necessary to trouble he . be anybody in attendance who know anything more ? " push forward by . . , gentlemen . married woman . now , , what have you get to say about this ? why , have a good deal to say , chiefly in parentheses and without punctuation , but not much to tell . live in the court ( which she husband be a cabinet - maker ) , and it have long be well beknow among the neighbour ( count from the day next but one before the half - baptizing of a eighteen month and four day old on account of not be expect to live such be the suffering gentleman of that child in he gum ) as the plaintive -- so insist on call the decease -- be report to have sell himself . think it be the plaintive 's air in which that report originatinin . see the plaintive often and consider as he air be feariocious and not to be allow to go about some child be timid ( and if doubt hope may be bring forard for she be here and will do credit to she husband and herself and family ) . have see the plaintive wex and worrit by the child ( for child they will ever be and you can not expect they specially if of playful disposition to be Methoozeller which you be not yourself ) . on account of this and he dark look have often dream as she see he take a pick - axe from he pocket and split 's head ( which the child know not fear and have repeatually call after he close at he eel ) . never however see the plaintive take a pick - axe or any other weppe far from it . have see he hurry away when run and call after as if not partial to child and never see he speak to neither child nor grow person at any time ( except the boy that sweep the crossing down the lane over the way round the
the corner which if he be here would tell you that he have be see a - speak to he frequent ) . say the coroner , be that boy here ? say the beadle , no , sir , he be not here . say the coroner , go and fetch he then . in the absence of the active and intelligent , the coroner converse with . oh ! here be the boy , gentlemen ! here he be , very muddy , very hoarse , very ragged . now , boy ! but stop a minute . caution . this boy must be put through a few preliminary pace . , . nothing else that he know on . do not know that everybody have two name . never heerd of sich a think . do not know that be short for a longer name . think it long enough for he . he do not find no fault with it . spell it ? no . he can not spell it . no father , no mother , no friend . never be to school . what be home ? know a broom be a broom , and know it be wicked to tell a lie . do not recollect who tell he about the broom or about the lie , but know both . can not exactly say what will be do to he arter he be dead if he tell a lie to the gentleman here , but believe it will be something wery bad to punish he , and serve he right -- and so he will tell the truth . " this will not do , gentlemen ! " say the coroner with a melancholy shake of the head . " do not you think you can receive he evidence , sir ? " ask a attentive juryman . " out of the question , " say the coroner . " you have hear the boy . ' can not exactly say ' will not do , you know . we can not take that in a court of justice , gentlemen . it be terrible depravity . put the boy aside . " put aside , to the great edification of the audience , especially of , the comic vocalist . now . be there any other witness ? no other witness . very well , gentlemen ! here be a man unknown , prove to have be in the habit of take opium in large quantity for a year and a half , find dead of too much opium . if you think you have any evidence to lead you to the conclusion that he commit suicide , you will come to that conclusion . if you think it be a case of accidental death , you will find a verdict accordingly . verdict accordingly . accidental death . no doubt . gentlemen , you be discharge . good afternoon . while the coroner button he great - coat , and he give private audience to the reject witness in a corner . that graceless creature only know that the dead man ( whom he recognize just now by he yellow face and black hair ) be sometimes hoote and pursue about the street . that one cold winter night when he , the boy , be shiver in a doorway near he crossing , the man turn to look at he , and come back , and have question he and find that he have not a friend in the world , say , " neither have I . not one ! " and give he the price of a supper and a night 's lodging . that the man have often spoken to he since and ask he whether he sleep sound at night , and how he bear cold and hunger , and whether he ever wish to die , and similar strange question . that when the man have no money , he would say in passing , " I be as poor as you to - day , , " but that when he have any , he have always ( as the boy most heartily belief ) be glad to give he some . " he be wery good to I , " say the boy , wip he eye with he wretched sleeve . " I see he a - layin ' so stritch out just now , I wish he could have heerd I tell he so . he wo wery good to I , he wo ! " as he shuffle downstairs , , lie in wait for he , put a half - crown in he hand . " if you ever see I come past you crossing with my little woman -- I mean a lady -- " say with he finger on he nose , " do not allude to it ! " for some little time the juryman hang about the 's arm colloquially . in the sequel , half - a - dozen be catch up in a cloud of pipe - smoke that pervade the parlour of the 's arm ; two stroll to ; and four engage to go half - price to the play at night , and top up with oyster . be treat on several hand . be ask what he think of the proceedings , characterize they ( he strength lie in a slangular direction ) as " a rummy start . " the landlord of the 's Arms , find so popular , commend he highly to the juryman and public , observe that for a song in character he do not know he equal and that that man 's character - wardrobe would fill a cart . thus , gradually the 's Arm melt into the shadowy night and then flare out of it strong in gas . the
the Harmonic meeting hour arrive , the gentleman of professional celebrity take the chair , be face ( red - face ) by ; they friend rally round they and support first - rate talent . in the zenith of the evening , say , " gentlemen , if you will permit I , I will attempt a short description of a scene of real life that come off here to - day . " be much applaude and encourage ; go out of the room as Swills ; come in as the coroner ( not the least in the world like he ) ; describe the inquest , with recreative interval of piano - forte accompaniment , to the refrain : with he ( the coroner 's ) tippy tol li doll , tippy tol lo doll , tippy tol li doll , ! the jingling piano at last be silent , and the Harmonic friend rally round they pillow . then there be rest around the lonely figure , now laid in it be last earthly habitation ; and it be watch by the gaunt eye in the shutter through some quiet hour of night . if this forlorn man could have be prophetically see lie here by the mother at whose breast he nestle , a little child , with eye upraise to she loving face , and soft hand scarcely know how to close upon the neck to which it creep , what a impossibility the vision would have see ! oh , if in brighter day the now - extinguish fire within he ever burn for one woman who hold he in she heart , where be she , while these ash be above the ground ! it be anything but a night of rest at 's , in 's , where murder sleep by go , as himself allow -- not to put too fine a point upon it -- out of one fit into twenty . the occasion of this seizure be that have a tender heart and a susceptible something that possibly might have be imagination , but for Tooting and she patron saint . be it what it may , now , it be so direfully impress at tea - time by 's account of the inquiry at which he have assist that at supper - time she project herself into the kitchen , proceed by a fly Dutch cheese , and fall into a fit of unusual duration , which she only come out of to go into another , and another , and so on through a chain of fit , with short interval between , of which she have pathetically avail herself by consum they in entreaty to not to give she warning " when she quite come to , " and also in appeal to the whole establishment to lay she down on the stone and go to bed . hence , , at last hearing the cock at the little dairy in go into that disinterested ecstasy of he on the subject of daylight , say , draw a long breath , though the most patient of man , " I think you be dead , I be sure ! " what question this enthusiastic fowl suppose he settle when he strain himself to such a extent , or why he should thus crow ( so man crow on various triumphant public occasion , however ) about what can not be of any moment to he , be he affair . it be enough that daylight come , morning come , noon come . then the active and intelligent , who have get into the morning papers as such , come with he pauper company to 's and bear off the body of we dear brother here depart to a hem - in churchyard , pestiferous and obscene , whence malignant disease be communicate to the body of we dear brothers and sister who have not depart , while we dear brothers and sister who hang about official back - stair -- would to heave they have depart !-- be very complacent and agreeable . into a beastly scrap of ground which a would reject as a savage abomination and a Caffre would shudder at , they bring we dear brother here depart to receive burial . with house look on , on every side , save where a reek little tunnel of a court give access to the iron gate -- with every villainy of life in action close on death , and every poisonous element of death in action close on life -- here they lower we dear brother down a foot or two , here sow he in corruption , to be raise in corruption : a avenging ghost at many a sick - bedside , a shameful testimony to future ag how civilization and barbarism walk this boastful island together . come night , come darkness , for you can not come too soon or stay too long by such a place as this ! come , straggl light into the window of the ugly house ; and you who do iniquity therein , do it at least with this dread scene shut out ! come , flame of gas , burn so sullenly above the iron gate , on which the poisone air deposits its witch - ointment slimy to the touch ! it be well that you should call to every passerby , " look here ! " with the night come a slouching figure through the tunnel - court to the outside of the iron gate . it hold the gate with it be hand and look in between the bar , stand look in for a little while . it then , with a old broom it carry , softly sweep the step and make the archway clean . it do so very busily and trimly , look in
in again a little while , and so depart . , be it thou ? well , well ! though a reject witness , who " can not exactly say " what will be do to he in greater hand than man 's , thou be not quite in outer darkness . there be something like a distant ray of light in thy mutter reason for this : " he wo wery good to I , he wo ! " on the it have leave off rain down in at last , and have take heart . be full of hospitable care , for and my Lady be come home from . the fashionable intelligence have find it out and communicate the glad tiding to benight . it have also find out that they will entertain a brilliant and distinguished circle of the Elite of the ( the fashionable intelligence be weak in , but a giant refresh in ) at the ancient and hospitable family seat in . for the greater honour of the brilliant and distinguished circle , and of into the bargain , the broken arch of the bridge in the park be mende ; and the water , now retire within its proper limit and again span gracefully , make a figure in the prospect from the house . the clear , cold sunshine glance into the britle woods and approvingly behold the sharp wind scatter the leave and dry the moss . it glide over the park after the move shadow of the cloud , and chase they , and never catch they , all day . it look in at the window and touch the ancestral portrait with bar and patch of brightness never contemplate by the painter . Athwbe the picture of my , over the great chimney - piece , it throw a broad bend - sinister of light that strike down crookedly into the hearth and seem to rmend it . through the same cold sunshine and the same sharp wind , my and , in they travelling chariot ( my 's woman and 's man affectionate in the rumble ) , start for home . with a considerable amount of jingling and whip - cracking , and many plunge demonstration on the part of two bare - back horse and two centaur with glazed hat , jack - boot , and flow mane and tail , they rattle out of the yard of the in the place Vendome and canter between the sun -and - shadow - cheque colonnade of the and the garden of the ill - fated palace of a headless king and queen , off by the place of , and the Elysian field , and the gate of the , out of . to say , they can not go away too fast , for even here my have be bore to death . concert , assembly , opera , theatre , drive , nothing be new to my under the worn - out heaven . only last , when poor wretch be gay -- within the walls play with child among the clipped tree and the statue in the ; walk , a score abreast , in the Elysian fields , make more Elysian by perform dog and wooden horse ; between whiles filtering ( a few ) through the gloomy of we Lady to say a word or two at the base of a pillar within flare of a rusty little gridiron - full of gusty little taper ; without the wall encompasse with dancing , love - making , wine - drink , tobacco-smok , tomb- visit , billiard card and domino play , quack - doctoring , and much murderous refuse , animate and inanimate -- only last , my , in the desolation of and the clutch of , almost hate she own maid for be in spirit . she cannot , therefore , go too fast from . Weariness of soul lie before she , as it lie behind -- she have put a girdle of it round the whole earth , and it can not be unclasped -- but the imperfect remedy be always to fly from the last place where it have be experience . Fl back into the distance , then , exchange it for endless avenue and cross -avenue of wintry tree ! and , when next beheld , let it be some leagu away , with the gate of the a white speck glitter in the sun , and the city a mere mound in a plain -- two dark square towers rise out of it , and light and shadow descende on it aslant , like the angels in 's dream ! be generally in a complacent state , and rarely bore . when he have nothing else to do , he can always contemplate he own greatness . it be a considerable advantage to a man to have so inexhaustible a subject . after read he letter , he lean back in he corner of the carriage and generally review he importance to society . " you have a unusual amount of correspondence this morning ? " say my after a long time . she be fatigue with reading . have almost read a page in twenty mile . " nothing in it , though . Nothe whatever . " " I see one of 's long effusion , I think ? " " you see everything , " say with admiration . " ! " sigh my . " he be the most tiresome of man ! " " he send -- I really beg you pardon -- he send , " say , select the letter and unfold it , " a message to you . we stop to change horse as I come to he postscript drive it out of my memory . I beg you will excuse I . he
he say -- " be so long in take out he eye - glass and adjust it that my look a little irritated . " he say ' in the matter of the right of way --' I beg you pardon , that be not the place . he say -- yes ! here I have it ! he say , 'I beg my respectful compliment to my , who , I hope , have benefite by the change . will you do I the favour to mention ( as it may interest she ) that I have something to tell she on she return in reference to the person who copy the affidavit in the suit , which so powerfully stimulate she curiosity . I have see he . ' " my lady , lean forward , look out of she window . " that be the message , " observe . " I should like to walk a little , " say my , still look out of she window . " walk ? " repeat in a tone of surprise . " I should like to walk a little , " say my with unmistakable distinctness . " please to stop the carriage . " the carriage be stop , the affectionate man alight from the rumble , open the door , and let down the step , obedient to a impatient motion of my 's hand . my Lady alight so quickly and walk away so quickly that , for all he scrupulous politeness , be unable to assist she , and be leave behind . a space of a minute or two have elapse before he come up with she . she smile , look very handsome , take he arm , lounge with he for a quarter of a mile , be very much bore , and resume she seat in the carriage . the rattle and clatter continue through the greater part of three day , with more or less of bell - jingling and whip - crack , and more or less plunging of centaur and bare - back horse . they courtly politeness to each other at the hotel where they tarry be the theme of general admiration . though my be a little aged for my , say , the hostess of the , and though he might be she amiable father , one can see at a glance that they love each other . one observe my with he white hair , stand , hat in hand , to help my to and from the carriage . one observe my , how recognisant of my 's politeness , with a inclination of she gracious head and the concession of she so - genteel finger ! it be ravish ! the sea have no appreciation of great man , but knock they about like the small fry . it be habitually hard upon , whose countenance it greenly mottle in the manner of sage - cheese and in whose aristocratic system it effect a dismal revolution . it be the of to he . nevertheless , he dignity get over it after stop to refit , and he go on with my for , lie only one night in on the way to . through the same cold sunlight , colder as the day decline , and through the same sharp wind , sharper as the separate shadow of bare tree gloom together in the woods , and as the Ghost 's , touch at the western corner by a pile of fire in the sky , resign itself to come night , they drive into the park . the rook , swing in they lofy house in the elm - tree avenue , seem to discuss the question of the occupancy of the carriage as it pass underneath , some agree that and my Lady be come down , some argue with malcontent who will not admit it , now all consent to consider the question dispose of , now all break out again in violent debate , incite by one obstinate and drowsy bird who will persist in put in a last contradictory croak . leave they to sw and cee , the travel chariot roll on to the house , where fire gleam warmly through some of the window , though not through so many as to give a inhabit expression to the darkening mass of front . but the brilliant and distinguished circle will soon do that . be in attendance and receive 's customary shake of the hand with a profound curtsy . " how do you do , Rouncewell ? I be glad to see you . " " I hope I have the honour of welcome you in good health , ? " " in excellent health , . " " my be look charmingly well , " say with another curtsy . my Lady signify , without profuse expenditure of word , that she be as wearily well as she can hope to be . but be in the distance , behind the housekeeper ; and my , who have not subdue the quickness of she observation , whatever else she may have conquer , ask , " who be that girl ? " " a young scholar of mine , my . . " " come here , ! " beckon she , with even a appearance of interest . " why , do you know how pretty you be , child ? " she say , touch she shoulder with she two forefinger . , very much abashed , say , " no , if you please , my lady ! " and glance up , and glance down , and do not know where to look , but look all the prettier . " how old be you ? " " , my . " " , " repeat my
my thoughtfully . " take care they do not spoil you by flattery . " " yes , my . " my Lady tap she dimple cheek with the same delicate glove finger and go on to the foot of the oak staircase , where pause for she as she knightly escort . a stare old in a panel , as large as life and as dull , look as if he do not know what to make of it , which be probably he general state of mind in the day of . that evening , in the housekeeper 's room , can do nothing but yomurmu 's praise . she be so affable , so graceful , so beautiful , so elegant ; have such a sweet voice and such a thrilling touch that can feel it yet ! confirm all this , not without personal pride , reserve only the one point of affability . be not quite sure as to that . forbid that she should say a syllable in dispraise of any member of that excellent family , above all , of my , whom the whole world admire ; but if my would only be " a little more free , " not quite so cold and distant , think she would be more affable . " ' almost a pity , " add -- only " almost " because it border on impiety to suppose that anything could be better than it be , in such a express dispensation as the Dedlock affair -- " that my have no family . if she have have a daughter now , a grown young lady , to interest she , I think she would have have the only kind of excellence she want . " " might not that have make she still more proud , grandmother ? " say , who have be home and come back again , he be such a good grandson . " more and most , my dear , " return the housekeeper with dignity , " be word it be not my place to use -- nor so much as to hear -- apply to any drawback on my lady . " " I beg you pardon , grandmother . but she be proud , be she not ? " " if she be , she have reason to be . the family have always reason to be . " " well , " say , " it be to be hope they line out of they prayer - book a certain passage for the common people about pride and vainglory . forgive I , grandmother ! only a joke ! " " and , my dear , be not fit subject for joking . " " be no joke by any means , " say , " and I humbly ask he pardon . I suppose , grandmother , that even with the family and they guest down here , there be no objection to my prolonge my stay at the for a day or two , as any other traveller might ? " " surely , none in the world , child . " " I be glad of that , " say , " because I have a inexpressible desire to extend my knowledge of this beautiful neighbourhood . " he happen to glance at , who look down and be very shy indeed . but accord to the old superstition , it should be 's ear that burn , and not she fresh bright cheek , for my 's maid be hold forth about she at this moment with surpassing energy . my Lady 's maid be a of two and thirty , from somewhere in the southern country about and , a large - eyed brown woman with black hair who would be handsome but for a certain feline mouth and general uncomfortable tightness of face , render the jaw too eager and the skull too prominent . there be something indefinably kee and want about she anatomy , and she have a watchful way of look out of the corner of she eye without turn she head which could be pleasantly dispense with , especially when she be in a ill humour and near knife . through all the good taste of she dress and little adornment , these objection so express themselves that she seem to go about like a very neat she - wolf imperfectly tame . besides be accomplish in all the knowledge appertain to she post , she be almost a in she acquaintance with the language ; consequently , she be in no want of word to shower upon for have attract my 's attention , and she pour they out with such grim ridicule as she sit at dinner that she companion , the affectionate man , be rather relieved when she arrive at the spoon stage of that performance . , ha , ha ! she , Hortense , be in my 's service since five year and always keep at the distance , and this doll , this puppet , caress -- absolutely caress -- by my on the moment of she arrive at the house ! , ha , ha ! " and do you know how pretty you be , child ? " " no , my . " you be right there ! " and how old be you , child ! and take care they do not spoil you by flattery , child ! " oh , how droll ! it be the best thing altogether . in short , it be such a admirable thing that can not forget it ; but at meal for day afterwards , even among she countrywoman and other attach in like capacity to the troop of visitor , relapse into silent enjoyment of the joke -- a enjoyment express , in she own convivial
convivial manner , by a additional tightness of face , thin elongation of compressed lip , and sidewise look , which intense appreciation of humwe be frequently reflecte in my 's mirror when my be not among they . all the mirror in the house be brotch into action now , many of they after a long blank . they reflect handsome face , simper face , youthful face , face of threescore and ten that will not submit to be old ; the entire collection of face that have come to pass a week or two at , and which the fashionable intelligence , a mighty hunter before the , hunt with a keen scent , from they breaking cover at the court of 's to they be run down to death . the place in be all alive . by day gun and voice be hear ringing in the wood , horseman and carriage enlive the park roads , servants and hanger - on pervade the village and the Dedlock Arm . see by night from distant opening in the tree , the row of window in the long drawing - room , where my 's picture hang over the great chimney - piece , be like a row of jewel set in a black frame . on the chill little church be almost war by so much gallant company , and the general flavour of the dust be quench in delicate perfume . the brilliant and distinguished circle comprehend within it no contract amount of education , sense , courage , honour , beauty , and virtue . yet there be something a little wrong about it in despite of its immense advantage . what can it be ? ? there be no the now ( more the pity ) to set the dandy fashion ; there be no clear - starch jack - towel neckcloth , no short - waiste coat , no false calf , no stay . there be no caricature , now , of effeminate exquisite so array , swoon in opera box with excess of delight and be revive by other dainty creature pok long - neck scent - bottle at they nos . there be no beau whom it take four man at once to shake into he buckskin , or who go to see all the execution , or who be trouble with the self - reproach of have once consum a pea . but be there dandyism in the brilliant and distinguished circle notwithstanding , dandyism of a more mischievous sort , that have get below the surface and be do less harmless thing than jack - towel itself and stop its own digestion , to which no rational person need particularly object ? why , yes . it can not be disguise . there be at this week some lady and gentleman of the newest fashion , who have set up a dandyism -- in religion , for instance . who in mere lackadaisical want of a emotion have agree upon a little dandy talk about the vulgar want faith in thing in general , mean in the thing that have be try and find want , as though a low fellow should unaccountably lose faith in a bad shilling after find it out ! who would make the vulgar very picturesque and faithful by put back the hand upon the clock of time and cancel a few hundred year of history . there be also lady and gentleman of another fashion , not so new , but very elegant , who have agree to put a smooth glaze on the world and to keep down all its reality . for whom everything must be languid and pretty . who have find out the perpetual stoppage . who be to rejoice at nothing and be sorry for nothing . who be not to be disturb by idea . on whom even the fine arts , attend in powder and walk backward like the , must array themselves in the milliner ' and tailor ' pattern of past generation and be particularly careful not to be in earnest or to receive any impress from the move age . then there be my , of considerable reputation with he party , who have know what office be and who tell with much gravity , after dinner , that he really do not see to what the present age be ten . a debate be not what a debate use to be ; the house be not what the house use to be ; even a cabinet be not what it formerly be . he perceive with astonishment that suppose the present government to be overthrow , the limited choice of the , in the formation of a new ministry , would lie between and -- suppose it to be impossible for the of to act with , which may be assume to be the case in consequence of the breach arise out of that affair with . then , give the and the leadership of the of to , the to , the Colony to , and the Foreign to , what be you to do with ? you can not offer he the Presidency of the Council ; that be reserve for . you can not put he in the Woods and Forests ; that be hardly good enough for . what follow ? that the country be shipwreck , lose , and go to piece ( as be make manifest to the patriotism of ) because you can not provide for ! on the other hand , the , , contend across the table with some one else that the shipwreck of the country -- about which there be no doubt ; it be only the manner of it that be in question -- be attributable to Cuffy . if you have do with what you ought to have
have do when he first come into parliament , and have prevent he from go over to , you would have get he into alliance with , you would have have with you the weight attach as a smart debater to , you would have bring to bear upon the election the wealth of , you would have get in for three county , , and , and you would have strengthen you administration by the official knowledge and the business habits of . all this , instead of be as you now be , dependent on the mere caprice of ! as to this point , and as to some minor topic , there be difference of opinion ; but it be perfectly clear to the brilliant and distinguished circle , all round , that nobody be in question but and he retinue , and and he retinue . these be the great actor for whom the stage be reserve . a people there be , no doubt -- a certain large number of supernumerary , who be to be occasionally address , and rely upon for shout and choruse , as on the theatrical stage ; but and , they follower and family , they heir , executor , administrator , and assign , be the bear first - actor , manager , and leader , and no other can appear upon the scene for ever and ever . in this , too , there be perhaps more dandyism at than the brilliant and distinguished circle will find good for itself in the long run . for it be , even with the stillest and politest circle , as with the circle the necromancer draw around he -- very strange appearance may be see in active motion outside . with this difference , that be reality and not phantom , there be the greater danger of they break in . be quite full anyhow , so full that a burn sense of injury arise in the breast of ill - lodged lady ' - maid , and be not to he extinguish . only one room be empty . it be a turret chamber of the third order of merit , plainly but comfortably furnish and have a old - fashioned business air . it be 's room , and be never bestow on anybody else , for he may come at any time . he be not come yet . it be he quiet habit to walk across the park from the village in fine weather , to drop into this room as if he have never be out of it since he be last see there , to request a servant to inform that he be arrive in case he should be want , and to appear ten minute before dinner in the shadow of the library - door . he sleep in he turret with a complain flag - staff over he head , and have some lead outside on which , any fine morning when he be down here , he black figure may be see walking before breakfast like a larger species of rook . every day before dinner , my look for he in the dusk of the library , but he be not there . every day at dinner , my Lady glance down the table for the vacant place that would be wait to receive he if he have just arrive , but there be no vacant place . every night my casually ask she maid , " be come ? " every night the answer be , " no , my , not yet . " one night , while have she hair undress , my lose herself in deep thought after this reply until she see she own brooding face in the opposite glass , and a pair of black eye curiously observe she . " be so good as to attend , " say my then , address the reflection of , " to you business . you can contemplate you beauty at another time . " " ! it be you Ladyship 's beauty . " " that , " say my , " you need not contemplate at all . " at length , one afternoon a little before sunset , when the bright group of figure which have for the last hour or two enliven the Ghost 's walk be all disperse and only and my remain upon the terrace , Tulkinghorn appear . he come towards they at he usual methodical pace , which be never quicken , never slacken . he wear he usual expressionless mask -- if it be a mask -- and carry family secret in every limb of he body and every crease of he dress . whether he whole soul be devote to the great or whether he yield they nothing beyond the service he sell be he personal secret . he keep it , as he keep the secret of he client ; he be he own client in that matter , and will never betray himself . " how do you do , ? " say , give he he hand . be quite well . be quite well . my Lady be quite well . all highly satisfactory . the lawyer , with he hand behind he , walk at 's side along the terrace . my Lady walk upon the other side . " we expect you before , " say . a gracious observation . as much as to say , " , we remember you existence when you be not here to remind we of it by you presence . we bestow a fragment of we minds upon you , sir , you see ! " , comprehend it , incline he head and say he be much obliged . " I should have come down sooner , " he explain , "
" but that I have be much engage with those matters in the several suit between yourself and . " " a man of a very ill - regulate mind , " observe with severity . " a extremely dangerous person in any community . a man of a very low character of mind . " " he be obstinate , " say . " it be natural to such a man to be so , " say , look most profoundly obstinate himself . " I be not at all surprised to hear it . " " the only question be , " pursue the lawyer , " whether you will give up anything . " " no , sir , " reply . " nothing . I give up ? " " I do not mean anything of importance . that , of course , I know you would not abandon . I mean any minor point . " " , " return , " there can be no minor point between myself and . if I go farther , and observe that I can not readily conceive how any right of mine can be a minor point , I speak not so much in reference to myself as a individual as in reference to the family position I have it in charge to maintain . " incline he head again . " I have now my instruction , " he say . " will give we a good deal of trouble -- " " it be the character of such a mind , , " interrupt he , " to give trouble . a exceedingly ill - condition , level person . a person who , fifty year ago , would probably have be try at the for some demagogue proceeding , and severely punish -- if not , " add after a moment 's pause , " if not hang , draw , and quarter . " appear to discharge he stately breast of a burden in pass this capital sentence , as if it be the next satisfactory thing to have the sentence execute . " but night be come on , " say he , " and my Lady will take cold . my dear , let we go in . " as they turn towards the hall - door , address for the first time . " you send I a message respect the person whose write I happen to inquire about . it be like you to remember the circumstance ; I have quite forgote it . you message remind I of it again . I can not imagine what association I have with a hand like that , but I surely have some . " " you have some ? " repeat . " oh , yes ! " return my carelessly . " I think I must have have some . and do you really take the trouble to find out the writer of that actual thing -- what be it !--affidavit ? " " yes . " " how very odd ! " they pass into a sombre breakfast - room on the ground floor , light in the day by two deep window . it be now twilight . the fire glow brightly on the panel wall and palely on the window - glass , where , through the cold reflection of the blaze , the colder landscape shudder in the wind and a grey mist creep along , the only traveller besides the waste of cloud . my Lady lounge in a great chair in the chimney - corner , and take another great chair opposite . the lawyer stand before the fire with he hand out at arm 's length , shade he face . he look across he arm at my lady . " yes , " he say , " I inquire about the man , and find he . and , what be very strange , I find he -- " " not to be any out - of - the - way person , I be afraid ! " languidly anticipate . " I find he dead . " " oh , dear I ! " remonstrate . not so much shocke by the fact as by the fact of the fact be mention . " I be direct to he lodging -- a miserable , poverty - stricken place -- and I find he dead . " " you will excuse I , , " observe . " I think the less say -- " " , , let I hear the story out " ( it be my Lady speaking ) . " it be quite a story for twilight . how very shocking ! dead ? " re-assert it by another inclination of he head . " whether by he own hand --" " upon my honour ! " cry . " really ! " " do let I hear the story ! " say my . " whatever you desire , my dear . but , I must say -- " " no , you must not say ! go on , . " 's gallantry concede the point , though he still feel that to bring this sort of squalor among the upper class be really -- really -- " I be about to say , " resume the lawyer with undisturbed calmness , " that whether he have die by he own hand or not , it be beyond my power to tell you . I should amend that phrase , however , by say that he have unquestionably die of he own act , though whether by he own deliberate intention or by mischance can never certainly be know . the coroner 's jury find that he take the poison accidentally . " " and what kind of man , " my Lady ask , "
" be this deplorable creature ? " " very difficult to say , " return the lawyer , shak he head . " he have liv so wretchedly and be so neglected , with he gipsy colour and he wild black hair and beard , that I should have consider he the commonest of the common . the surgeon have a notion that he have once be something better , both in appearance and condition . " " what do they call the wretched being ? " " they call he what he have call himself , but no one know he name . " " not even any one who have attend on he ? " " no one have attend on he . he be find dead . in fact , I find he . " " without any clue to anything more ? " " without any ; there be , " say the lawyer meditatively , " a old portmanteau , but -- no , there be no papers . " during the utterance of every word of this short dialogue , and , without any other alteration in they customary deportment , have look very steadily at one another -- as be natural , perhaps , in the discussion of so unusual a subject . have look at the fire , with the general expression of the Dedlock on the staircase . the story be tell , he renew he stately protest , say that as it be quite clear that no association in my 's mind can possibly be traceable to this poor wretch ( unless he be a begging - letter writer ) , he trust to hear no more about a subject so far remove from my 's station . " certainly , a collection of horror , " say my lady , gather up she mantle and fur , " but they interest one for the moment ! have the kindness , , to open the door for I . " do so with deference and hold it open while she pass out . she pass close to he , with she usual fatigued manner and insolent grace . they meet again at dinner -- again , next day -- again , for many day in succession . be always the same exhaust deity , surround by worshipper , and terribly liable to be bore to death , even while presid at she own shrine . be always the same speechless repository of noble confidences , so oddly but of place and yet so perfectly at home . they appear to take as little note of one another as any two people enclose within the same wall could . but whether each evermore watch and suspect the other , evermore mistrustful of some great reservation ; whether each be evermore prepared at all point for the other , and never to be take unawar ; what each would give to know how much the other know -- all this be hide , for the time , in they own heart . 's we hold many consultation about what be to be , first without , as he have request , and afterwards with he , but it be a long time before we seem to make progress . say he be ready for anything . when doubt whether he might not already be too old to enter the navy , say he have think of that , and perhaps he be . when ask he what he think of the , say he have think of that , too , and it be not a bad idea . when advise he to try and decide within himself whether he old preference for the sea be a ordinary boyish inclination or a strong impulse , answer , well he really have try very often , and he could not make out . " how much of this indecision of character , " say to I , " be chargeable on that incomprehensible heap of uncertainty and procrastination on which he have be throw from he birth , I do not pretend to say ; but that Chancery , among its other sins , be responsible for some of it , I can plainly see . it have engender or confirm in he a habit of put off -- and trust to this , that , and the other chance , without know what chance -- and dismiss everything as unsettled , uncertain , and confused . the character of much older and steadier people may be even change by the circumstance surround they . it would be too much to expect that a boy 's , in its formation , should be the subject of such influence and escape they . " I feel this to be true ; though if I may venture to mention what I think besides , I think it much to be regret that 's education have not counteract those influence or direct he character . he have be eight year at a public school and have learnt , I understand , to make latin verse of several sort in the most admirable manner . but I never hear that it have be anybody be business to find out what he natural bent be , or where he failings lay , or to adapt any kind of knowledge to he . he have be adapt to the verse and have lear not the art of make they to such perfection that if he have remain at school until he be of age , I suppose he could only have go on make they over and over again unless he have enlarge he education by forget how to do it . still , although I have no doubt that they be very beautiful , and very improve , and very sufficient for a great many purpose of life ,
, and always remember all through life , I do doubt whether would not have profit by some one study he a little , instead of he study they quite so much . to be sure , I know nothing of the subject and do not even now know whether the young gentleman of classic or make verse to the same extent -- or whether the young gentleman of any country ever do . " I have not the least idea , " say , muse , " what I have better be . except that I be quite sure I do not want to go into the , it be a toss - up . " " you have no inclination in 's way ? " suggest . " I do not know that , sir ! " reply . " I be fond of boating . Articl clerk go a good deal on the water . it be a capital profession ! " " surgeon -- " suggest . " that be the thing , sir ! " cry . I doubt if he have ever once think of it before . " that be the thing , sir , " repeat with the greatest enthusiasm . " we have get it at last . " he be not to be laugh out of it , though he laugh at it heartily . he say he have choose he profession , and the more he think of it , the more he feel that he destiny be clear ; the art of healing be the art of all other for he . Mistrust that he only come to this conclusion because , have never have much chance of find out for himself what he be fitte for and have never be guide to the discovery , he be take by the newest idea and be glad to get rid of the trouble of consideration , I wonder whether the Latin verse often end in this or whether 's be a solitary case . take great pain to talk with he seriously and to put it to he good sense not to deceive himself in so important a matter . be a little grave after these interview , but invariably tell and I that it be all right , and then begin to talk about something else . " by heaven ! " cry , who interest himself strongly in the subject -- though I need not say that , for he could do nothing weakly ; " I rejoice to find a young gentleman of spirit and gallantry devote himself to that noble profession ! the more spirit there be in it , the better for mankind and the worse for those mercenary task - master and low trickster who delight in put that illustrious art at a disadvantage in the world . by all that be base and despicable , " cry , " the treatment of surgeon aboard ship be such that I would submit the leg -- both leg -- of every member of the board to a compound fracture and render it a transportable offence in any qualified practitioner to set they if the system be not wholly change in eight and forty hour ! " " would not you give they a week ? " ask . " no ! " cry firmly . " not on any consideration ! eight and forty hour ! as to corporations , parish , vestry - board , and similar gatherings of jolter - head clod who assemble to exchange such speech that , by heaven , they ought to be work in quicksilver mine for the short remainder of they miserable existence , if it be only to prevent they detestable English from contaminate a language speak in the presence of the sun -- as to those fellows , who meanly take advantage of the ardour of gentleman in the pursuit of knowledge to recompense the inestimable service of the best year of they life , they long study , and they expensive education with pittance too small for the acceptance of clerk , I would have the neck of every one of they wrung and they skull arrange in ' hall for the contemplation of the whole profession in order that its younger members might understand from actual measurement , in early life , how thick skull may become ! " he wound up this vehement declaration by look round upon we with a most agreeable smile and suddenly thunder , " , ha , ha ! " over and over again , until anybody else might have be expect to be quite subdue by the exertion . as still continue to say that he be fix in he choice after repeat period for consideration have be recommend by and have expire , and he still continue to assure and I in the same final manner that it be " all right , " it become advisable to take into council . , therefore , come down to dinner one day , and lean back in he chair , and turn he eye - glass over and over , and speak in a sonorous voice , and do exactly what I remember to have see he do when I be a little girl . " ah ! " say . " yes . well ! a very good profession , , a very good profession . " " the course of study and preparation require to be diligently pursue , " observe my guardian with a glance at . " oh , no doubt , " say . " Diligently . " " but that be the case , more or less , with all pursuits that be worth much , " say , " it be not a special consideration which another choice would be likely to escape . " " truly , "
" say . " and , who have so meritoriously acquit himself in the -- shall I say the classic shade ?-- in which he youth have be pass , will , no doubt , apply the habit , if not the principle and practice , of versification in that tongue in which a poet be say ( unless I mistake ) to be bear , not make , to the more eminently practical field of action on which he enter . " " you may rely upon it , " say in he off - hand manner , " that I shall go at it and do my best . " " very well , ! " say , gently nodd he head . " really , when we be assure by that he mean to go at it and to do he best , " nodd feelingly and smoothly over those expression , " I would submit to you that we have only to inquire into the best mode of carry out the object of he ambition . now , with reference to place with some sufficiently eminent practitioner . be there any one in view at present ? " " no one , , I think ? " say my guardian . " no one , sir , " say . " quite so ! " observ . " as to situation , now . be there any particular feeling on that head ? " " -- no , " say . " quite so ! " observ again . " I should like a little variety , " say ; " I mean a good range of experience . " " very requisite , no doubt , " return . " I think this may be easily arrange , ? we have only , in the first place , to discover a sufficiently eligible practitioner ; and as soon as we make we want -- and shall I add , we ability to pay a premium ?-- know , we only difficulty will be in the selection of one from a large number . we have only , in the second place , to observe those little formality which be render necessary by we time of life and we be under the guardianship of the court . we shall soon be -- shall I say , in 's own light - hear manner , ' go at it ' -- to we heart 's content . it be a coincidence , " say with a tinge of melancholy in he smile , " one of those coincidence which may or may not require a explanation beyond we present limited faculty , that I have a cousin in the medical profession . he might be deem eligible by you and might be dispose to respond to this proposal . I can answer for he as little as for you , but he might ! " as this be a opening in the prospect , it be arrange that should see he cousin . and as have before propose to take we to for a few week , it be settle next day that we should make we visit at once and combine 's business with it . leave we within a week , we take up we abode at a cheerful lodging near over a upholsterer 's shop . be a great wonder to we , and we be out for hour and hour at a time , see the sight , which appear to be less capable of exhaustion than we be . we make the round of the principal theatre , too , with great delight , and see all the play that be worth see . I mention this because it be at the theatre that I begin to be make uncomfortable again by . I be sit in front of the box one night with , and be in the place he like best , behind 's chair , when , happen to look down into the pit , I see , with he hair flatten down upon he head and woe depict in he face , look up at I . I feel all through the performance that he never look at the actor but constantly look at I , and always with a carefully prepare expression of the deepest misery and the profoundest dejection . it quite spoilead my pleasure for that night because it be so very embarrassing and so very ridiculous . but from that time forth , we never go to the play without my see in the pit , always with he hair straight and flat , he shirt - collar turn down , and a general feebleness about he . if he be not there when we go in , and I begin to hope he would not come and yield myself for a little while to the interest of the scene , I be certain to encounter he languishing eye when I least expect it and , from that time , to be quite sure that they be fix upon I all the evening . I really can not express how uneasy this make I . if he would only have brush up he hair or turn up he collar , it would have be bad enough ; but to know that that absurd figure be always gaze at I , and always in that demonstrative state of despondency , put such a constraint upon I that I do not like to laugh at the play , or to cry at it , or to move , or to speak . I seem able to do nothing naturally . as to escape by go to the back of the box , I could not bear to do that because I know and rely on have I next they and that they could never have talk together
together so happily if anybody else have be in my place . so there I sit , not know where to look -- for wherever I look , I know 's eye be follow I -- and think of the dreadful expense to which this young man be put himself on my account . sometimes I think of tell . then I fear that the young man would lose he situation and that I might ruin he . sometimes I think of confiding in , but be deter by the possibility of he fighting and give he black eye . sometimes I think , should I fry at he or shake my head . then I feel I could not do it . sometimes I consider whether I should write to he mother , but that end in my be convince that to open a correspondence would be to make the matter worse . I always come to the conclusion , finally , that I could do nothing . 's perseverance , all this time , not only produce he regularly at any theatre to which we go , but cause he to appear in the crowd as we be come out , and even to get up behind we fly -- where I be sure I see he , two or three time , struggle among the most dreadful spikes . after we get home , he haunt a post opposite we house . the upholsterer 's where we lod be at the corner of two street , and my bedroom window be opposite the post , I be afraid to go near the window when I go upstairs , lest I should see he ( as I do one moonlight night ) lean against the post and evidently catch cold . if have not be , fortunately for I , engage in the daytime , I really should have have no rest from he . while we be make this round of gaiety , in which so extraordinarily participate , the business which have help to bring we to town be not neglect . 's cousin be a , who have a good practice at and attend a large public institution besides . he be quite willing to receive into he house and to superintend he study , and as it see that those could be pursue advantageously under 's roof , and like , and as say he like " well enough , " a agreement be make , the 's consent be obtain , and it be all settled . on the day when matter be conclude between and , we be all under engagement to dine at 's house . we be to be " merely a family party , " 's note say ; and we find no lady there but herself . she be surround in the drawing - room by various object , indicative of she paint a little , play the piano a little , play the guitar a little , play the harp a little , singe a little , work a little , read a little , write poetry a little , and botanize a little . she be a lady of about fifty , I should think , youthfully dress , and of a very fine complexion . if I add to the little list of she accomplishment that she rouge a little , I do not mean that there be any harm in it . himself be a pink , fresh - face , crisp - look gentleman with a weak voice , white tooth , light hair , and surprised eye , some year younger , I should say , than . he admire she exceedingly , but principally , and to begin with , on the curiious ground ( as it see to we ) of she have have three husband . we have barely take we seat when he say to quite triumphantly , " you would hardly suppose that I be 's third ! " " indeed ? " say . " she third ! " say . " have not the appearance , , of a lady who have have two former husband ? " I say " not at all ! " " and most remarkable man ! " say in a tone of confidence . " of the , who be 's first husband , be a very distinguished officer indeed . the name of , my immediate predecessor , be one of european reputation . " overhear he and smile . " yes , my dear ! " reply to the smile , " I be observe to and that you have have two former husband -- both very distinguished man . and they find it , as people generally do , difficult to believe . " " I be barely twenty , " say , " when I marry of the . I be in the with he ; I be quite a sailor . on the twelfth anniversary of my wedding - day , I become the wife of . " " of european reputation , " add Badger in a undertone . " and when and myself be marry , " pursue , " we be marry on the same day of the year . I have become attach to the day . " " so that have be marry to three husband -- two of they highly distinguished man , " say , sum up the fact , " and each time upon the twenty - first of at eleven in the forenoon ! " we all express we admiration . " but for 's modesty , " say , " I would take leave to correct he and say three distinguished man . " " thank you , ! what I always tell he ! " observe . " and , my dear , "
" say , " what do I always tell you ? that without any affectation of disparage such professional distinction as I may have attaine ( which we friend will have many opportunity of estimating ) , I be not so weak -- no , really , " say to we generally , " so unreasonable -- as to put my reputation on the same footing with such first - rate man as and . perhaps you may be interested , , " continue , lead the way into the next drawing - room , " in this portrait of . it be take on he return home from the african station , where he have suffer from the fever of the country . consider it too yellow . but it be a very fine head . a very fine head ! " we all echo , " a very fine head ! " " I feel when I look at it , " say , " ' that be a man I should like to have see ! ' it strikingly bespeak the first - class man that pre-eminently be . on the other side , . I know he well -- attend he in he last illness -- a speak likeness ! over the piano , when . over the sofa , when . of in , I possess the original and have no copy . " dinner be now announce , and we go downstairs . it be a very genteel entertainment , very handsomely serve . but the captain and the professor still run in 's head , and as and I have the honour of be under he particular care , we have the full benefit of they . " , ? allow I ! not in that tumbler , pray . bring I the professor 's goblet , ! " very much admire some artificial flower under a glass . " Astonish how they keep ! " say . " they be present to when she be in the . " he invite to take a glass of claret . " not that claret ! " he say . " excuse I ! this be a occasion , and on a occasion I produce some very special claret I happen to have . ( , 's wine ! ) , this be a wine that be import by the captain , we will not say how many year ago . you will find it very curious . my dear , I shall he happy to take some of this wine with you . ( 's claret to you mistress , ! ) my love , you health ! " after dinner , when we lady retire , we take 's first and second husband with we . give we in the drawing - room a biographical sketch of the life and service of before he marriage and a more minute account of he dating from the time when he fall in love with she at a ball on board the Crippler , give to the officer of that ship when she lay in . " the dear old ! " say , shak she head . " she be a noble vessel . Trim , ship - shape , all a taunto , as use to say . you must excuse I if I occasionally introduce a nautical expression ; I be quite a sailor once . love that craft for my sake . when she be no longer in commission , he frequently say that if he be rich enough to buy she old hulk , he would have a inscription let into the timber of the quarter - deck where we stand as partner in the dance to mark the spot where he fall -- rak fore and aft ( use to say ) by the fire from my tops . it be he naval way of mention my eye . " shook she head , sigh , and look in the glass . " it be a great change from to , " she resume with a plaintive smile . " I feel it a good deal at first . such a entire revolution in my mode of life ! but custom , combine with science -- particularly science -- inure I to it . be the professor 's sole companion in he botanical excursion , I almost forget that I have ever be afloat , and become quite learned . it be singular that the professor be the antipode of and that be not in the least like either ! " we then pass into a narrative of the death of and , both of whom seem to have have very bad complaint . in the course of it , . signify to we that she have never madly love but once and that the object of that wild affection , never to be recall in its fresh enthusiasm , be . the professor be yet die by inch in the most dismal manner , and be give we imitation of he way of say , with great difficulty , " where be ? let give I my toast and water ! " when the entrance of the gentleman consign he to the tomb . now , I observ that evening , as I have observe for some day past , that and be more than ever attach to each other 's society , which be but natural , see that they be go to be separate so soon . I be therefore not very much surprise when we get home , and and I retire upstairs , to find more silent than usual , though I be not quite prepare for she come into my arm and begin to speak to I , with she face hide . " my darl ! " murmure . " I have a great
great secret to tell you ! " a mighty secret , my pretty one , no doubt ! " what be it , ? " " oh , , you would never guess ! " " shall I try to guess ? " say I . " oh , no ! do not ! pray do not ! " cry , very much start by the idea of my do so . " now , I wonder who it can be about ? " say I , pretend to consider . " it be about -- " say in a whisper . " it be about -- my cousin ! " " well , my own ! " say I , kiss she bright hair , which be all I could see . " and what about he ? " " oh , , you would never guess ! " it be so pretty to have she clinging to I in that way , hide she face , and to know that she be not cry in sorrow but in a little glow of joy , and pride , and hope , that I would not help she just yet . " he say -- I know it be very foolish , we be both so young -- but he say , " with a burst of tear , " that he love I dearly , . " " do he indeed ? " say I . " I never hear of such a thing ! why , my pet of pet , I could have tell you that week and week ago ! " to see lift up she flushed face in joyful surprise , and hold I round the neck , and laugh , and cry , and blush , be so pleasant ! " why , my darling , " say I , " what a goose you must take I for ! you cousin have be love you as plainly as he could for I do not know how long ! " " and yet you never say a word about it ! " cry , kiss I . " no , my love , " say I . " I wait to be tell . " " but now I have tell you , you do not think it wrong of I , do you ? " return . she might have coax I to say no if I have be the hardest - hear duenna in the world . not be that yet , I say no very freely . " and now , " say I , " I know the worst of it . " " oh , that be not quite the worst of it , Esther dear ! " cry , hold I tighter and lay down she face again upon my breast . " no ? " say I . " not even that ? " " no , not even that ! " say , shak she head . " why , you never mean to say -- " I be begin in joke . but , look up and smile through she tear 's , cry , " yes , I do ! you know , you know I do ! " and then sob out , " with all my heart I do ! with all my whole heart , ! " I tell she , laugh , why I have know that , too , just as well as I have know the other ! and we sit before the fire , and I have all the talking to myself for a little while ( though there be not much of it ) ; and be soon quiet and happy . " do you think my cousin know , dear ? " she ask . " unless my cousin be blind , my pet , " say I , " I should think my cousin know pretty well as much as we know . " " we want to speak to he before go , " say timidly , " and we want you to advise we , and to tell he so . perhaps you would not mind 's come in , ? " " oh ! be outside , be he , my dear ? " say I . " I be not quite certain , " return with a bashful simplicity that would have win my heart if she have not win it long before , " but I think he be wait at the door . " there he be , of course . they bring a chair on either side of I , and put I between they , and really seem to have fall in love with I instead of one another , they be so confid , and so trustful , and so fond of I . they go on in they own wild way for a little while -- I never stop they ; I enjoy it too much myself -- and then we gradually fall to consider how young they be , and how there must be a lapse of several year before this early love could come to anything , and how it could come to happiness only if it be real and last and inspire they with a steady resolution to do they duty to each other , with constancy , fortitude , and perseverance , each always for the other 's sake . well ! say that he would work he finger to the bone for , and say that she would work she finger to the bone for , and they call I all sort of endearing and sensible name , and we sit there , advise and talk , half the night . finally , before we parte , I give they my promise to speak to they cousin to - morrow
morrow . so , when to - morrow come , I go to my guardian after breakfast , in the room that be we town - substitute for the growlery , and tell he that I have it in trust to tell he something . " well , little woman , " say he , shut up he book , " if you have accept the trust , there can be no harm in it . " " I hope not , guardian , " say I . " I can guarantee that there be no secrecy in it . for it only happen yesterday . " " aye ? and what be it , ? " " guardian , " say I , " you remember the happy night when first we come down to ? when be singe in the dark room ? " I wish to call to he remembrance the look he have give I then . unless I be much mistaken , I see that I do so . " because -- " say I with a little hesitation . " yes , my dear ! " say he . " do not hurry . " " because , " say I , " and have fall in love . and have tell each other so . " " already ! " cry my guardian , quite astonished . " yes ! " say I . " and to tell you the truth , guardian , I rather expect it . " " the deuce you do ! " say he . he sit consider for a minute or two , with he smile , at once so handsome and so kind , upon he change face , and then request I to let they know that he wish to see they . when they come , he encircle with one arm in he fatherly way and address himself to with a cheerful gravity . " , " say , " I be glad to have win you confidence . I hope to preserve it . when I contemplate these relation between we four which have so brighten my life and so invest it with new interest and pleasure , I certainly do contemplate , afar off , the possibility of you and you pretty cousin here ( do not be shy , , do not be shy , my dear ! ) be in a mind to go through life together . I see , and do see , many reason to make it desirable . but that be afar off , , afar off ! " " we look afar off , sir , " return . " well ! " say . " that be rational . now , hear I , my dear ! I might tell you that you do not know you own mind yet , that a thousand thing may happen to divert you from one another , that it be well this chain of flower you have take up be very easily break , or it might become a chain of lead . but I will not do that . such wisdom will come soon enough , I dare say , if it be to come at all . I will assume that a few year hence you will be in you heart to one another what you be to - day . all I say before speak to you accord to that assumption be , if you do change -- if you do come to find that you be more commonplace cousins to each other as man and woman than you be as boy and girl ( you manhood will excuse I , ! ) -- do not be asham still to confide in I , for there will be nothing monstrous or uncommon in it . I be only you friend and distant kinsman . I have no power over you whatever . but I wish and hope to retain you confidence if I do nothing to forfeit it . " " I be very sure , sir , " return , " that I speak for too when I say that you have the strongest power over we both -- root in respect , gratitude , and affection -- strengthen every day . " " dear cousin , " say , on he shoulder , " my father 's place can never be empty again . all the love and duty I could ever have render to he be transfer to you . " " come ! " say . " now for we assumption . now we lift we eye up and look hopefully at the distance ! , the world be before you ; and it be most probable that as you enter it , so it will receive you . trust in nothing but in Providence and you own effort . never separate the two , like the heathe waggoner . Constancy in love be a good thing , but it mean nothing , and be nothing , without constancy in every kind of effort . if you have the ability of all the great man , past and present , you could do nothing well without sincerely meane it and set about it . if you entertain the supposition that any real success , in great thing or in small , ever be or could be , ever will or can be , wrest from by fit and start , leave that wrong idea here or leave you cousin here . " " I will leave it here , sir , " reply smiling , " if I bring it here just now ( but I hope I do not ) , and will work my way on to my cousin in the hopeful distance . " " right ! " say . " if you be not to make she
she happy , why should you pursue she ? " " I would not make she unhappy -- no , not even for she love , " retort proudly . " well say ! " cry . " that be well say ! she remain here , in she home with I . love she , , in you active life , no less than in she home when you revisit it , and all will go well . otherwise , all will go ill . that be the end of my preaching . I think you and have better take a walk . " tenderly embrace he , and heartily shook hand with he , and then the cousins go out of the room , look back again directly , though , to say that they would wait for I . the door stood open , and we both follow they with we eye as they pass down the adjoining room , on which the sun be shine , and out at its farther end . with he head bent , and she hand draw through he arm , be talk to she very earnestly ; and she look up in he face , listen , and seem to see nothing else . so young , so beautiful , so full of hope and promise , they go on lightly through the sunlight as they own happy thought might then be traverse the year to come and make they all year of brightness . so they pass away into the shadow and be gone . it be only a burst of light that have be so radiant . the room darken as they go out , and the sun be cloud over . " be I right , ? " say my guardian when they be gone . he be so good and wise to ask I whether he be right ! " may gain , out of this , the quality he want . wants , at the core of so much that be good ! " say , shak he head . " I have say nothing to , . she have she friend and counsellor always near . " and he lay he hand lovingly upon my head . I could not help show that I be a little moved , though I do all I could to conceal it . " Tut tut ! " say he . " but we must take care , too , that we little woman 's life be not all consum in care for other . " " care ? my dear guardian , I believe I be the happiest creature in the world ! " " I believe so , too , " say he . " but some one may find out what never will -- that the little woman be to be hold in remembrance above all other people ! " I have omit to mention in it be place that there be some one else at the family dinner party . it be not a lady . it be a gentleman . it be a gentleman of a dark complexion -- a young surgeon . he be rather reserve , but I think he very sensible and agreeable . at least , ask I if I do not , and I say yes . leave we on the very next evening to begin he new career , and commit to my charge with great love for she and great trust in I . it touch I then to reflect , and it touch I now , more nearly , to remember ( have what I have to tell ) how they both think of I , even at that engrossing time . I be a part of all they plan , for the present and the future . I be to write once a week , make my faithful report of , who be to write to he every alternate day . I be to be inform , under he own hand , of all he labour and success ; I be to observe how resolute and persever he would be ; I be to be 's bridesmay when they be marry ; I be to live with they afterwards ; I be to keep all the key of they house ; I be to be make happy for ever and a day . " and if the suit should make we rich , -- which it may , you know ! " say to cry all . a shade cross 's face . " my dearest , " ask , " why not ? " " it have better declare we poor at once , " say . " oh ! I do not know about that , " return , " but at all event , it will not declare anything at once . it have not declare anything in heaven know how many year . " " too true , " say . " yes , but , " urge , answer what she look suggest rather than she word , " the longer it go on , dear cousin , the nearer it must be to a settlement one way or other . now , be not that reasonable ? " " you know best , . but I be afraid if we trust to it , it will make we unhappy . " " but , my , we be not go to trust to it ! " cry gaily . " we know it better than to trust to it . we only say that if it should make we rich , we have no constitutional objection to be rich . the court be , by solemn settlement of law , we grim old guardian , and we be to suppose that what it give we ( when it give
give we anything ) be we right . it be not necessary to quarrel with we right . " " no , " , " but it may be better to forget all about it . " " well , well , " cry , " then we will forget all about it ! we consign the whole thing to . put on she approve face , and it be do ! " " 's approve face , " say I , look out of the box in which i be pack he book , " be not very visible when you call it by that name ; but it do approve , and she think you can not do better . " so , say there be a end of it , and immediately begin , on no other foundation , to build as many castle in the air as would man the Great wall of . he go away in high spirit . and I , prepare to miss he very much , commence we quieter career . on we arrival in , we have call with at 's but have not be so fortunate as to find she at home . it appear that she have go somewhere to a tea -drinking and have take with she . besides the tea -drink , there be to be some considerable speech - make and letter -writ on the general merit of the cultivation of coffee , conjointly with native , at the settlement of - . all this involved , no doubt , sufficient active exercise of pen and ink to make she daughter 's part in the proceeding anything but a holiday . it be now beyond the time appoint for 's return , we call again . she be in town , but not at home , have go to directly after breakfast on some Borrioboolan business , arise out of a society call the . as I have not see Peepy on the occasion of we last call ( when he be not to be find anywhere , and when the cook rather think he must have stroll away with the dustman 's cart ) , I now inquire for he again . the oyster shell he have be build a house with be still in the passage , but he be nowhere discoverable , and the cook suppose that he have " go after the sheep . " when we repeat , with some surprise , " the sheep ? " she say , oh , yes , on market day he sometimes follow they quite out of town and come back in such a state as never be ! I be sit at the window with my guardian on the follow morning , and be busy write -- of course to -- when be announce , and enter , lead the identical , whom she have make some endeavour to render presentable by wip the dirt into corner of he face and hand and make he hair very wet and then violently frizzl it with she finger . everything the dear child wore be either too large for he or too small . among he other contradictory decoration he have the hat of a bishop and the little glove of a baby . he boot be , on a small scale , the boot of a ploughman , while he leg , so cross and recross with scratch that they look like map , be bear below a very short pair of plaid drawer finish off with two frill of perfectly different pattern . the deficient buttons on he plaid frock have evidently be supply from one of 's coat , they be so extremely brazen and so much too large . most extraordinary specimen of needlework appear on several part of he dress , where it have be hastily mende , and I recognize the same hand on 's . she be , however , unaccountably improve in she appearance and look very pretty . she be conscious of poor little Peepy be but a failure after all her trouble , and she show it as she come in by the way in which she glance first at he and then at we . " oh , dear I ! " say my guardian . " due ! " and I give she a cordial welcome and present she to , to whom she say as she sit down , " ma 's compliment , and she hope you will excuse she , because she be correcte proof of the plan . she be go to put out five thousand new circular , and she know you will be interested to hear that . I have bring one of they with I . ma 's compliment . " with which she present it sulkily enough . " thank you , " say my guardian . " I be much oblige to . oh , dear I ! this be a very trying wind ! " we be busy with , take off he clerical hat , ask he if he remember we , and so on . retir behind he elbow at first , but relent at the sight of sponge - cake and allow I to take he on my lap , where he sit munch quietly . then withdraw into the temporary growlery , open a conversation with she usual abruptness . " we be go on just as bad as ever in , " say she . " I have no peace of my life . talk of ! I could not be worse off if I be a what be - he -name -- man and a brother ! " I try to say something soothing . " oh , it be of no use , , " exclaim , " though I thank you for the kind intention
intention all the same . I know how I be use , and I be not to be talk over . you would not be talk over if you be use so . Peepy , go and play at under the piano ! " " I sha not ! " say . " very well , you ungrateful , naughty , hard - hear boy ! " return with tear in she eye . " I will never take pain to dress you any more . " " yes , I will go , ! " cry , who be really a good child and who be so move by he sister 's vexation that he go at once . " it seem a little thing to cry about , " say poor Jellyby apologetically , " but I be quite wear out . I be direct the new circular till two this morning . I detest the whole thing so that that alone make my head ache till I can not see out of my eye . and look at that poor unfortunate child ! be there ever such a fright as he be ! " Peepy , happily unconscious of the defects in he appearance , sit on the carpet behind one of the leg of the piano , look calmly out of he den at we while he eat he cake . " I have send he to the other end of the room , " observe , draw she chair nearer ours , " because I do not want he to hear the conversation . those little thing be so sharp ! I be go to say , we really be go on worse than ever . will be a bankrupt before long , and then I hope ma will be satisfied . there 'll he nobody but Ma to thank for it . " we say we hope 's affair be not in so bad a state as that . " it be of no use hope , though it be very kind of you , " return , shak she head . " tell I only yesterday morning ( and dreadfully unhappy he be ) that he wcould not weather the storm . I should be surprise if he could . when all we tradesman send into we house any stuff they like , and the servants do what they like with it , and I have no time to improve thing if I know how , and ma do not care about anything , I should like to make out how be to weather the storm . I declare if I be , I would run away . " " my dear ! " say I , smile . " you papa , no doubt , consider he family . " " oh , yes , he family be all very fine , , " reply ; " but what comfort be he family to he ? he family be nothing but bills , dirt , waste , noise , tumble downstair , confusion , and wretchedness . he scrambl home , from week 's end to week 's end , be like one great washing - day -- only nothing be wash ! " tap she foot upon the floor and wip she eye . " I be sure I pity to that degree , " she say , " and be so angry with ma that I can not find word to express myself ! however , I be not go to bear it , I be determine . I will not be a slave all my life , and I will not submit to be propose to by . a pretty thing , indeed , to marry a philanthropist . as if I have not have enough of that ! " say poor . I must confess that I could not help feel rather angry with . myself , see and hear this neglect girl and know how much of bitterly satirical truth there be in what she say . " if it be not that we have be intimate when you stop at we house , " pursue , " I should have be asham to come here to - day , for I know what a figure I must seem to you two . but as it be , I make up my mind to call , especially as I be not likely to see you again the next time you come to town . " she say this with such great significance that and I glance at one another , foresee something more . " no ! " say , shak she head . " not at all likely ! I know I may trust you two . I be sure you will not betray I . I be engage . " " without they knowledge at home ? " say I . " why , good gracious I , , " she return , justify herself in a fretful but not angry manner , " how can it be otherwise ? you know what ma be -- and I need not make poor more miserable by tell he . " " but would it not he add to he unhappiness to marry without he knowledge or consent , my dear ? " say I . " no , " say , soften . " I hope not . I should try to make he happy and comfortable when he come to see I , and and the other should take it in turn to come and stay with I , and they should have some care take of they then . " there be a good deal of affection in poor Caddy . she soften more and more while say this and cry so much over the unwonted little home - picture she have raise in she
she mind that , in he cave under the piano , be touch , and turn himself over on he back with loud lamentation . it be not until I have bring he to kiss he sister , and have restore he to he place on my lap , and have show he that be laugh ( she laugh expressly for the purpose ) , that we could recall he peace of mind ; even then it be for some time conditional on he take we in turn by the ching and smooth we face all over with he hand . at last , as he spirit be not equal to the piano , we put he on a chair to look out of window ; and , hold he by one leg , resum she confidence . " it begin in you come to we house , " she say . we naturally ask how . " I feel I be so awkward , " she reply , " that I make up my mind to be improve in that respect at all event and to learn to dance . I tell ma I be asham of myself , and I must be teach to dance . ma look at I in that provoke way of hers as if I be not in sight , but I be quite determined to be teach to dance , and so I go to 's in . " " and be it there , my dear -- " I begin . " yes , it be there , " say , " and I be engage to . there be two , father and son . my be the son , of course . I only wish I have be better bring up and be likely to make he a better wife , for I be very fond of he . " " I be sorry to hear this , " say I , " I must confess . " " I do not know why you should be sorry , " she retort a little anxiously , " but I be engage to , whether or no , and he be very fond of I . it be a secret as yet , even on he side , because old have a share in the connexion and it might break he heart or give he some other shock if he be tell of it abruptly . be a very gentlemanly man indeed -- very gentlemanly . " " do he wife know of it ? " ask . " 's wife , ? " return , open she eye . " there be no such person . he be a widower . " we be here interrupt by , whose leg have undergone so much on account of he sister 's unconsciously jerk it like a bell - rope whenever she be emphatic that the afflict child now bemoan he suffering with a very low - spirited noise . as he appeal to I for compassion , and as I be only a listener , I undertake to hold he . proceed , after begge 's pardon with a kiss and assure he that she have not mean to do it . " that be the state of the case , " say . " if I ever blame myself , I still think it be Ma 's fault . we be to be marry whenever we can , and then I shall go to at the office and write to Ma . it will not much agitate ma ; I be only pen and ink to she . one great comfort be , " say with a sob , " that I shall never hear of after I be marry . yong hate it for my sake , and if old know there be such a place , it be as much as he do . " " it be he who be very gentlemanly , I think ! " say I . " very gentlemanly indeed , " say . " he be celebrate almost everywhere for he deportment . " " do he teach ? " ask . " no , he do not teach anything in particular , " reply . " but he deportment be beautiful . " go on to say with considerable hesitation and reluctance that there be one thing more she wish we to know , and feel we ought to know , and which she hope would not offend we . it be that she have improve she acquaintance with , the little crazy old lady , and that she frequently go there early in the morning and meet she lover for a few minute before breakfast -- only for a few minute . " I go there at other time , " say , " but do not come then . yong 's name be ; I wish it be not , because it sound like a dog , but of course he do not christen himself . have he christen in remembrance of the . adore the on account of he deportment . I hope you will not think the worse of I for have make these little appointment at 's , where I first go with you , because I like the poor thing for she own sake and I believe she like I . if you could see young , I be sure you would think well of he -- at least , I be sure you could not possibly think any ill of he . I be go there now for my lesson . I could not ask you to go with I , ; but if you would , " say , who have say all this earnestly and tremblingly , " I should be very glad -- very glad . " it happen that we have
have arrange with my guardian to go to 's that day . we have tell he of we former visit , and we account have interes he ; but something have always happen to prevent we go there again . as I trust that I might have sufficient influence with to prevent she take any very rash step if I fully accept the confidence she be so willing to place in I , poor girl , I propose that she and I and should go to the academy and afterwards meet my guardian and at 's , whose name I now learn for the first time . this be on condition that and should come back with we to dinner . the last article of the agreement be joyfully acced to by both , we smarten up a little with the assistance of a few pins , some soap and water , and a hair - brush , and go out , bend we step towards , which be very near . I find the academy establish in a sufficiently dingy house at the corner of a archway , with bust in all the staircase window . in the same house there be also establish , as I gather from the plate on the door , a draw - master , a coal - merchant ( there be , certainly , no room for he coal ) , and a lithographic artist . on the plate which , in size and situation , take precedence of all the rest , I read , . the door be open , and the hall be block up by a grand piano , a harp , and several other musical instrument in case , all in progress of removal , and all look rakish in the daylight . inform I that the academy have be lent , last night , for a concert . we go upstairs -- it have be quite a fine house once , when it be anybody 's business to keep it clean and fresh , and nobody be business to smoke in it all day -- and into 's great room , which be build out into a mew at the back and be light by a skylight . it be a bare , resoun room smell of stable , with cane form along the wall , and the wall ornament at regular interval with painted lyre and little cut - glass branch for candle , which seem to be shed they old - fashioned drop as other branch might she autumn leave . several young lady pupil , range from thirteen or fourteen year of age to two or three and twenty , be assemble ; and I be look among they for they instructor when , pinch my arm , repeat the ceremony of introduction . " , ! " I curtsy to a little blue - eye fair man of youthful appearance with flaxen hair part in the middle and curl at the end all round he head . he have a little fiddle , which we use to call at school a kit , under he left arm , and it be little bow in the same hand . he little dancing - shoe be particularly diminutive , and he have a little innocent , feminine manner which not only appeal to I in a amiable way , but make this singular effect upon I , that I receive the impression that he be like he mother and that he mother have not be much consider or well use . " I be very happy to see 's friend , " he say , bow low to I . " I begin to fear , " with timid tenderness , " as it be past the usual time , that be not come . " " I beg you will have the goodness to attribute that to I , who have detain she , and to receive my excuse , sir , " say I . " oh , dear ! " say he . " and pray , " I entreate , " do not allow I to be the cause of any more delay . " with that apology I withdraw to a seat between ( who , be well use to it , have already clim into a corner place ) and a old lady of a censorious countenance whose two niece be in the class and who be very indignant with 's boot . then tinkle the string of he kit with he finger , and the young lady stand up to dance . just then there appear from a side - door old , in the full lustre of he deportment . he be a fat old gentleman with a false complexion , false tooth , false whisker , and a wig . he have a fur collar , and he have a padded breast to he coat , which only want a star or a broad blue ribbon to be complete . he be pinch in , and swell out , and get up , and strap down , as much as he could possibly bear . he have such a neckcloth on ( puffe he very eye out of they natural shape ) , and he ching and even he ear so sunk into it , that it see as though be must inevitably double up if it be cast loose . he have under he arm a hat of great size and weight , shelve downward from the crown to the brim , and in he hand a pair of white glove with which he flap it as he stand poise on one leg in a high - shouldere , round - elbow state of elegance not to be surpass . he have a cane , he have a eye - glass , he have a snuff
snuff - box , he have ring , he have wristband , he have everything but any touch of nature ; he be not like youth , he be not like age , he be not like anything in the world but a model of deportment . " ! a visitor . 's friend , . " " distinguished , " say , " by 's presence . " as he bow to I in that tight state , I almost believe I see crease come into the whites of he eye . " my father , " say the son , aside , to I with quite a affect belief in he , " be a celebrated character . my father be greatly admire . " " go on , ! go on ! " say , stand with he back to the fire and wave he glove condescendingly . " go on , my son ! " at this command , or by this gracious permission , the lesson go on . sometimes play the kit , dancing ; sometimes play the piano , stand ; sometimes hum the tune with what little breath he could spare , while he set a pupil right ; always conscientiously move with the least proficient through every step and every part of the figure ; and never rest for a instant . he distinguished father do nothing whatever but stand before the fire , a model of deportment . " and he never do anything else , " say the old lady of the censorious countenance . " yet would you believe that it be this name on the door - plate ? " " he son 's name be the same , you know , " say I . " he would not let he son have any name if he could take it from he , " return the old lady . " look at the son 's dress ! " it certainly be plain -- threadbare -- almost shabby . " yet the father must be garnish and tricke out , " say the old lady , " because of he deportment . I would deport he ! transport he would be better ! " I feel curiious to know more concern this person . I ask , " do he give lesson in deportment now ? " " now ! " return the old lady shortly . " never do . " after a moment 's consideration , I suggest that perhaps fence have be he accomplishment . " I do not believe he can fence at all , ma 'am , " say the old lady . I look surprised and inquisitive . the old lady , become more and more incense against the master of deportment as she dwelt upon the subject , give I some particular of he career , with strong assurances that they be mildly state . he have marry a meek little dancing -mistress , with a tolerable connexion ( have never in he life before do anything but deport himself ) , and have work she to death , or have , at the best , suffer she to work herself to death , to maintain he in those expense which be indispensable to he position . at once to exhibit he deportment to the best model and to keep the best model constantly before himself , he have find it necessary to frequent all public place of fashionable and lounge resort , to be see at and elsewhere at fashionable time , and to lead a idle life in the very best clothes . to enable he to do this , the affectionate little dancing -mistress have toil and laboure and would have toil and laboure to that hour if she strength have last so long . for the mainspring of the story be that in spite of the man 's absorb selfishness , he wife ( overpower by he deportment ) have , to the last , believe in he and have , on she death - bed , in the most move term , confide he to they son as one who have a inextinguishable claim upon he and whom he could never regard with too much pride and deference . the son , inherit he mother 's belief , and have the deportment always before he , have liv and grow in the same faith , and now , at thirty year of age , work for he father twelve hour a day and look up to he with veneration on the old imaginary pinnacle . " the air the fellow give himself ! " say my informant , shak she head at old with speechless indignation as he draw on he tight glove , of course unconscious of the homage she be render . " he fully believe he be one of the aristocracy ! and he be so condescending to the son he so egregiously delude that you might suppose he the most virtuous of parent . oh ! " say the old lady , apostrophize he with infinite vehemence . " I could bite you ! " I could not help be amuse , though I hear the old lady out with feeling of real concern . it be difficult to doubt she with the father and son before I . what I might have think of they without the old lady 's account , or what I might have think of the old lady 's account without they , I can not say . there be a fitness of thing in the whole that carry conviction with it . my eye be yet wander , from young work so hard , to old deport himself so beautifully , when the latter come ambl up to I and enter into conversation . he ask I , first of all , whether I confer a
a charm and a distinction on by residing in it ? I do not think it necessary to reply that I be perfectly aware I should not do that , in any case , but merely tell he where I do reside . " a lady so graceful and accomplish , " he say , kiss he right glove and afterwards extend it towards the pupil , " will look leniently on the deficiency here . we do we best to polish -- polish -- polish ! " he sit down beside I , take some pain to sit on the form , I think , in imitation of the print of he illustrious model on the sofa . and really he do look very like it . " to polish -- polish -- polish ! " he repeat , take a pinch of snuff and gently flutter he finger . " but we be not , if I may say so to one form to be graceful both by and -- " with the high - shouldered bow , which it seem impossible for he to make without lift up he eyebrow and shutt he eye " -- we be not what we use to be in point of deportment . " " be we not , sir ? " say I . " we have degenerate , " he return , shak he head , which he could do to a very limited extent in he cravat . " a levelling age be not favourable to deportment . it develop vulgarity . perhaps I speak with some little partiality . it may not be for I to say that I have be call , for some year now , , or that he the do I the honour to inquire , on my remove my hat as he drive out of the at ( that fine building ) , ' who be he ? who the devil be he ? why do not I know he ? why have not he thirty thousand a year ? ' but these be little matter of anecdote -- the general property , ma 'am -- still repeat occasionally among the upper class . " " indeed ? " say I . he reply with the high - shouldered bow . " where what be leave among we of deportment , " he add , " still linger . -- ala , my country !-- have degenerat very much , and be degenerat every day . she have not many gentleman leave . we be few . I see nothing to succeed we but a race of weaver . " " one might hope that the race of gentleman would be perpetuate here , " say I . " you be very good . " he smile with a high - shouldere bow again . " you flatter I . but , no --no ! I have never be able to imbue my poor boy with that part of he art . forbid that I should disparage my dear child , but he have -- no deportment . " " he appear to be a excellent master , " I observe . " understand I , my dear madam , he be a excellent master . all that can be acquire , he have acquire . all that can be impart , he can impart . but there be thing -- " he take another pinch of snuff and make the bow again , as if to add , " this kind of thing , for instance . " I glance towards the centre of the room , where 's lover , now engage with single pupil , be undergo greater drudgery than ever . " my amiable child , " murmure Turveydrop , adjust he cravat . " you son be indefatigable , " say I . " it be my reward , " say , " to hear you say so . in some respects , he tread in the footstep of he sainted mother . she be a devoted creature . but wooman , lovely wooman , " say with very disagreeable gallantry , " what a sex you be ! " I rise and join , who be by this time put on she bonnet . the time allot to a lesson have fully elapsed , there be a general put on of bonnet . when and the unfortunate find a opportunity to become betrothed I do not know , but they certainly find none on this occasion to exchange a dozen word . " my dear , " say benignly to he son , " do you know the hour ? " " no , father . " the son have no watch . the father have a handsome gold one , which he pull out with a air that be a example to mankind . " my son , " say he , " it be two o'clock . Recollect you school at at three . " " that be time enough for I , father , " say . " I can take a morsel of dinner standing and be off . " " my dear boy , " return he father , " you must be very quick . you will find the cold mutton on the table . " " thank you , father . be you off now , father ? " " yes , my dear . I suppose , " say , shutt he eye and lifte up he shoulders with modest consciousness , " that I must show myself , as usual , about town . " " you have better dine out comfortably somewhere , " say he son . " my dear child , I intend to . I shall take my little meal , I think , at the french house , in the . " "
" that be right . good - bye , father ! " say , shak hand . " good - bye , my son . bless you ! " say this in quite a pious manner , and it seem to do he son good , who , in parting from he , be so pleased with he , so dutiful to he , and so proud of he that I almost feel as if it be a unkindness to the younger man not to be able to believe implicitly in the elder . the few moments that be occupy by in take leave of we ( and particularly of one of we , as I see , be in the secret ) , enhance my favourable impression of he almost childish character . I feel a liking for he and a compassion for he as he put he little kit in he pocket -- and with it he desire to stay a little while with -- and go away good - humouredly to he cold mutton and he school at , that make I scarcely less irate with he father than the censorious old lady . the father open the room door for we and bow we out in a manner , I must acknowledge , worthy of he shining original . in the same style he presently pass we on the other side of the street , on he way to the aristocratic part of the town , where he be go to show himself among the few other gentleman leave . for some moment , I be so lost in reconsidere what I have hear and see in that I be quite unable to talk to or even to fix my attention on what she say to I , especially when I begin to inquire in my mind whether there be , or ever have be , any other gentleman , not in the dancing profession , who liv and foun a reputation entirely on they deportment . this become so bewildering and suggest the possibility of so many Turveydrops that I say , " Esther , you must make up you mind to abandon this subject altogether and attend to . " I accordingly do so , and we chat all the rest of the way to 's . tell I that she lover 's education have be so neglect that it be not always easy to read he note . she say if he be not so anxious about he spelling and take less pain to make it clear , he would do better ; but he put so many unnecessary letter into short word that they sometimes quite lose they English appearance . " he do it with the best intention , " observe , " but it have not the effect he mean , poor fellow ! " then go on to reason , how could he be expect to be a scholar when he have pass he whole life in the dancing - school and have do nothing but teach and fag , fag and teach , morning , noon , and night ! and what do it matter ? she could write letter enough for both , as she know to she cost , and it be far better for he to be amiable than learn . " , it be not as if I be a accomplished girl who have any right to give herself air , " say . " I know little enough , I be sure , thanks to Ma ! " there be another thing I want to tell you , now we be alone , " continue , " which I should not have like to mention unless you have see , . you know what a house ours be . it be of no use my try to learn anything that it would be useful for 's wife to know in we house . we live in such a state of muddle that it be impossible , and I have only be more dishearten whenever I have try . so I get a little practice with -- who do you think ? poor ! Early in the morning I help she to tidy she room and clean she bird , and I make she cup of coffee for she ( of course she teach I ) , and I have learn to make it so well that say it be the very best coffee he ever taste , and would quite delight old , who be very particular indeed about he coffee . I can make little pudding too ; and I know how to buy neck of mutton , and tea , and sugar , and butter , and a good many housekeeping thing . I be not clever at my needle , yet , " say , glance at the repair on 's frock , " but perhaps I shall improve , and since I have be engage to and have be do all this , I have feel better - tempere , I hope , and more forgive to Ma . it rather put I out at first this morning to see you and look so neat and pretty and to feel asham of and myself too , but on the whole I hope I be better - tempere than I be and more forgive to . " the poor girl , try so hard , say it from she heart , and touch mine . " Caddy , my love , " I reply , " I begin to have a great affection for you , and I hope we shall become friend . " " oh , do you ? " cry . " how happy that would make I ! " " my dear Caddy , " say I , " let we be friend from this time ,
, and let we often have a chat about these matters and try to find the right way through they . " be overjoy . I say everything I could in my old - fashioned way to comfort and encourage she , and I would not have object to old Turveydrop that day for any smaller consideration than a settlement on he daughter - in - law . by this time we be come to 's , whose private door stand open . there be a bill , paste on the door - post , announce a room to let on the second floor . it remind to tell I as we proceed upstairs that there have be a sudden death there and a inquest and that we little friend have be ill of the fright . the door and window of the vacant room be open , we look in . it be the room with the dark door to which have secretly direct my attention when I be last in the house . a sad and desolate place it be , a gloomy , sorrowful place that give I a strange sensation of mournfulness and even dread . " you look pale , " say when we come out , " and cold ! " I feel as if the room have chill I . we have walk slowly while we be talk , and my guardian and be here before we . we find they in 's garret . they be look at the bird , while a medical gentleman who be so good as to attend with much solicitude and compassion speak with she cheerfully by the fire . " I have finish my professional visit , " he say , come forward . " be much better and may appear in court ( as she mind be set upon it ) to - morrow . she have be greatly miss there , I understand . " receive the compliment with complacency and drop a general curtsy to we . " Honoure , indeed , " say she , " by another visit from the wards in ! have - ry happy to receive of beneath my humble roof ! " with a special curtsy . " - , my dear " -- she have bestow that name on , it appear , and always call she by it -- " a double welcome ! " " have she be very ill ? " ask of the gentleman whom we have find in attendance on she . she answer for herself directly , though he have put the question in a whisper . " oh , decidedly unwell ! oh , very unwell indeed , " she say confidentially . " not pain , you know -- trouble . not bodily so much as nervous , nervous ! the truth be , " in a subdue voice and trembling , " we have have death here . there be poison in the house . I be very susceptible to such horrid thing . it frightene I . only know how much . my physician , ! " with great stateliness . " the wards in -- of -- - ! " " , " say in a grave kind of voice , as if he be appeal to she while speak to we , and lay he hand gently on she arm , " describe she illness with she usual accuracy . she be alarm by a occurrence in the house which might have alarme a stronger person , and be make ill by the distress and agitation . she bring I here in the first hurry of the discovery , though too late for I to be of any use to the unfortunate man . I have compensate myself for that disappointment by come here since and be of some small use to she . " " the kindest physician in the college , " whisper to I . " I expect a judgment . on the day of judgament . and shall then confer estate . " " she will be as well in a day or two , " say , look at she with a observant smile , " as she ever will be . in other word , quite well of course . have you hear of she good fortune ? " " most extraordinary ! " say , smile brightly . " you never hear of such a thing , my dear ! every , or ( clerk to ) place in my hand a paper of shilling . Shilling . I assure you ! always the same number in the paper . always one for every day in the week . now you know , really ! so well - time , be it not ? ye -e ! from whence do these papers come , you say ? that be the great question . naturally . shall I tell you what I think ? I think , " say , draw herself back with a very shrewd look and shake she right forefinger in a most significant manner , " that the , aware of the length of time during which the have be open ( for it have be open a long time ! ) , forward they . until the judgament I expect be give . now that be very creditable , you know . to confess in that way that he be a little slow for human life . so delicate ! attend court the other day -- I attend it regularly , with my document -- I tax he with it , and he almost confess . that be , I smile at he from my bench , and he smile at I from he bench . but it be great good fortune , be it not ? and - lay the money out for
for I to great advantage . oh , I assure you to the greatest advantage ! " I congratulate she ( as she address herself to I ) upon this fortunate addition to she income and wish she a long continuance of it . I do not speculate upon the source from which it come or wonder whose humanity be so considerate . my guardian stand before I , contemplate the bird , and I have no need to look beyond he . " and what do you call these little fellow , ma 'am ? " say he in he pleasant voice . " have they any name ? " " I can answer for Flite that they have , " say I , " for she promise to tell we what they be . remember ? " remembe very well . " do I ? " say . " who be that at my door ? what be you listen at my door for , ? " the old man of the house , push it open before he , appear there with he fur cap in he hand and he cat at he heel . " I war not listen , , " he say , " I be go to give a rap with my knuckle , only you be so quick ! " " make you cat go down . drive she away ! " the old lady angrily exclaim . " Bah , bah ! there be not no danger , gentlefolk , " say , look slowly and sharply from one to another until he have look at all of we ; " she would never offer at the bird when I be here unless I tell she to it . " " you will excuse my landlord , " say the old lady with a dignified air . " m , quite m ! what do you want , , when I have company ? " " hi ! " say the old man . " you know I be the . " " well ? " return . " what of that ? " " for the , " say the old man with a chuckle , " not to be acquaint with a Jarndyce be queer , be not it , ? might not I take the liberty ? you servant , sir . I know and a'most as well as you do , sir . I know old , sir . I never to my knowledge see you afore though , not even in court . yet , I go there a mortal sight of time in the course of the year , take one day with another . " " I never go there , " say ( which he never do on any consideration ) . " I would sooner go -- somewhere else . " " would you though ? " return , grinn . " you be bear hard upon my noble and learn brother in you meaning , sir , though perhaps it be but nat 'ral in a . the burnt child , sir ! what , you be look at my lodger 's bird , ? " the old man have come by little and little into the room until he now touch my guardian with he elbow and look close up into he face with he spectacled eye . " it be one of she strange way that she will never tell the name of these bird if she can help it , though she name th'ey all . " this be in a whisper . " shall I run th'ey over , ? " he ask aloud , wink at we and point at she as she turn away , affect to sweep the grate . " if you like , " she answer hurriedly . the old man , look up at the cage after another look at we , go through the list . " hope , , , peace , , , , , , , , despair , Madness , death , Cunning , , , , , , , , , , and . that be the whole collection , " say the old man , " all coop up together , by my noble and learn brother . " " this be a bitter wind ! " mutter my guardian . " when my noble and learn brother give he judgment , they be to be let go free , " say , wink at we again . " and then , " he add , whisper and grinn , " if that ever be to happen -- which it will not -- the bird that have never be cage would kill th'ey . " " if ever the wind be in the east , " say my guardian , pretend to look out of the window for a weathercock , " I think it be there to - day ! " we find it very difficult to get away from the house . it be not who detain we ; she be as reasonable a little creature in consult the convenience of other as there possibly could be . it be . he seem unable to detach himself from . if he have be link to he , he could hardly have attend he more closely . he propose to show we he of and all the strange medley it contain ; during the whole of we inspection ( prolonge by himself ) he keep close to and sometimes detain he under one pretence or other until we have pass on , as if he be torment by a inclination to enter upon some secret subject which he could not make up he mind to approach . I can not imagine a countenance and manner more singularly expressive of caution and indecision , and
and a perpetual impulse to do something he could not resolve to venture on , than 's be that day . he watchfulness of my guardian be incessant . he rarely remove he eye from he face . if he go on beside he , he observe he with the slyness of a old white fox . if he go before , he look back . when we stand still , he get opposite to he , and draw he hand across and across he open mouth with a curiious expression of a sense of power , and turn up he eye , and lower he grey eyebrow until they appear to be shut , seem to scan every lineament of he face . at last , have be ( always attend by the cat ) all over the house and have see the whole stock of miscellaneous lumber , which be certainly curious , we come into the back part of the shop . here on the head of a empty barrel stand on end be a ink - bottle , some old stump of pens , and some dirty playbill ; and against the wall be paste several large print alphabet in several plain hand . " what be you do here ? " ask my guardian . " try to learn myself to read and write , " say . " and how do you get on ? " " slow . bad , " return the old man impatiently . " it be hard at my time of life . " " it would be easier to be teach by some one , " say my guardian . " aye , but they might teach I wrong ! " return the old man with a wonderfully suspicious flash of he eye . " I do not know what I may have lose by not be learn afore . I would not like to lose anything by be learn wrong now . " " ? " say my guardian with he good - humoured smile . " who do you suppose would teach you wrong ? " " I do not know , of ! " reply the old man , turn up he spectacle on he forehead and rub he hand . " I do not suppose as anybody would , but I would rather trust my own self than another ! " these answer and he manner be strange enough to cause my guardian to inquire of , as we all walk across 's together , whether be really , as he lodger represent he , derange . the young surgeon reply , no , he have see no reason to think so . he be exceedingly distrustful , as ignorance usually be , and he be always more or less under the influence of raw gin , of which he drank great quantity and of which he and he back - shop , as we might have observe , smelt strongly ; but he do not think he mad as yet . on we way home , I so conciliate 's affections by buy he a windmill and two flour - sack that he would suffer nobody else to take off he hat and glove and would sit nowhere at dinner but at my side . sit upon the other side of I , next to , to whom we impart the whole history of the engagement as soon as we get back . we make much of , and too ; and brighten exceedingly ; and my guardian be as merry as we be ; and we be all very happy indeed until go home at night in a hackney - coach , with fast asleep , but hold tight to the windmill . I have forget to mention -- at least I have not mention -- that be the same dark young surgeon whom we have meet at 's . or that invite he to dinner that day . or that he come . or that when they be all gone and I say to , " now , my darling , let we have a little talk about ! " laugh and say -- but I do not think it matter what my darling say . she be always merry . while we be in be constantly beset by the crowd of excitable lady and gentleman whose proceedings have so much astonished we . , who present himself soon after we arrival , be in all such excitement . he seem to project those two shining knob of temple of he into everything that go on and to brush he hair farther and farther back , until the very root be almost ready to fly out of he head in inappeasable philanthropy . all objects be alike to he , but he be always particularly ready for anything in the way of a testimonial to any one . he great power seem to be he power of indiscriminate admiration . he would sit for any length of time , with the utmost enjoyment , bath he temple in the light of any order of luminary . have first see he perfectly swallow up in admiration of , I have suppose she to be the absorbing object of he devotion . I soon discover my mistake and find he to be train - bearer and organ - blower to a whole procession of people . come one day for a subscription to something , and with she , . whatever say , repeat to we ; and just as he have draw out , he draw Pardiggle out . write a letter of introduction to my guardian in behalf of she eloquent friend . with appear again . , be a flabby gentleman with a moist surface and eyes so much too small for he moon of a face that they seem to
to have be originally make for somebody else , be not at first sight prepossesse ; yet he be scarcely seate before ask and I , not inaudibly , whether he be not a great creature -- which he certainly be , flabbily speak , though mean in intellectual beauty -- and whether we be not strike by he massive configuration of brow . in short , we hear of a great many mission of various sort among this set of people , but nothing respecte they be half so clear to we as that it be 's mission to be in ecstasy with everybody else 's mission and that it be the most popular mission of all . have fall into this company in the tenderness of he heart and he earnest desire to do all the good in he power ; but that he feel it to be too often a unsatisfactory company , where benevolence take spasmodic form , where charity be assume as a regular uniform by loud professor and speculator in cheap notoriety , vehement in profession , restless and vain in action , servile in the last degree of meanness to the great , adulatory of one another , and intolerable to those who be anxious quietly to help the weak from failing rather than with a great deal of bluster and self - laudation to raise they up a little way when they be down , he plainly tell we . when a testimonial be originate to by ( who have already get one , originate by ) , and when speak for a hour and a half on the subject to a meeting , include two charity school of small boy and girl , who be specially remind of the widow 's mite , and request to come forward with halfpence and be acceptable sacrifice , I think the wind be in the east for three whole week . I mention this because I be come to again . it seem to I that he off - hand professions of childishness and carelessness be a great relief to my guardian , by contrast with such thing , and be the more readily believe in since to find one perfectly undesigning and candid man among many opposite could not fail to give he pleasure . I should be sorry to imply that divine this and be polintic ; I really never understand he well enough to know . what he be to my guardian , he certainly be to the rest of the world . he have not be very well ; and thus , though he live in , we have see nothing of he until now . he appear one morning in he usual agreeable way and as full of pleasant spirit as ever . well , he say , here he be ! he have be bilious , but rich man be often bilious , and therefore he have be persuade himself that he be a man of property . so he be , in a certain point of view -- in he expansive intention . he have be enrich he medical attendent in the most lavish manner . he have always double , and sometimes quadruple , he fee . he have say to the doctor , " now , my dear doctor , it be quite a delusion on you part to suppose that you attend I for nothing . I be overwhelm you with money -- in my expansive intention -- if you only know it ! " and really ( he say ) he mean it to that degree that he think it much the same as do it . if he have have those bit of metal or thing paper to which mankind attach so much importance to put in the doctor 's hand , he would have put they in the doctor 's hand . not have they , he substitute the will for the deed . very well ! if he really mean it -- if he will be genuine and real , which it be -- it appear to he that it be the same as coin , and cancel the obligation . " it may be , partly , because I know nothing of the value of money , " say , " but I often feel this . it seem so reasonable ! my butcher say to I he want that little bill . it be a part of the pleasant unconscious poetry of the man 's nature that he always call it a ' little ' bill -- to make the payment appear easy to both of we . I reply to the butcher , ' my good friend , if you know it , you be pay . you have not have the trouble of come to ask for the little bill . you be pay . I mean it . ' " " but , suppose , " say my guardian , laugh , " he have mean the meat in the bill , instead of provide it ? " " my dear , " he return , " you surprise I . you take the butcher 's position . a butcher I once deal with occupi that very ground . say he , ' Sir , why do you eat spring lamb at eighteen pence a pound ? ' ' why do I eat spring lamb at eighteen pence a pound , my honest friend ? ' say I , naturally amaze by the question . 'i like spring lamb ! ' this be so far convince . ' well , sir , ' say he , 'I wish I have mean the lamb as you mean the money ! ' ' my good fellow , ' say I , ' pray let we reason like intellectual being . how could that be ? it be impossible
impossible . you have get the lamb , and I have not get the money . you could not really mean the lamb without send it in , whereas I can , and do , really mean the money without pay it ! ' he have not a word . there be a end of the subject . " " do he take no legal proceedings ? " inquire my guardian . " yes , he take legal proceedings , " say . " but in that he be influence by passion , not by reason . passion remind I of . he write I that you and the lady have promise he a short visit at he bachelor - house in . " " he be a great favourite with my girl , " say , " and I have promise for they . " " forget to shade he off , I think , " observe to and I . " a little too boisterous -- like the sea . a little too vehement -- like a bull who have make up he mind to consider every colour scarlet . but I grant a sledge - hammere sort of merit in he ! " I should have be surprise if those two could have think very highly of one another , attach so much importance to many thing and car so little for anything . besides which , I have notice more than once on the point of break out into some strong opinion when be refer to . of course I merely join in say that we have be greatly pleased with he . " he have invite I , " say ; " and if a child may trust himself in such hand -- which the present child be encourage to do , with the united tenderness of two angels to guard he -- I shall go . he propose to frank I down and back again . I suppose it will cost money ? Shilling perhaps ? or pound ? or something of that sort ? by the by , Coavinse . you remember we friend Coavinse , ? " he ask I as the subject arise in he mind , in he graceful , light - hear manner and without the least embarrassment . " oh , yes ! " say I . " Coavinse have be arrest by the great Bailiff , " say . " he will never do violence to the sunshine any more . " it quite shocke I to hear it , for I have already recall with anything but a serious association the image of the man sit on the sofa that night wip he head . " he successor inform I of it yesterday , " say . " he successor be in my house now -- in possession , I think he call it . he come yesterday , on my blue - eyed daughter 's birthday . I put it to he , ' this be unreasonable and inconvenient . if you have a blue - eyed daughter you would not like I to come , uninvit , on she birthday ? ' but he stay . " laugh at the pleasant absurdity and lightly touch the piano by which he be seat . " and he tell I , " he say , play little chords where I shall put full stop , " the Coavinse have leave . three child . no mother . and that Coavinse 's profession . be unpopular . the rise Coavinse . be at a considerable disadvantage . " get up , rub he head , and begin to walk about . play the melody of one of 's favourite song . and I both look at , think that we know what be pass in he mind . after walk and stop , and several time leave off rub he head , and begin again , my guardian put he hand upon the key and stop 's play . " I do not like this , , " he say thoughtfully . , who have quite forgotten the subject , look up surprised . " the man be necessary , " pursue my guardian , walk backward and forward in the very short space between the piano and the end of the room and rub he hair up from the back of he head as if a high east wind have blow it into that form . " if we make such man necessary by we fault and folly , or by we want of worldly knowledge , or by we misfortune , we must not revenge ourselves upon they . there be no harm in he trade . he maintain he child . one would like to know more about this . " " oh ! Coavinse ? " cry , at length perceive what he mean . " nothing easier . a walk to ' headquarters , and you can know what you will . " nod to we , who be only wait for the signal . " come ! we will walk that way , my dear . why not that way as soon as another ! " we be quickly ready and go out . go with we and quite enjoy the expedition . it be so new and so refresh , he say , for he to want Coavinse instead of want he ! he take we , first , to , , where there be a house with barr window , which he call ' . on we go into the entry and ring a bell , a very hideous boy come out of a sort of office and look at we over a spiked wicket . " who do you want ? " say the boy , fit two of the spike into he ching . " there be a
a follower , or a officer , or something , here , " say , " who be dead . " " yes ? " say the boy . " well ? " " I want to know he name , if you please ? " " name of , " say the boy . " and he address ? " " , " say the boy . " 's shop , leave hand side , name of . " " be he -- I do not know how to shape the question -- " murmure my guardian , " industrious ? " " ? " say the boy . " yes , wery much so . he be never tired of watch . he would set upon a post at a street corner eight or ten hour at a stretch if he undertake to do it . " " he might have do worse , " I hear my guardian soliloquize . " he might have undertaken to do it and not do it . thank you . that be all I want . " we leave the boy , with he head on one side and he arm on the gate , fond and suck the spike , and go back to 's , where , who have not care to remain nearer Coavinse , await we . then we all go to , a narrow alley at a very short distance . we soon find the chandler 's shop . in it be a good - nature - look old woman with a dropsy , or a asthma , or perhaps both . " 's child ? " say she in reply to my inquiry . " yes , surely , miss . three pair , if you please . door right opposite the stair . " and she hand I the key across the counter . I glance at the key and glance at she , but she take it for grant that I know what to do with it . as it could only be intend for the child 's door , I come out without ask any more question and lead the way up the dark stair . we go as quietly as we could , but four of we make some noise on the aged board , and when we come to the second story we find we have disturb a man who be stand there look out of he room . " be it that have want ? " he say , fix he eye on I with a angry stare . " no , sir , " say I ; " I be go higher up . " he look at , and at , and at , fix the same angry stare on each in succession as they pass and follow I . give he good day . " good day ! " he say abruptly and fiercely . he be a tall , sallow man with a careworn head on which but little hair remain , a deeply lined face , and prominent eye . he have a combative look and a chafing , irritable manner which , associate with he figure -- still large and powerful , though evidently in its decline -- rather alarme I . he have a pen in he hand , and in the glimpse I catch of he room in passing , I see that it be cover with a litter of papers . leave he stand there , we go up to the top room . I tap at the door , and a little shrill voice inside say , " we be lock in . 's get the key ! " I apply the key on hear this and open the door . in a poor room with a sloping ceiling and contain very little furniture be a mite of a boy , some five or six year old , nurse and hush a heavy child of eighteen month . there be no fire , though the weather be cold ; both child be wrap in some poor shawl and tippet as a substitute . they clothing be not so warm , however , but that they nose look red and pinch and they small figure shrunke as the boy walk up and down nurse and hush the child with its head on he shoulder . " who have lock you up here alone ? " we naturally ask . " , " say the boy , stand still to gaze at we . " be you brother ? " " no . she be my sister , . call she . " " be there any more of you besides ? " " I , " say the boy , " and , " pat the limp bonnet of the child he be nurse . " and . " " where be now ? " " out a - washing , " say the boy , begin to walk up and down again and take the nankeen bonnet much too near the bedstead by try to gaze at we at the same time . we be look at one another and at these two child when there come into the room a very little girl , childish in figure but shrewd and older - look in the face -- pretty - face too -- wear a womanly sort of bonnet much too large for she and dry she bare arm on a womanly sort of apron . she finger be white and wrinkl with washing , and the soap - sud be yet smoke which she wip off she arm . but for this , she might have be a child play at washing and imitat a poor working - woman with a quick observation of the truth . she have come run from some place in the neighbourhood and have
have make all the haste she could . consequently , though she be very light , she be out of breath and could not speak at first , as she stand panting , and wip she arm , and look quietly at we . " oh , here be ! " say the boy . the child he be nurse stretch forth its arm and cry out to be take by . the little girl take it , in a womanly sort of manner belong to the apron and the bonnet , and stand look at we over the burden that cling to she most affectionately . " be it possible , " whisper my guardian as we put a chair for the little creature and get she to sit down with she load , the boy keep close to she , hold to she apron , " that this child work for the rest ? look at this ! for 's sake , look at this ! " it be a thing to look at . the three child close together , and two of they rely solely on the third , and the third so young and yet with a air of age and steadiness that sit so strangely on the childish figure . " , ! " say my guardian . " how old be you ? " " over thirteen , sir , " reply the child . " oh ! what a great age , " say my guardian . " what a great age , ! " I can not describe the tenderness with which he speak to she , half playfully yet all the more compassionately and mournfully . " and do you live alone here with these baby , ? " say my guardian . " yes , sir , " return the child , look up into he face with perfect confidence , " since father di . " " and how do you live , ? oh ! , " say my guardian , turn he face away for a moment , " how do you live ? " " since father die , sir , I have go out to work . I be out wash to - day . " " help you , ! " say my guardian . " you be not tall enough to reach the tub ! " " in patten I be , sir , " she say quickly . " I have get a high pair as belong to mother . " " and when do mother die ? poor mother ! " " mother die just after be bear , " say the child , glance at the face upon she bosom . " the father say I be to be as good a mother to she as I could . and so I try . and so I work at home and do clean and nurse and wash for a long time before I begin to go out . and that be how I know how ; do not you see , sir ? " " and do you often go out ? " " as often as I can , " say , open she eye and smile , " because of earning sixpence and shilling ! " " and do you always lock the baby up when you go out ? " " to keep them safe , sir , do not you see ? " say . " . come up now and then , and come up sometimes , and perhaps I can run in sometimes , and they can play you know , and a not afraid of be lock up , be you , ? " " no - of ! " say stoutly . " when it come on dark , the lamps be light down in the court , and they show up here quite bright -- almost quite bright . do not they , ? " " yes , , " say , " almost quite bright . " " then he be as good as gold , " say the little creature -- oh , in such a motherly , womanly way ! " and when 's tired , he put she to bed . and when he be tired he go to be himself . and when I come home and light the candle and have a bit of supper , he sit up again and have it with I . do not you , ? " " oh , yes , ! " say . " that I do ! " and either in this glimpse of the great pleasure of he life or in gratitude and love for , who be all in all to he , he lay he face among the scanty fold of she frock and pass from laugh into crying . it be the first time since we entry that a tear have be she among these child . the little orphan girl have speak of they father and they mother as if all that sorrow be subdue by the necessity of take courage , and by she childish importance in be able to work , and by she bustling busy way . but now , when cry , although she sit quite tranquil , look quietly at we , and do not by any movement disturb a hair of the head of either of she little charge , I see two silent tear fall down she face . I stand at the window with , pretend to look at the housetop , and the blacken stack of chimney , and the poor plant , and the bird in little cage belong to the neighbour , when I find that , from the shop below , have come in ( perhaps it have take she all this time to get upstairs ) and be
be talk to my guardian . " it be not much to forgive them the rent , sir , " she say ; " who could take it from they ! " " well , well ! " say my guardian to we two . " it be enough that the time will come when this good woman will find that it be much , and that forasmuch as she do it unto the least of these -- this child , " he add after a few moment , " could she possibly continue this ? " " really , sir , I think she might , " say . , get she heavy breath by painful degree . " she be as handy as it be possible to be . bless you , sir , the way she ten they two child after the mother die be the talk of the yard ! and it be a wonder to see she with he after he be take ill , it really be ! ' ,' he say to I the very last he speak -- he be lie there --' . , whatever my calling may have be , I see a angel sit in this room last night along with my child , and I trust she to Our father ! ' " " he have no other calling ? " say my guardian . " no , sir , " return , " he be nothing but a follerer . when he first come to lodge here , I do not know what he be , and I confess that when I find out I give he notice . it be not like in the yard . it be not approve by the other lodger . it be not a genteel call , " say , " and most people do object to it . object to it very strong , and he be a good lodger , though he temper have be hard try . " " so you give he notice ? " say my guardian . " so I give he notice , " say . " but really when the time come , and I know no other ill of he , I be in doubt . he be punctual and diligent ; he do what he have to do , sir , " say , unconsciously fix with she eye , " and it be something in this world even to do that . " " so you keep he after all ? " " why , I say that if he could arrange with , I could arrange it with the other lodger and should not so much mind it be be like or dislike in the yard . give he consent gruff -- but give it . he be always gruff with he , but he have be kind to the child since . a person be never know till a person be prove . " " have many people be kind to the child ? " ask . " upon the whole , not so bad , sir , " say ; " but certainly not so many as would have be if they father 's calling have be different . give a guinea , and the follerer make up a little purse . some neighbour in the yard that have always joke and tap they shoulders when he go by come forward with a little subscription , and -- in general -- not so bad . similarly with . some people will not employ she because she be a follerer 's child ; some people that do employ she cast it at she ; some make a merit of have she to work for they , with that and all she draw - back upon she , and perhaps pay she less and put upon she more . but she be patienter than other would be , and be clever too , and always willing , up to the full mark of she strength and over . so I should say , in general , not so bad , sir , but might be better . " sit down to give herself a more favourable opportunity of recovere she breath , exhaust anew by so much talk before it be fully restore . be turn to speak to we when he attention be attract by the abrupt entrance into the room of the who have be mention and whom we have see on we way up . " I do not know what you may be do here , lady and gentleman , " he say , as if he resent we presence , " but you will excuse my come in . I do not come in to stare about I . well , ! well , ! well , little one ! how be it with we all to - day ? " he bend over the group in a caressing way and clearly be regard as a friend by the child , though he face retain its stern character and he manner to we be as rude as it could be . my guardian notice it and respecte it . " no one , surely , would come here to stare about he , " he say mildly . " may be so , sir , may be so , " return the other , take upon he knee and wave he off impatiently . " I do not want to argue with lady and gentleman . I have have enough of arguing to last one man he life . " " you have sufficient reason , I dare say , " say , " for be chaf and irritate -- " " there again ! " exclaim the man , become violently angry . " I be of a quarrelsome temper . I be irascible
irascible . I be not polite ! " " not very , I think . " " , " say , put down the child and go up to he as if he mean to strike he , " do you know anything of courts of equity ? " " perhaps I do , to my sorrow . " " to you sorrow ? " say the man , pause in he wrath , " if so , I beg you pardon . I be not polite , I know . I beg you pardon ! , " with renew violence , " I have be drag for five and twenty year over burn iron , and I have lose the habit of treading upon velvet . go into the court of Chancery yonder and ask what be one of the standing joke that brighten up they business sometimes , and they will tell you that the best joke they have be the man from . I , " he say , beat one hand on the other passionately , " be the man from . " " I believe I and my family have also have the honour of furnishing some entertainment in the same grave place , " say my guardian composedly . " you may have hear my name -- . " " , " say with a rough sort of salutation , " you bear you wrongs more quietly than I can bear mine . more than that , I tell you -- and I tell this gentleman , and these young lady , if they be friend of yours -- that if I take my wrongs in any other way , I should be drive mad ! it be only by resent they , and by revenge they in my mind , and by angrily demand the justice I never get , that I be able to keep my wit together . it be only that ! " he say , speak in a homely , rustic way and with great vehemence . " you may tell I that I over-excite myself . I answer that it be in my nature to do it , under wrong , and I must do it . there be nothing between do it , and sinke into the smiling state of the poor little mad woman that haunt the court . if I be once to sit down under it , I should become imbecile . " the passion and heat in which he be , and the manner in which he face work , and the violent gesture with which he accompany what he say , be most painful to see . " , " he say , " consider my case . as true as there be a heaven above we , this be my case . I be one of two brother . my father ( a farmer ) make a will and leave he farm and stock and so forth to my mother for she life . after my mother 's death , all be to come to I except a legacy of three hundred pound that I be then to pay my brother . my mother die . my brother some time afterwards claim he legacy . I and some of my relation say that he have have a part of it already in board and lodging and some other thing . now mind ! that be the question , and nothing else . no one dispute the will ; no one dispute anything but whether part of that three hundred pound have be already pay or not . to settle that question , my brother file a bill , I be oblige to go into this accurse Chancery ; I be force there because the law force I and would let I go nowhere else . seventeen people be make defendant to that simple suit ! it first come on after two year . it be then stop for another two year while the master ( may he head rot off ! ) inquire whether I be my father 's son , about which there be no dispute at all with any mortal creature . he then find out that there be not defendant enough -- remember , there be only seventeen as yet !-- but that we must have another who have be leave out and must begin all over again . the cost at that time -- before the thing be begin !-- be three time the legacy . my brother would have give up the legacy , and joyful , to escape more cost . my whole estate , leave to I in that will of my father 's , have go in cost . the suit , still undecided , have fall into rack , and ruin , and despair , with everything else -- and here I stand , this day ! now , , in you suit there be thousand and thousand involve , where in mine there be hundred . be mine less hard to bear or be it harder to bear , when my whole living be in it and have be thus shamefully suck away ? " say that he condol with he with all he heart and that he set up no monopoly himself in be unjustly treat by this monstrous system . " there again ! " say with no diminution of he rage . " the system ! I be tell on all hand , it be the system . I must not look to individual . it be the system . I must not go into court and say , ' my , I beg to know this from you -- be this right or wrong ? have you the face to tell I I have receive justice and therefore be dismiss ? ' my know nothing of it .
. he sit there to administer the system . I must not go to , the solicitor in 's , and say to he when he make I furious by be so cool and satisfied -- as they all do , for I know they gain by it while I lose , do not I ?-- I must not say to he , 'I will have something out of some one for my ruin , by fair means or foul ! ' he be not responsible . it be the system . but , if I do no violence to any of they , here -- I may ! I do not know what may happen if I be carry beyond myself at last ! I will accuse the individual worker of that system against I , face to face , before the great eternal bar ! " he passion be fearful . I could not have believe in such rage without see it . " I have do ! " he say , sit down and wip he face . " , I have do ! I be violent , I know . I ought to know it . I have be in prison for contempt of court . I have be in prison for threaten the solicitor . I have be in this trouble , and that trouble , and shall be again . I be the man from , and I sometimes go beyond amuse they , though they have find it amuse , too , to see I commit into custody and bring up in custody and all that . it would be better for I , they tell I , if I restrain myself . I tell they that if I do restrain myself I should become imbecile . I be a good - enough - temper man once , I believe . people in my part of the country say they remember I so , but now I must have this vent under my sense of injury or nothing could hold my wit together . it would be far better for you , , ' the tell I last week , ' not to waste you time here , and to stay , usefully employ , down in . ' ' my , my , I know it would , ' say I to he , ' and it would have be far better for I never to have hear the name of you high office , but unhappily for I , I can not undue the past , and the past drive I here ! ' , " he add , break fiercely out , " I will shame they . to the last , I will show myself in that court to its shame . if I know when I be go to die , and could be carry there , and have a voice to speak with , I would die there , say , ' you have bring I here and send I from here many and many a time . now send I out foot foremost ! ' " he countenance have , perhaps for year , become so set in its contentious expression that it do not soften , even now when he be quiet . " I come to take these baby down to my room for a hour , " he say , go to they again , " and let they play about . I do not mean to say all this , but it do not much signify . you be not afraid of I , , be you ? " " no ! " say . " you be not angry with I . " " you be right , my child . you be go back , ? aye ? come then , little one ! " he take the youngest child on he arm , where she be willing enough to be carry . " I should not wonder if we find a ginger - bread soldier downstairs . let 's go and look for he ! " he make he former rough salutation , which be not deficient in a certain respect , to , and bow slightly to we , go downstairs to he room . upon that , begin to talk , for the first time since we arrival , in he usual gay strain . he say , well , it be really very pleasant to see how thing lazily adapt themselves to purpose . here be this , a man of a robust will and surprising energy -- intellectually speak , a sort of inharmonious blacksmith -- and he could easily imagine that there be , year ago , wander about in life for something to expend he superfluous combativeness upon -- a sort of young love among the thorn -- when the court of come in he way and accommodate he with the exact thing he want . there they be , match , ever afterwards ! otherwise he might have be a great general , blow up all sort of town , or he might have be a great politician , deal in all sort of parliamentary rhetoric ; but as it be , he and the court of have fall upon each other in the pleasantest way , and nobody be much the worse , and be , so to speak , from that hwe provide for . then look at Coavinse ! how delightfully poor Coavinse ( father of these charming child ) illustrate the same principle ! he , , himself , have sometimes repin at the existence of Coavinse . he have find Coavinse in he way . he could have dispense with Coavinse . there have be time when , if he have be a sultan , and he grand vizier have say one morning , " what do the
the of the faithful require at the hand of he slave ? " he might have even go so far as to reply , " the head of Coavinse ! " but what turn out to be the case ? that , all that time , he have be give employment to a most deserving man , that he have be a benefactor to Coavinse , that he have actually be enable Coavinse to bring up these charming child in this agreeable way , develop these social virtue ! Insomuch that he heart have just now swelled and the tear have come into he eye when he have look round the room and thought , " I be the great patron of Coavinse , and he little comforts be my work ! " there be something so captivat in he light way of touch these fantastic string , and he be such a mirthful child by the side of the graver childhood we have see , that he make my guardian smile even as he turn towards we from a little private talk with . we kiss , and take she downstairs with we , and stop outside the house to see she run away to she work . I do not know where she be go , but we see she run , such a little , little creature in she womanly bonnet and apron , through a covered way at the bottom of the court and melt into the city 's strife and sound like a dewdrop in a ocean . - all - 's be restless , very restless . the astonish fashionable intelligence hardly know where to have she . to -day she be at ; yesterday she be at she house in town ; to - morrow she may be abroad , for anything the fashionable intelligence can with confidence predict . even 's gallantry have some trouble to keep pace with she . it would have more but that he other faithful ally , for better and for worse -- the gout -- dart into the old oak bed - chamber at and grip he by both leg . receive the gout as a troublesome demon , but still a demon of the patrician order . all the Dedlock , in the direct male line , through a course of time during and beyond which the memory of man goeth not to the contrary , have have the gout . it can be prove , sir . other man 's father may have die of the rheumatism or may have take base contagion from the taint blood of the sick vulgar , but the Dedlock family have communicate something exclusive even to the levelling process of die by dying of they own family gout . it have come down through the illustrious line like the plate , or the picture , or the place in . it be among they dignity . be perhaps not wholly without a impression , though he have never resolve it into word , that the angel of death in the discharge of he necessary duty may observe to the shade of the aristocracy , " my lord and gentleman , I have the honour to present to you another Dedlock certify to have arrive per the family gout . " yield up he family leg to the family disorder as if he hold he name and fortune on that feudal tenure . he feel that for a Dedlock to be laid upon he back and spasmodically twitch and stab in he extremity be a liberty take somewhere , but he think , " we have all yield to this ; it belong to we ; it have for some hundred of year be understood that we be not to make the vault in the park interest on more ignoble term ; and I submit myself to the compromise . " and a goodly show he make , lie in a flush of crimson and gold in the midst of the great drawing - room before he favourite picture of my , with broad strips of sunlight shine in , down the long perspective , through the long line of window , and alternate with soft relief of shadow . outside , the stately oak , root for age in the green ground which have never know ploughshare , but be still a chase when king ride to battle with sword and shield and ride a - hunting with bow and arrow , bear witness to he greatness . inside , he forefather , look on he from the wall , say , " each of we be a passing reality here and leave this coloured shadow of himself and melt into remembrance as dreamy as the distant voice of the rook now lull you to rest , " and hear they testimony to he greatness too . and he be very great this day . and woe to or other daring wight who shall presumptuously contest a inch with he ! my Lady be at present represent , near , by she portrait . she have flit away to town , with no intention of remain there , and will soon flight hither again , to the confusion of the fashionable intelligence . the house in town be not prepare for she reception . it be muffled and dreary . only one in powder gap disconsolate at the hall - window ; and he mention last night to another mercury of he acquaintance , also accustom to good society , that if that sort of thing be to last -- which it could not , for a man of he spirit could not bear it , and a man of he figure could not be expect to bear it -- there would be no resource for he , upon he honour , but to cut he throat ! what
what connexion can there be between the place in , the house in town , the in powder , and the whereabout of the outlaw with the broom , who have that distant ray of light upon he when he sweep the churchyard - step ? what connexion can there have been between many people in the innumerable histories of this world who from opposite side of great gulfs have , nevertheless , be very curiously bring together ! sweep he cross all day long , unconscious of the link , if any link there be . he sum up he mental condition when ask a question by reply that he " do not know nothink . " he know that it be hard to keep the mud off the crossing in dirty weather , and harder still to live by do it . nobody teach he even that much ; he find it out . life -- that be to say , have not yet die -- in a ruinous place know to the like of he by the name of - all - 's . it be a black , dilapidate street , avoid by all decent people , where the crazy house be seize upon , when they decay be far advanced , by some bold vagrant who after establish they own possession take to let they out in lodging . now , these tumbl tenement contain , by night , a swarm of misery . as on the ruin human wretch vermin parasite appear , so these ruin shelter have breed a crowd of foul existence that crawl in and out of gaps in wall and board ; and coil itself to sleep , in maggot number , where the rain drip in ; and come and go , fetch and carry fever and sow more evil in it be every footprint than , and , and the of , and all the fine gentleman in office , down to , shall set right in five hundred year -- though bear expressly to do it . twice lately there have be a crash and a cloud of dust , like the springing of a mine , in - all - ' ; and each time a house have fall . these accident have make a paragraph in the newspaper and have fill a bed or two in the nearest hospital . the gap remain , and there be not unpopular lodging among the rubbish . as several more house be nearly ready to go , the next crash in - all - 's may be expect to be a good one . this desirable property be in , of course . it would be a insult to the discernment of any man with half a eye to tell he so . whether " " be the popular representative of the original plaintiff or defendent in and , or whether live here when the suit have lay the street waste , all alone , until other settler come to join he , or whether the traditional title be a comprehensive name for a retreat cut off from honest company and put out of the pale of hope , perhaps nobody know . certainly Jo do not know . " for I do not , " say , " I do not know nothink . " it must be a strange state to be like ! to shuffle through the street , unfamiliar with the shape , and in utter darkness as to the meaning , of those mysterious symbol , so abundant over the shop , and at the corner of street , and on the door , and in the window ! to see people read , and to see people write , and to see the postmen deliver letter , and not to have the least idea of all that language -- to be , to every scrap of it , stone blind and dumb ! it must be very puzzling to see the good company go to the churche on , with they book in they hand , and to think ( for perhaps think at odd time ) what do it all mean , and if it mean anything to anybody , how come it that it mean nothing to I ? to be hustle , and jostle , and move on ; and really to feel that it would appear to be perfectly true that I have no business here , or there , or anywhere ; and yet to be perplex by the consideration that I be here somehow , too , and everybody overlook I until I become the creature that I be ! it must be a strange state , not merely to be tell that I be scarcely human ( as in the case of my offer myself for a witness ) , but to feel it of my own knowledge all my life ! to see the horse , dog , and cattle go by I and to know that in ignorance I belong to they and not to the superior being in my shape , whose delicacy I offend ! 's idea of a criminal trial , or a judge , or a bishop , or a government , or that inestimable jewel to he ( if he only know it ) the constitution , should be strange ! he whole material and immaterial life be wonderfully strange ; he death , the strangest thing of all . come out of - all - 's , meet the tardy morning which be always late in get down there , and munch he dirty bit of bread as he come along . he way lie through many street , and the house not yet be open , he sit down to breakfast on the door - step of the for the Propagation of the in foreign part and
and give it a brush when he have finish as a acknowledgment of the accommodation . he admire the size of the edifice and wonder what it be all about . he have no idea , poor wretch , of the spiritual destitution of a coral reef in the or what it cost to look up the precious soul among the coco -nut and bread - fruit . he go to he crossing and begin to lay it out for the day . the town awake ; the great tee - totum be set up for it be daily spin and whirl ; all that unaccountable reading and writing , which have be suspend for a few hour , recommence . and the other lower animal get on in the unintelligible mess as they can . it be market - day . the blinded oxen , over -goaded , over-driven , never guide , run into wrong place and be beat out , and plunge red - eye and foam at stone wall , and often sorely hurt the innocent , and often sorely hurt themselves . very like and he order ; very , very like ! a band of music come and play . listen to it . so do a dog -- a drover 's dog , wait for he master outside a butcher 's shop , and evidently think about those sheep he have have upon he mind for some hour and be happily rid of . he seem perplex respecte three or four , can not remember where he leave they , look up and down the street as half expect to see they astray , suddenly prick up he ear and remember all about it . a thoroughly vagabond dog , accustom to low company and public - house ; a terrific dog to sheep , ready at a whistle to scamper over they back and tear out mouthful of they wool ; but a educated , improve , develop dog who have be teach he duty and know how to discharge they . he and listen to the music , probably with much the same amount of animal satisfaction ; likewise as to awaken association , aspiration , or regret , melancholy or joyful reference to thing beyond the sense , they be probably upon a par . but , otherwise , how far above the human listener be the brute ! turn that dog 's descendant wild , like , and in a very few year they will so degenerate that they will lose even they bark -- but not they bite . the day change as it wear itself away and become dark and drizzly . fight it out at he crossing among the mud and wheel , the horse , whips , and umbrella , and get but a scanty sum to pay for the unsavoury shelter of - all - 's . twilight come on ; gas begin to start up in the shop ; the lamplighter , with he ladder , run along the margin of the pavement . a wretched evening be begin to close in . in he chamber sit meditat a application to the nearest magistrate to - morrow morning for a warrant . , a disappointed suitor , have be here to - day and have be alarm . we be not to be put in bodily fear , and that ill - condition fellow shall be hold to bail again . from the ceiling , foreshorten , in the person of one impossible upside down , point with the arm of ( out of joint , and a odd one ) obtrusively toward the window . why should , for such no reason , look out of window ? be the hand not always point there ? so he do not look out of window . and if he do , what would it be to see a woman go by ? there be woman enough in the world , Tulkinghorn think -- too many ; they be at the bottom of all that go wrong in it , though , for the matter of that , they create business for lawyer . what would it be to see a woman go by , even though she be go secretly ? they be all secret . know that very well . but they be not all like the woman who now leave he and he house behind , between whose plain dress and she refin manner there be something exceedingly inconsistent . she should be a upper servant by she attire , yet in she air and step , though both be hurry and assume -- as far as she can assume in the muddy street , which she tread with a unaccustomed foot -- she be a lady . she face be veil , and still she sufficiently betray herself to make more than one of those who pass she look round sharply . she never turn she head . or servant , she have a purpose in she and can follow it . she never turn she head until she come to the crossing where ply with he broom . he cross with she and beg . still , she do not turn she head until she have land on the other side . then she slightly beckon to he and say , " come here ! " follow she a pace or two into a quiet court . " be you the boy I have read of in the papers ? " she ask behind she veil . " I do not know , " say , star moodily at the veil , " nothink about no papers . I do not know nothink about nothink at all . " " be you examine at a inquest ? " " I do not know nothink about no --where I be take
take by the beadle , do you mean ? " say . " be the boy 's name at the ? " " yes . " " that be I ! " say . " come farther up . " " you mean about the man ? " say , follow . " he as wos dead ? " " Hush ! speak in a whisper ! yes . do he look , when he be liive , so very ill and poor ? " " oh , jist ! " say . " do he look like -- not like you ? " say the woman with abhorrence . " oh , not so bad as I , " say . " I be a reg'lar one I be ! you do not know he , do you ? " " how dare you ask I if I know he ? " " no offence , my lady , " say with much humility , for even he have get at the suspicion of she be a lady . " I be not a lady . I be a servant . " " you be a jolly servant ! " say without the least idea of say anything offensive , merely as a tribute of admiration . " and be silent . do not talk to I , and stand farther from I ! can you show I all those place that be speak of in the account I read ? the place he write for , the place he die at , the place where you be take to , and the place where he be bury ? do you know the place where he be bury ? " answer with a nod , have also nod as each other place be mention . " go before I and show I all those dreadful place . stop opposite to each , and do not speak to I unless I speak to you . do not look back . do what I want , and I will pay you well . " attend closely while the word be be speak ; tell they off on he broom - handle , finde they rather hard ; pause to consider they meaning ; consider it satisfactory ; and nods he rag head . " I be fly , " say . " but fen lark , you know . Stow hook it ! " " what do the horrible creature mean ? " exclaim the servant , recoil from he . " Stow cut away , you know ! " say . " I do not understand you . go on before ! I will give you more money than you ever have in you life . " screw up he mouth into a whistle , give he rag head a rub , take he broom under he arm , and lead the way , pass deftly with he bare foot over the hard stone and through the mud and mire . 's . stop . a pause . " who live here ? " " wot give he he write and give I half a bull , " say in a whisper without look over he shoulder . " go on to the next . " 's house . stop again . a longer pause . " who live here ? " " he live here , " answer as before . after a silence he be ask , " in which room ? " " in the back room up there . you can see the winder from this corner . up there ! that be where I see he stritch out . this be the public - ouse where I be take to . " " go on to the next ! " it be a longer walk to the next , but , relieved of he first suspicion , stick to the form impos upon he and do not look round . by many devious way , reek with offence of many kind , they come to the little tunnel of a court , and to the gas - lamp ( light now ) , and to the iron gate . " he be put there , " say , hold to the bar and look in . " where ? oh , what a scene of horror ! " " there ! " say , point . " over yinder . among they pile of bone , and close to that there kitchin winder ! they put he wery nigh the top . they be oblige to stamp upon it to git it in . I could unkiver it for you with my broom if the gate be open . that be why they lock it , I s's pose , " give it a shake . " it be always lock . look at the rat ! " cry , excited . " hi ! look ! there he go ! Ho ! into the ground ! " the servant shrink into a corner , into a corner of that hideous archway , with its deadly stains contaminate she dress ; and put out she two hand and passionately tell he to keep away from she , for he be loathsome to she , so remains for some moment . stand staring and be still sta when she recover herself . " be this place of abomination consecrate ground ? " " I do not know nothink of consequential ground , " say , still sta . " be it bless ? " " which ? " say , in the last degree amaz . " be it bless ? " " I be blest if I know , " say , star more than ever ; " but I should not think it war not . Blest ? " repeat , something trouble in he
he mind . " it can not do it much good if it be . Blest ? I should think it be t'other myself . but I do not know nothink ! " the servant take as little heed of what he say as she seem to take of what she have say herself . she draw off she glove to get some money from she purse . silently notice how white and small she hand be and what a jolly servant she must be to wear such sparkling ring . she drop a piece of money in he hand without touch it , and shudder as they hand approach . " now , " she add , " show I the spot again ! " be the handle of he broom between the bar of the gate , and with he utmost power of elaboration , point it out . at length , look aside to see if he have make himself intelligible , he find that he be alone . he first proceeding be to hold the piece of money to the gas - light and to be overpower at finding that it be yellow -- gold . he next be to give it a one - sided bite at the edge as a test of its quality . he next , to put it in he mouth for safety and to sweep the step and passage with great care . he job do , he set off for -all - 's , stop in the light of innumerable gas - lamps to produce the piece of gold and give it another one - sided bite as a reassurance of its be genuine . the in powder be in no want of society to - night , for my go to a grand dinner and three or four ball . be fidgety down at , with no better company than the goat ; he complain to . Rouncewell that the rain make such a monotonous pattering on the terrace that he can not read the paper even by the fireside in he own snug dressing - room . " would have do better to try the other side of the house , my dear , " say to . " he dress - room be on my 's side . and in all these year I never hear the step upon the Ghost 's walk more distinct than it be to - night ! " 's very often come to see we while we remain in ( though he soon fail in he letter-writing ) , and with he quick ability , he good spirit , he good temper , he gaiety and freshness , be always delightful . but though I like he more and more the better I know he , I still feel more and more how much it be to be regret that he have be educate in no habits of application and concentration . the system which have address he in exactly the same manner as it have address hundred of other boy , all varying in character and capacity , have enable he to dash through he tasnks , always with fair credit and often with distinction , but in a fitful , dazzling way that have confirm he reliance on those very quality in himself which it have be most desirable to direct and train . they be good quality , without which no high place can be meritoriously win , but like fire and water , though excellent servants , they be very bad master . if they have be under 's direction , they would have be he friend ; but be under they direction , they become he enemy . I write down these opinion not because I believe that this or any other thing be so because I think so , but only because I do think so and I want to be quite cando about all I think and do . these be my thought about . I think I often observe besides how right my guardian be in what he have say , and that the uncertainty and delay of the suit have impart to he nature something of the careless spirit of a gamester who feel that he be part of a great gaming system . and come one afternoon when my guardian be not at home , in the course of conversation I naturally inquire after . " why , , " say , " be very well and be , I assure you , a great acquisition to we society . use to say of I that I be always better than land a - head and a breeze a - starn to the midshipman 's mess when the purser 's junk have become as tough as the fore - topsel weather earing . it be he naval way of mention generally that I be a acquisition to any society . I may render the same tribute , I be sure , to . but I -- you will not think I premature if I mention it ? " I say no , as 's insinuat tone seem to require such a answer . " ? " say sweetly . say no , too , and look uneasy . " why , you see , my dear , " say , " -- you will excuse I call you my dear ? " we entreate not to mention it . " because you really be , if I may take the liberty of say so , " pursue , " so perfectly charme . you see , my dear , that although I be still young -- or pay I the compliment of say so -- " " no , " call out like some one contradict at a public meeting . " not at all ! " " very well , "
" smile , " we will say still young . " " undoubtedly , " say . " my dear , though still young , I have have many opportunity of observing young man . there be many such on board the dear old Crippler , I assure you . after that , when I be with in the , I embrace every opportunity of know and befriend the midshipman under 's command . you never hear they call the young gentleman , my dear , and probably would not understand allusion to they pipe - clay they weekly account , but it be otherwise with I , for blue water have be a second home to I , and I have be quite a sailor . again , with . " " a man of european reputation , " murmure . " when I lose my dear first and become the wife of my dear second , " say , speak of she former husband as if they be part of a charade , " I still enjoy opportunity of observe youth . the class attendant on 's lecture be a large one , and it become my pride , as the wife of a eminent scientific man seek herself in science the utmost consolation it could impart , to throw we house open to the student as a kind of . every evening there be lemonade and a mix biscuit for all who choose to partake of those refreshment . and there be science to a unlimited extent . " " Remarkable assemblie those , , " say Badger reverentially . " there must have be great intellectual friction go on there under the auspices of such a man ! " " and now , " pursue , " now that I be the wife of my dear third , , I still pursue those habits of observation which be form during the lifetime of and adapt to new and unexpected purpose during the lifetime of . I therefore have not come to the consideration of as a neophyte . and yet I be very much of the opinion , my dear , that he have not choose he profession advisedly . " look so very anxious now that I ask on what she foun she supposition . " my dear , " she reply , " on 's character and conduct . he be of such a very easy disposition that probably he would never think it worth - while to mention how he really feel , but he feel languid about the profession . he have not that positive interest in it which make it he vocation . if he have any decided impression in reference to it , I should say it be that it be a tiresome pursuit . now , this be not promise . young man like who take it from a strong interest in all that it can do will find some reward in it through a great deal of work for a very little money and through year of considerable endurance and disappointment . but I be quite convince that this would never be the case with . " " do think so too ? " ask timidly . " why , " say , " to tell the truth , , this view of the matter have not occur to I until mention it . but when . put it in that light , I naturally give great consideration to it , know that 's mind , in addition to its natural advantage , have have the rare advantage of be form by two such very distinguished ( I will even say illustrious ) public man as of the and . the conclusion at which I have arrive be -- in short , be 's conclusion . " " it be a maxim of 's , " say , " speak in he figurative naval manner , that when you make pitch hot , you can not make it too hot ; and that if you only have to swab a plank , you should swab it as if be after you . it appear to I that this maxim be applicable to the medical as well as to the nautical profession . " to all profession , " observ . " it be admirably say by . beautifully say . " " people object to when we be stay in the north of after we marriage , " say , " that he disfigure some of the house and other building by chipping off fragment of those edifice with he little geological hammer . but the professor reply that he know of no building save the Temple of . the principle be the same , I think ? " " precisely the same , " say . " Finely express ! the professor make the same remark , , in he last illness , when ( he mind wander ) he insist on keep he little hammer under the pillow and chipping at the countenance of the attendant . the rule passion ! " although we could have dispense with the length at which and pursue the conversation , we both feel that it be disinterest in they to express the opinion they have communicate to we and that there be a great probability of its be sound . we agree to say nothing to until we have speak to ; and as he be come next evening , we resolve to have a very serious talk with he . so after he have be a little while with , I go in and find my darling ( as I know she would be ) prepare to consider he thoroughly right in whatever he say . " and how do you get on , ? " say I . I always sit down on the other side of he
he . he make quite a sister of I . " oh ! well enough ! " say . " he can not say better than that , , can he ? " cry my pet triumphantly . I try to look at my pet in the wisest manner , but of course I could not . " well enough ? " I repeat . " yes , " say , " well enough . it be rather jog - trotty and humdrum . but it will do as well as anything else ! " " oh ! my dear ! " I remonstrate . " what be the matter ? " say . " do as well as anything else ! " " I do not think there be any harm in that , , " say , look so confidingly at I across he ; " because if it will do as well as anything else , it will do very well , I hope . " " oh , yes , I hope so , " return , carelessly toss he hair from he forehead . " after all , it may be only a kind of probation till we suit be -- I forget though . I be not to mention the suit . forbidden ground ! oh , yes , it be all right enough . let we talk about something else . " would have do so willingly , and with a full persuasion that we have bring the question to a most satisfactory state . but I think it would be useless to stop there , so I begin again . " no , but , " say I , " and my dear ! consider how important it be to you both , and what a point of honour it be towards you cousin , that you , , should be quite in earnest without any reservation . I think we have better talk about this , really , . it will be too late very soon . " " oh , yes ! we must talk about it ! " say . " but I think be right . " what be the use of my try to look wise when she be so pretty , and so engage , and so fond of he ! " and be here yesterday , , " say I , " and they seem dispose to think that you have no great liking for the profession . " " do they though ? " say . " oh ! well , that rather alter the case , because I have no idea that they think so , and I should not have like to disappoint or inconvenience they . the fact be , I do not care much about it . but , oh , it do not matter ! it will do as well as anything else ! " " you hear he , " say I . " the fact be , " proceed , half thoughtfully and half jocosely , " it be not quite in my way . I do not take to it . and I get too much of 's first and second . " " I be sure that be very natural ! " cry , quite delighted . " the very thing we both say yesterday , ! " " then , " pursue , " it be monotonous , and to - day be too like yesterday , and to - morrow be too like to - day . " " but I be afraid , " say I , " this be a objection to all kind of application -- to life itself , except under some very uncommon circumstance . " " do you think so ? " return , still consider . " perhaps ! ! why , then , you know , " he add , suddenly become gay again , " we travel outside a circle to what I say just now . it will do as well as anything else . oh , it be all right enough ! let we talk about something else . " but even , with she loving face -- and if it have seem innocent and trust when I first see it in that memorable fog , how much more do it seem now when I know she innocent and trust heart --even shook she head at this and look serious . so I think it a good opportunity to hind to that if he be sometimes a little careless of himself , I be very sure he never mean to be of , and that it be a part of he affectionate consideration for she not to slight the importance of a step that might influence both they life . this make he almost grave . " my dear mother , " he say , " that be the very thing ! I have think of that several time and have be quite angry with myself for meane to be so much in earnest and -- somehow -- not exactly be so . I do not know how it be ; I seem to want something or other to stand by . even you have no idea how fond I be of ( my darling cousin , I love you , so much ! ) , but I do not settle down to constancy in other thing . it be such uphill work , and it take such a time ! " say with a air of vexation . " that may be , " I suggest , " because you do not like what you have choose . " " poor fellow ! " say . " I be sure I do not wonder at it ! " no . it be not of the least use my try to look wise
wise . I try again , but how could I do it , or how could it have any effect if I could , while rest she clasp hand upon he shoulder and while he look at she tender blue eye , and while they look at he ! " you see , my precious girl , " say , pass she golden curl through and through he hand , " I be a little hasty perhaps ; or I misunderstand my own inclination perhaps . they do not seem to lie in that direction . I could not tell till I try . now the question be whether it be worth - while to undo all that have be do . it seem like make a great disturbance about nothing particular . " " my dear , " say I , " how can you say about nothing particular ? " " I do not mean absolutely that , " he return . " I mean that it may be nothing particular because I may never want it . " both and I urge , in reply , not only that it be decidedly worth - while to undo what have be do , but that it must be undone . I then ask whether he have think of any more congenial pursuit . " there , my dear , " say , " you touch I home . yes , I have . I have be think that the law be the boy for I . " " the law ! " repeat as if she be afraid of the name . " if I go into 's office , " say , " and if I be place under article to , I should have my eye on the -- hum !-- the forbidden ground -- and should be able to study it , and master it , and to satisfy myself that it be not neglect and be be properly conduct . I should be able to look after 's interest and my own interest ( the same thing ! ) ; and I should peg away at and all those fellow with the most tremendous ardour . " I be not by any means so sure of that , and I see how he hanker after the vague thing yet to come of those long - defer hope cast a shade on 's face . but I think it best to encourage he in any project of continuous exertion , and only advise he to be quite sure that he mind be make up now . " my dear , " say , " I be as steady as you be . I make a mistake ; we be all liable to mistake ; I will not do so any more , and I will become such a lawyer as be not often see . that be , you know , " say , relapse into doubt , " if it really be worth - while , after all , to make such a disturbance about nothing particular ! " this lead to we say again , with a great deal of gravity , all that we have say already and to we come too much the same conclusion afterwards . but we so strongly advise to be frank and open with , without a moment 's delay , and he disposition be naturally so opposed to concealment that he seek he out at once ( take we with he ) and make a full avowal . " , " say my guardian , after hear he attentively , " we can retreat with honour , and we will . but we must be careful -- for we cousin 's sake , , for we cousin 's sake -- that we make no more such mistake . therefore , in the matter of the law , we will have a good trial before we decide . we will look before we leap , and take plenty of time about it . " 's energy be of such a impatient and fitful kind that he would have like nothing better than to have go to 's office in that hour and to have enter into article with he on the spot . Submitting , however , with a good grace to the caution that we have show to be so necessary , he contente himself with sit down among we in he lightest spirit and talk as if he one unvarying purpose in life from childhood have be that one which now hold possession of he . my guardian be very kind and cordial with he , but rather grave , enough so to cause , when he have depart and we be go upstairs to bed , to say , " , I hope you do not think the worse of ? " " no , my love , " say he . " because it be very natural that should be mistaken in such a difficult case . it be not uncommon . " " no , no , my love , " say he . " do not look unhappy . " " oh , I be not unhappy , cousin ! " say , smile cheerfully , with she hand upon he shoulder , where she have put it in bid he good night . " but I should be a little so if you think at all the worse of . " " my dear , " say , " I should think the worse of he only if you be ever in the least unhappy through he means . I should be more dispose to quarrel with myself even then , than with poor , for I bring you together . but , tut , all this be nothing ! he have time before he , and the race to run
run . I think the worse of he ? not I , my love cousin ! and not you , I swear ! " " no , indeed , cousin , " say , " I be sure I could not -- I be sure I would not -- think any ill of if the whole world do . I could , and I would , think better of he then than at any other time ! " so quietly and honestly she say it , with she hand upon he shoulders -- both hand now -- and look up into he face , like the picture of truth ! " I think , " say my guardian , thoughtfully regard she , " I think it must be somewhere write that the virtue of the mother shall occasionally be visit on the child , as well as the sins of the father . good night , my rosebud . good night , little woman . pleasant slumber ! happy dream ! " this be the first time I ever see he follow with he eyes with something of a shadow on they benevolent expression . I well remember the look with which he have contemplate she and when she be singe in the firelight ; it be but a very little while since he have watch they pass down the room in which the sun be shine , and away into the shade ; but he glance be change , and even the silent look of confidence in I which now follow it once more be not quite so hopeful and untroubled as it have originally be . praise more to I that night than ever she have praise he yet . she go to sleep with a little bracelet he have give she clasp upon she arm . I fancie she be dream of he when I kiss she cheek after she have sleep a hour and see how tranquil and happy she look . for I be so little inclin to sleep myself that night that I sit up work . it would not be worth mention for its own sake , but I be wakeful and rather low - spirited . I do not know why . at least I do not think I know why . at least , perhaps I do , but I do not think it matter . at any rate , I make up my mind to be so dreadfully industrious that I would leave myself not a moment 's leisure to be low - spirit . for I naturally say , " ! you to be low - spirited . you ! " and it really be time to say so , for I -- yes , I really do see myself in the glass , almost cry . " as if you have anything to make you unhappy , instead of everything to make you happy , you ungrateful heart ! " say I . if I could have make myself go to sleep , I would have do it directly , but not be able to do that , I take out of my basket some ornamental work for we house ( I mean ) that I be busy with at that time and sit down to it with great determination . it be necessary to count all the stitch in that work , and I resolve to go on with it until I could not keep my eye open , and then to go to bed . I soon find myself very busy . but I have leave some silk downstair in a work - table drawer in the temporary growlery , and come to a stop for want of it , I take my candle and go softly down to get it . to my great surprise , on go in I find my guardian still there , and sit look at the ash . he be lose in thought , he book lay unheeded by he side , he silver iron - grey hair be scatter confusedly upon he forehead as though he hand have be wander among it while he thought be elsewhere , and he face look worn . almost frightene by come upon he so unexpectedly , I stand still for a moment and should have retire without speak have he not , in again pass he hand abstractedly through he hair , see I and start . " ! " I tell he what I have come for . " at work so late , my dear ? " " I be work late to - night , " say I , " because I could not sleep and wish to tire myself . but , dear guardian , you be late too , and look weary . you have no trouble , I hope , to keep you wake ? " " none , little woman , that you would readily understand , " say he . he speak in a regretful tone so new to I that I inwardly repeat , as if that would help I to he meaning , " that I could readily understand ! " " remain a moment , , " say he , " you be in my thought . " " I hope I be not the trouble , guardian ? " he slightly wav he hand and fall into he usual manner . the change be so remarkable , and he appear to make it by dint of so much self - command , that I find myself again inwardly repeat , " none that I could understand ! " " little woman , " say my guardian , " I be think -- that be , I have be think since I have be sit here -- that you ought to know of you own history all I know . it
it be very little . next to nothing . " " dear guardian , " I reply , " when you speak to I before on that subject -- " " but since then , " he gravely interpose , anticipat what I mean to say , " I have reflecte that you have anything to ask I , and my have anything to tell you , be different consideration , . it be perhaps my duty to impart to you the little I know . " " if you think so , guardian , it be right . " " I think so , " he return very gently , and kindly , and very distinctly . " my dear , I think so now . if any real disadvantage can attach to you position in the mind of any man or woman worth a thought , it be right that you at least of all the world should not magnify it to yourself by have vague impressions of its nature . " I sit down and say after a little effort to be as calm as I ink to be , " one of my earliest remembrance , guardian , be of these word : ' you mother , , be you disgrace , and you be hers . the time will come , and soon enough , when you will understand this better , and will feel it too , as no one save a woman can . ' " I have cover my face with my hand in repea the word , but I take they away now with a better kind of shame , I hope , and tell he that to he I owe the blessing that I have from my childhood to that hour never , never , never feel it . he put up he hand as if to stop I . I well know that he be never to be thanke , and say no more . " nine year , my dear , " he say after think for a little while , " have pass since I receive a letter from a lady live in seclusion , write with a stern passion and power that render it unlike all other letter I have ever read . it be write to I ( as it tell I in so many word ) , perhaps because it be the writer 's idiosyncrasy to put that trust in I , perhaps because it be mine to justify it . it tell I of a child , a orphan girl then twelve year old , in some such cruel word as those which live in you remembrance . it tell I that the writer have breed she in secrecy from she birth , have blot out all trace of she existence , and that if the writer be to die before the child become a woman , she would be leave entirely friendless , nameless , and unknown . it ask I to consider if I would , in that case , finish what the writer have begin . " I listen in silence and look attentively at he . " you early recollection , my dear , will supply the gloomy medium through which all this be see and expresse by the writer , and the distort religion which cloude she mind with impressions of the need there be for the child to expiate a offence of which she be quite innocent . I feel concerned for the little creature , in she darkened life , and reply to the letter . " I take he hand and kiss it . " it lay the injunction on I that I should never propose to see the writer , who have long be estrange from all intercourse with the world , but who would see a confidential agent if I would appoint one . I accredit . the lady say , of she own accord and not of he seek , that she name be a assume one . that she be , if there be any tie of blood in such a case , the child 's aunt . that more than this she would never ( and he be well persuade of the steadfastness of she resolution ) for any human consideration disclose . my dear , I have tell you all . " I hold he hand for a little while in mine . " I see my ward oftener than she see I , " he add , cheerily make light of it , " and I always know she be beloved , useful , and happy . she repay I twenty -thousandfold , and twenty more to that , every hour in every day ! " " and oftener still , " say I , " she bless the guardian who be a father to she ! " at the word father , I see he former trouble come into he face . he subdue it as before , and it be go in a instant ; but it have be there and it have come so swiftly upon my word that I feel as if they have give he a shock . I again inwardly repeat , wonder , " that I could readily understand . none that I could readily understand ! " no , it be true . I do not understand it . not for many and many a day . " take a fatherly good night , my dear , " say he , kiss I on the forehead , " and so to rest . these be late hour for work and think . you do that for all of we , all day long , little housekeeper ! " I neither work nor think any more that night . I open my grateful heart to heave in thankfulness for its providence to
to I and its care of I , and fall asleep . we have a visitor next day . come . he come to take leave of we ; he have settle to do so beforehand . he be go to and to as a surgeon on board ship . he be to be away a long , long time . I believe -- at least I know -- that he be not rich . all he widowed mother could spare have be spend in qualifye he for he profession . it be not lucrative to a young practitioner , with very little influence in ; and although he be , night and day , at the service of number of poor people and do wonder of gentleness and skill for they , he gain very little by it in money . he be seven year older than I . not that I need mention it , for it hardly seem to belong to anything . I think -- I mean , he tell we -- that he have be in practice three or four year and that if he could have hope to contend through three or four more , he would not have make the voyage on which he be bound . but he have no fortune or private means , and so he be go away . he have be to see we several time altogether . we think it a pity he should go away . because he be distinguished in he art among those who know it best , and some of the greatest man belong to it have a high opinion of he . when he come to bid we good - bye , he bring he mother with he for the first time . she be a pretty old lady , with bright black eye , but she seem proud . she come from Wales and have have , a long time ago , a eminent person for a ancestor , of the name of ap - Kerrig -- of some place that sound like -- who be the most illustrious person that ever be know and all of whose relation be a sort of royal family . he appear to have pass he life in always get up into mountain and fight somebody ; and a bard whose name sound like have sng he praise in a piece which be call , as nearly as I could catch it , . , after expatiat to we on the fame of she great kinsman , say that no doubt wherever she son go he would remember he pedigree and would on no account from a alliance below it . she tell he that there be many handsome English lady in who go out on speculation , and that there be some to be pick up with property , but that neither charms nor wealth would suffice for the descendant from such a line without birth , which must ever be the first consideration . she talk so much about birth that for a moment I half fancie , and with pain -- but what a idle fancy to suppose that she could think or care what be ! seem a little distress by she prolixity , but he be too considerate to let she see it and contrive delicately to bring the conversation round to make he acknowledgment to my guardian for he hospitality and for the very happy hour -- he call they the very happy hour -- he have pass with we . the recollection of they , he say , would go with he wherever he go and would be always treasure . and so we give he we hand , one after another -- at least , they do -- and I do ; and so he put he lip to 's hand -- and to mine ; and so he go away upon he long , long voyage ! I be very busy indeed all day and write direction home to the servants , and write note for my guardian , and dust he book and papers , and jingle my housekeeping key a good deal , one way and another . I be still busy between the light , singe and work by the window , when who should come in but , whom I have no expectation of see ! " why , , my dear , " say I , " what beautiful flower ! " she have such a exquisite little nosegay in she hand . " indeed , I think so , , " reply . " they be the loveliest I ever see . " " , my dear ? " say I in a whisper . " no , " answer , shak she head and hold they to I to smell . " . " " well , to be sure , ! " say I . " you must have two lover ! " " what ? do they look like that sort of thing ? " say . " do they look like that sort of thing ? " I repeat , pinch she cheek . Caddy only laugh in return , and tell I that she have come for half a hour , at the expiration of which time would be wait for she at the corner , sit chat with I and in the window , every now and then hand I the flowers again or try how they look against my hair . at last , when she be go , she take I into my room and put they in my dress . " for I ? " say I , surprise . " for you , " say with a kiss . " they be leave behind by somebody . " " leave behind ? " " at poor 's , " say .
. " somebody who have be very good to she be hurry away a hour ago to join a ship and leave these flower behind . no , no ! do not take they out . let the pretty little thing lie here , " say , adjust they with a careful hand , " because I be present myself , and I should not wonder if somebody leave they on purpose ! " " do they look like that sort of thing ? " say , come laughingly behind I and clasp I merrily round the waist . " oh , yes , indeed they do , ! they look very , very like that sort of thing . oh , very like it indeed , my dear ! " it be not so easy as it have appear at first to arrange for 's make a trial of 's office . himself be the chief impediment . as soon as he have it in he power to leave at any moment , he begin to doubt whether he want to leave he at all . he do not know , he say , really . it be not a bad profession ; he could not assert that he dislike it ; perhaps he like it as well as he like any other -- suppose he give it one more chance ! upon that , he shut himself up for a few week with some book and some bone and seem to acquire a considerable fund of information with great rapidity . he feravor , after last about a month , begin to cool , and when it be quite cooled , begin to grow warm again . he vacillation between law and medicine last so long that midsummer arrive before he finally separate from and enter on a experimental course of Messrs . and . for all he waywardness , he take great credit to himself as be determine to be in earnest " this time . " and he be so good - natured throughout , and in such high spirit , and so fond of , that it be very difficult indeed to be otherwise than please with he . " as to , " who , I may mention , find the wind much give , during this period , to stick in the east ; " as to , " would say to I , " he be the finest fellow in the world , ! I must be particularly careful , if it be only for he satisfaction , to take myself well to task and have a regular wind - up of this business now . " the idea of he take himself well to task , with that laugh face and heedless manner and with a fancy that everything could catch and nothing could hold , be ludicrously anomalous . however , he tell we between - while that he be do it to such a extent that he wonder he hair do not turn grey . he regular wind - up of the business be ( as I have say ) that he go to 's about midsummer to try how he like it . all this time he be , in money affair , what I have describe he in a former illustration -- generous , profuse , wildly careless , but fully persuade that he be rather calculate and prudent . I happen to say to , in he presence , half jestingly , half seriously , about the time of he go to 's , that he need to have ' purse , he make so light of money , which he answer in this way , " my jewel of a dear cousin , you hear this old woman ! why do she say that ? because I give eight pound odd ( or whatever it be ) for a certain neat waistcoat and button a few day ago . now , if I have stay at 's I should have be oblige to spend twelve pound at a blow for some heart - break lecture -fee . so I make four pound -- in a lump -- by the transaction ! " it be a question much discuss between he and my guardian what arrangement should be make for he live in while he experiment on the law , for we have long since go back to , and it be too far off to admit of he come there oftener than once a week . my guardian tell I that if be to settle down at 's he would take some apartment or chamber where we too could occasionally stay for a few day at a time ; " but , little woman , " he add , rub he head very significantly , " he have not settle down there yet ! " the discussion end in we hiring for he , by the month , a neat little furnished lodging in a quiet old house near . he immediately begin to spend all the money he have in buy the oddest little ornament and luxuries for this lodging ; and so often as and I dissuad he from make any purchase that he have in contemplation which be particularly unnecessary and expensive , he take credit for what it would have cost and make out that to spend anything less on something else be to save the difference . while these affair be in abeyance , we visit to 's be postpone . at length , have take possession of he lodging , there be nothing to prevent we departure . he could have go with we at that time of the year very well , but he be in the full novelty of he new position and be make most energetic attempt to unravel the mystery of the fatal suit . consequently
consequently we go without he , and my darling be delighted to praise he for be so busy . we make a pleasant journey down into by the coach and have a entertaining companion in . he furniture have be all clear off , it appear , by the person who take possession of it on he blue - eyed daughter 's birthday , but he seem quite relieved to think that it be gone . chair and table , he say , be wearisome object ; they be monotonous idea , they have no variety of expression , they look you out of countenance , and you look they out of countenance . how pleasant , then , to be bound to no particular chair and table , but to sport like a butterfly among all the furniture on hire , and to flit from rosewood to mahogany , and from mahogany to walnut , and from this shape to that , as the humour take one ! " the oddity of the thing be , " say with a quicken sense of the ludicrous , " that my chair and table be not pay for , and yet my landlord walk off with they as composedly as possible . now , that seem droll ! there be something grotesque in it . the chair and table merchant never engage to pay my landlord my rent . why should my landlord quarrel with he ? if I have a pimple on my nose which be disagreeable to my landlord 's peculiar idea of beauty , my landlord have no business to scratch my chair and table merchant 's nose , which have no pimple on it . he reason seem defective ! " " well , " say my guardian good - humouredly , " it be pretty clear that whoever become security for those chair and table will have to pay for they . " " exactly ! " return . " that be the crowning point of unreason in the business ! I say to my landlord , ' my good man , you be not aware that my excellent friend will have to pay for those thing that you be swee off in that indelicate manner . have you no consideration for this property ? ' he have not the least . " " and refuse all proposal , " say my guardian . " refuse all proposal , " return . " I make he business proposal . I have he into my room . I say , ' you be a man of business , I believe ? ' he reply , am ,' ' very well , ' say I , ' now let we be business - like . here be a inkstand , here be pens and paper , here be wafer . what do you want ? I have occupy you house for a considerable period , I believe to we mutual satisfaction until this unpleasant misunderstanding arise ; let we be at once friendly and business - like . what do you want ? ' in reply to this , he make use of the figurative expression -- which have something eastern about it -- that he have never see the colour of my money . ' my amiable friend , ' say I , 'I never have any money . I never know anything about money . ' ' well , sir , ' say he , ' what do you offer if I give you time ? ' ' my good fellow , ' say I , 'I have no idea of time ; but you say you be a man of business , and whatever you can suggest to be do in a business - like way with pen , and ink , and paper -- and wafer -- I be ready to do . do not pay yourself at another man 's expense ( which be foolish ) , but be business - like ! ' however , he would not be , and there be a end of it . " if these be some of the inconvenience of 's childhood , it assuredly possess its advantages too . on the journey he have a very good appetite for such refreshment as come in we way ( include a basket of choice hothouse peach ) , but never think of pay for anything . so when the coachman come round for he fee , he pleasantly ask he what he consider a very good fee indeed , now -- a liberal one -- and on he reply half a crown for a single passenger , say it be little enough too , all thing consider , and leave to give it he . it be delightful weather . the green corn wav so beautifully , the lark sang so joyfully , the hedge be so full of wild flower , the tree be so thickly out in leaf , the bean - field , with a light wind blow over they , fill the air with such a delicious fragrance ! late in the afternoon we come to the market - town where we be to alight from the coach -- a dull little town with a church - spire , and a marketplace , and a market - cross , and one intensely sunny street , and a pond with a old horse cool he leg in it , and a very few man sleepily lie and stand about in narrow little bit of shade . after the rustling of the leave and the waving of the corn all along the road , it look as still , as hot , as motionless a little town as could produce . at the inn we find on horseback , wait with a open carriage to take we to he house , which be a few
few mile off . he be overjoy to see we and dismount with great alacrity . " by heaven ! " say he after give we a courteous greeting . this a most infamous coach . it be the most flagrant example of a abominable public vehicle that ever encumber the face of the earth . it be twenty - five minute after its time this afternoon . the coachman ought to be put to death ! " " be he after he time ? " say , to whom he happen to address himself . " you know my infirmity . " " twenty - five minute ! twenty - six minute ! " reply , refer to he watch . " with two lady in the coach , this scoundrel have deliberately delay he arrival six and twenty minute . deliberately ! it be impossible that it can be accidental ! but he father -- and he uncle -- be the most profligate coachman that ever sit upon a box . " while he say this in tone of the greatest indignation , he hand we into the little phaeton with the utmost gentleness and be all smile and pleasure . " I be sorry , lady , " he say , stand bare - head at the carriage - door when all be ready , " that I be oblige to conduct you nearly two mile out of the way . but we direct road lie through 's park , and in that fellow 's property I have swear never to set foot of mine , or horse 's foot of mine , pend the present relation between we , while I breathe the breath of life ! " and here , catch my guardian 's eye , he break into one of he tremendous laugh , which seem to shake even the motionless little market - town . " be the Dedlock down here , ? " say my guardian as we drive along and trot on the green turf by the roadside . " be here , " reply . " ha ha ha ! be here , and I be glad to say , have be lay by the heel here . my , " in name whom he always make a courtly gesture as if particularly to exclude she from any part in the quarrel , " be expect , I believe , daily . I be not in the least surprise that she postpone she appearance as long as possible . whatever can have induce that transcendent woman to marry that effigy and figure - head of a baronet be one of the most impenetrable mystery that ever baffle human inquiry . ha ha ha ha ! " " I suppose , " say my guardian , laugh , " we may set foot in the park while we be here ? the prohibition do not extend to we , do it ? " " I can lay no prohibition on my guest , " he say , bend he head to and I with the smiling politeness which sit so gracefully upon he , " except in the matter of they departure . I be only sorry that I can not have the happiness of be they escort about , which be a very fine place ! but by the light of this summer day , , if you call upon the owner while you stay with I , you be likely to have but a cool reception . he carry himself like a eight - day clock at all time , like one of a race of eight - day clock in gorgeous case that never go and never go -- ha ha ! -- but he will have some extra stiffness , I can promise you , for the friend of he friend and neighbour ! " " I shall not put he to the proof , " say my guardian . " he be as indifferent to the honour of know I , I dare say , as I be to the honour of know he . the air of the grounds and perhaps such a view of the house as any other sightseer might get be quite enough for I . " " well ! " say . " I be glad of it on the whole . it be in better keeping . I be look upon about here as a second Ajax defy the lightning . ha ha ha ha ! when I go into we little church on a , a considerable part of the inconsiderable congregation expect to see I drop , scorch and wither , on the pavement under the displeasure . ha ha ha ha ! I have no doubt he be surprised that I do not . for he be , by heaven , the most self - satisfied , and the shallowest , and the most coxcombical and utterly brainless ass ! " we come to the ridge of a hill we have be ascend enable we friend to point out itself to we and divert he attention from its master . it be a picturesque old house in a fine park richly woode . among the tree and not far from the residence he point out the spire of the little church of which he have speak . oh , the solemn woods over which the light and shadow travel swiftly , as if heavenly wing be swee on benignant errand through the summer air ; the smooth green slope , the glitter water , the garden where the flower be so symmetrically arrange in cluster of the richest colour , how beautiful they look ! the house , with gable and chimney , and tower , and turret , and dark doorway , and broad terrace - walk , twin among the balustrade of which , and lie
lie heape upon the vase , there be one great flush of rose , see scarcely real in its light solidity and in the serene and peaceful hush that rest on all around it . to and to I , that above all appear the pervading influence . on everything , house , garden , terrace , green slope , water , old oak , fern , moss , woods again , and far away across the opening in the prospect to the distance lie wide before we with a purple bloom upon it , there seem to be such undisturbed repose . when we come into the little village and pass a small inn with the sign of the swing over the road in front , interchange greeting with a young gentleman sit on a bench outside the inn - door who have some fishing - tackle lie beside he . " that be the housekeeper 's grandson , by name , " say , he , " and he be in love with a pretty girl up at the house . have take a fancy to the pretty girl and be go to keep she about she own fair person -- a honour which my young friend himself do not at all appreciate . however , he can not marry just yet , even if he be willing ; so he be fain to make the best of it . in the meanwhile , he come here pretty often for a day or two at a time to -- fish . ha ha ha ha ! " " be he and the pretty girl engage , ? " ask . " why , my dear , " he return , " I think they may perhaps understand each other ; but you will see they soon , I dare say , and I must learn from you on such a point -- not you from I . " blush , and , trot forward on he comely grey horse , dismount at he own door and stood ready with extend arm and uncovered head to welcome we when we arrive . he live in a pretty house , formerly the parsonage house , with a lawn in front , a bright flower - garden at the side , and a well - stock orchard and kitchen - garden in the rear , enclose with a venerable wall that have of itself a ripen ruddy look . but , indeed , everything about the place wear a aspect of maturity and abundance . the old lime - tree walk be like green cloister , the very shadow of the cherry - tree and apple - tree be heavy with fruit , the gooseberry - bushes be so laden that they branch arch and rest on the earth , the strawberry and raspberry grow in like profusion , and the peach bask by the hundred on the wall . Tumble about among the spread net and the glass frame sparkl and wink in the sun there be such heap of droop pod , and marrow , and cucumber , that every foot of ground appear a vegetable treasury , while the smell of sweet herb and all kind of wholesome growth ( to say nothing of the neighbour meadow where the hay be carry ) make the whole air a great nosegay . such stillness and composure reign within the orderly precinct of the old red wall that even the feather hang in garland to scare the bird hardly stir ; and the wall have such a ripening influence that where , here and there high up , a disused nail and scrap of list still clng to it , it be easy to fancy that they have mellow with the change season and that they have rust and decay accord to the common fate . the house , though a little disorderly in comparison with the garden , be a real old house with settle in the chimney of the brick - floor kitchen and great beam across the ceiling . on one side of it be the terrible piece of ground in dispute , where maintain a sentry in a smock - frock day and night , whose duty be suppose to be , in casis of aggression , immediately to ring a large bell hang up there for the purpose , to unchain a great bull - dog establish in a kennel as he ally , and generally to deal destruction on the enemy . not contend with these precaution , have himself compose and post there , on paint board to which he name be attach in large letter , the follow solemn warning : " of the bull - dog . he be most ferocious . . " " the blunderbus be load with slug . . " " Man - trap and spring - gun be set here at all time of the day and night . . " " take notice . that any person or person audaciously presum to trespass on this property will be punish with the utmost severity of private chastisement and prosecute with the utmost rigour of the law . . " these he show we from the drawing - room window , while he bird be hopp about he head , and he laugh , " ha ha ha ha ! ha ha ha ha ! " to that extend as he point they out that I really think he would have hurt himself . " but this be take a good deal of trouble , " say in he light way , " when you be not in earnest after all . " " not in earnest ! " return with unspeakable warmth . " not in earnest ! if I could have hope to train he , I would have buy a lion instead of that dog
dog and would have turn he loose upon the first intolerable robber who should dare to make a encroachment on my rights . let consent to come out and decide this question by single combat , and I will meet he with any weapon know to mankind in any age or country . I be that much in earnest . not more ! " we arrive at he house on a . on the morning we all set forth to walk to the little church in the park . enter the park , almost immediately by the disputed ground , we pursue a pleasant footpath win among the verdant turf and the beautiful tree until it bring we to the church - porch . the congregation be extremely small and quite a rustic one with the exception of a large muster of servant from the house , some of whom be already in they seat , while other be yet drop in . there be some stately footmen , and there be a perfect picture of a old coachman , who look as if he be the official representative of all the pomp and vanity that have ever be put into he coach . there be a very pretty show of young woman , and above they , the handsome old face and fine responsible portly figure of the housekeeper towere pre-eminent . the pretty girl of whom have tell we be close by she . she be so very pretty that I might have know she by she beauty even if I have not see how blushingly conscious she be of the eyes of the young fisherman , whom I discover not far off . one face , and not a agreeable one , though it be handsome , seem maliciously watchful of this pretty girl , and indeed of every one and everything there . it be a 's . as the bell be yet ring and the great people be not yet come , I have leisure to glance over the church , which smelt as earthy as a grave , and to think what a shady , ancient , solemn little church it be . the window , heavily shade by tree , admit a subdue light that make the face around I pale , and darken the old brass in the pavement and the time and damp - worn monument , and render the sunshine in the little porch , where a monotonous ringer be work at the bell , inestimably bright . but a stir in that direction , a gathering of reverential awe in the rustic face , and a blandly ferocious assumption on the part of of be resolutely unconscious of somebody 's existence forewarn I that the great people be come and that the service be go to begin . " not into judgament with thy servant , of , for in thy sight -- ' " shall I ever forget the rapid beat at my heart , occasion by the look I meet as I stand up ! I ever forget the manner in which those handsome proud eye seem to spre out of they languor and to hold mine ! it be only a moment before I cast mine down -- release again , if I may say so -- on my book ; but I know the beautiful face quite well in that short space of time . and , very strangely , there be something quicken within I , associate with the lonely day at my godmother 's ; yes , away even to the day when I have stand on tiptoe to dress myself at my little glass after dress my doll . and this , although I have never see this lady 's face before in all my life -- I be quite sure of it -- absolutely certain . it be easy to know that the ceremonious , gouty , grey - hair gentleman , the only other occupant of the great pew , be , and that the lady be . but why she face should be , in a confused way , like a break glass to I , in which I see scrap of old remembrance , and why I should be so flutter and trouble ( for I be still ) by have casually meet she eye , I could not think . I feel it to be a unmeaning weakness in I and try to overcome it by attend to the word I hear . then , very strangely , I seem to hear they , not in the reader 's voice , but in the well - remember voice of my godmother . this make I think , do 's face accidentally resemble my godmother 's ? it might be that it do , a little ; but the expression be so different , and the stern decision which have wear into my godmother 's face , like weather into rock , be so completely want in the face before I that it could not be that resemblance which have strike I . neither do I know the loftiness and haughtiness of 's face , at all , in any one . and yet I -- I , little , the child who live a life apart and on whose birthday there be no rejoicing -- seem to arise before my own eye , evok out of the past by some power in this fashionable lady , whom I not only entertain no fancy that I have ever see , but whom I perfectly well know I have never see until that hour . it make I tremble so to be throw into this unaccountable agitation that I be conscious of be distress even by the observation of the french maid , though I know she have be look watchfully here , and there , and everywhere , from
from the moment of she come into the church . by degrees , though very slowly , I at last overcame my strange emotion . after a long time , I look towards again . it be while they be prepare to s , before the sermon . she take no heed of I , and the beating at my heart be gone . neither do it revive for more than a few moment when she once or twice afterwards glance at or at I through she glass . the service be conclude , give he arm with much taste and gallantry to -- though he be oblige to walk by the help of a thick stick -- and escort she out of church to the pony carriage in which they have come . the servant then disperse , and so do the congregation , whom have contemplate all along ( say to 's infinite delight ) as if he be a considerable landed proprietor in heaven . " he believe he be ! " say . " he firmly believe it . so do he father , and he grandfather , and he great -grandfather ! " " do you know , " pursue very unexpectedly to , " it be agreeable to I to see a man of that sort . " " be it ! " say . " say that he want to patronize I , " pursue . " very well ! I do not object . " " I do , " say with great vigour . " do you really ? " return in he easy light vein . " but that be take trouble , surly . and why should you take trouble ? here be I , contend to receive thing childishly as they fall out , and I never take trouble ! I come down here , for instance , and I find a mighty potentate exact homage . very well ! I say ' Mighty potentate , here be my homage ! it be easier to give it than to withhold it . here it be . if you have anything of a agreeable nature to show I , I shall be happy to see it ; if you have anything of a agreeable nature to give I , I shall be happy to accept it . ' potentate reply in effect , ' this be a sensible fellow . I find he accord with my digestion and my bilious system . he do not impose upon I the necessity of roll myself up like a hedgehog with my point outward . I expand , I open , I turn my silver line outward like 's cloud , and it be more agreeable to both of we . ' that be my view of such thing , speak as a child ! " " but suppose you go down somewhere else to - morrow , " say , " where there be the opposite of that fellow -- or of this fellow . how then ? " " how then ? " say with a appearance of the utmost simplicity and candour . " just the same then ! I should say , ' my esteem ' -- to make you the personification of we imaginary friend -- 'my esteem , you object to the mighty potentate ? very good . so do I . I take it that my business in the social system be to be agreeable ; I take it that everybody 's business in the social system be to be agreeable . it be a system of harmony , in short . therefore if you object , I object . now , excellent Boythorn , let we go to dinner ! ' " " but excellent might say , " return we host , swell and grow very red , " I will be -- " " I understand , " say . " very likely he would . " " -- if I will go to dinner ! " cry in a violent burst and stop to strike he stick upon the ground . " and he would probably add , ' be there such a thing as principle , ? ' " " to which would reply , you know , " he return in he gayest manner and with he most ingenuous smile , " ' upon my life I have not the least idea ! I do not know what it be you call by that name , or where it be , or who possess it . if you possess it and find it comfortable , I be quite delighted and congratulate you heartily . but I know nothing about it , I assure you ; for I be a mere child , and I lay no claim to it , and I do not want it ! ' so , you see , excellent and I would go to dinner after all ! " this be one of many little dialogue between they which I always expect to end , and which I dare say would have end under other circumstance , in some violent explosion on the part of we host . but he have so high a sense of he hospitable and responsible position as we entertainer , and my guardian laugh so sincerely at and with , as a child who blow bubble and break they all day long , that matter never go beyond this point . , who always see quite unconscious of have be on delicate ground , then betake himself to begin some sketch in the park which be never finish , or to play fragment of air on the piano , or to singe scrap of song , or to lie down on he back under a tree and look at the sky -- which he could not help think , he
he say , be what he be mean for ; it suit he so exactly . " Enterprise and effort , " he would say to we ( on he back ) , " be delightful to I . I believe I be truly cosmopolitan . I have the deepest sympathy with they . I lie in a shady place like this and think of adventurous spirit go to the or penetrat to the heart of the with admiration . Mercenary creature ask , ' what be the use of a man 's go to the ? what good do it do ? ' I can not say ; but , for anything I can say , he may go for the purpose -- though he do not know it -- of employ my thought as I lie here . take a extreme case . take the case of the slave on american plantation . I dare say they be work hard , I dare say they do not altogether like it . I dare say theirs be a unpleasant experience on the whole ; but they people the landscape for I , they give it a poetry for I , and perhaps that be one of the pleasanter object of they existence . I be very sensible of it , if it be , and I should not wonder if it be ! " I always wonder on these occasion whether he ever think of . and the child , and in what point of view they present themselves to he cosmopolitan mind . so far as I could understand , they rarely present themselves at all . the week have go round to the follow that beat of my heart in the church ; and every day have be so bright and blue that to ramble in the wood , and to see the light strike down among the transparent leave and sparkl in the beautiful interlacing of the shadows of the tree , while the bird pour out they song and the air be drowsy with the hum of insect , have be most delightful . we have one favourite spot , deep in moss and last year 's leave , where there be some felle tree from which the bark be all stripp off . seat among these , we look through a green vista support by thousand of natural column , the whitened stem of tree , upon a distant prospect make so radiant by its contrast with the shade in which we sit and make so precious by the arch perspective through which we see it that it be like a glimpse of the better land . upon the we sit here , , , and I , until we hear thunder muttering in the distance and feel the large raindrop rattle through the leave . the weather have be all the week extremely sultry , but the storm break so suddenly -- upon we , at least , in that shelter spot -- that before we reach the outskirt of the wood the thunder and lightning be frequent and the rain come plunge through the leave as if every drop be a great leaden bead . as it be not a time for stand among tree , we run out of the wood , and up and down the moss - grow step which cross the plantation - fence like two broad - stave ladder place back to back , and make for a keeper 's lodge which be close at hand . we have often notice the dark beauty of this lodge stand in a deep twilight of tree , and how the ivy clustered over it , and how there be a steep hollow near , where we have once see the keeper 's dog dive down into the fern as if it be water . the lodge be so dark within , now the sky be overcast , that we only clearly see the man who come to the door when we take shelter there and put two chair for and I . the lattice - window be all thrown open , and we sit just within the doorway watch the storm . it be grand to see how the wind awoke , and bend the tree , and drive the rain before it like a cloud of smoke ; and to hear the solemn thunder and to see the lightning ; and while think with awe of the tremendous power by which we little life be encompass , to consider how beneficent they be and how upon the smallest flower and leaf there be already a freshness pour from all this seem rage which seem to make creation new again . " be it not dangerous to sit in so expose a place ? " " oh , no , Esther dear ! " say quietly . say it to I , but I have not speak . the beating of my heart come back again . I have never hear the voice , as I have never see the face , but it affect I in the same strange way . again , in a moment , there arise before my mind innumerable picture of myself . have take shelter in the lodge before we arrival there and have come out of the gloom within . she stand behind my chair with she hand upon it . I see she with she hand close to my shoulder when I turn my head . " I have frightene you ? " she say . no . it be not fright . why should I be frightene ! " I believe , " say to my guardian , " I have the pleasure of speak to . " " you remembrance do I more honou than I have suppose it would , , " he return . " I recognize you
you in church on . I be sorry that any local dispute of 's -- they be not of he seeking , however , I believe -- should render it a matter of some absurd difficulty to show you any attention here . " " I be aware of the circumstance , " return my guardian with a smile , " and be sufficiently oblige . " she have give he she hand in a indifferent way that seem habitual to she and speak in a correspondingly indifferent manner , though in a very pleasant voice . she be as graceful as she be beautiful , perfectly self - possess , and have the air , I think , of be able to attract and interest any one if she have think it worth she while . the keeper have bring she a chair on which she sit in the middle of the porch between we . " be the young gentleman dispose of whom you write to about and whose wish be sorry not to have it in he power to advance in any way ? " she say over she shoulder to my guardian . " I hope so , " say he . she seem to respect he and even to wish to conciliate he . there be something very win in she haughty manner , and it become more familiar -- I be go to say more easy , but that could hardly be -- as she speak to he over she shoulder . " I presume this be you other ward , ? " he present , in form . " you will lose the disinterested part of you character , " say to over she shoulder again , " if you only redress the wrongs of beauty like this . but present I , " and she turn full upon I , " to this young lady too ! " " really be my ward , " say . " I be responsible to no in she case . " " have lose both she parent ? " say my . " yes . " " she be very fortunate in she guardian . " look at I , and I look at she and say I be indeed . all at once she turn from I with a hasty air , almost expressive of displeasure or dislike , and speak to he over she shoulder again . " ag have pass since we be in the habit of meeting , . " " a long time . at least I think it be a long time , until I see you last , " he return . " what ! even you be a courtier , or think it necessary to become one to I ! " she say with some disdain . " I have achieve that reputation , I suppose . " " you have achieve so much , , " say my guardian , " that you pay some little penalty , I dare say . but none to I . " " so much ! " she repeat , slightly laugh . " yes ! " with she air of superiority , and power , and fascination , and I know not what , she seem to regard and I as little more than child . so , as she slightly laugh and afterwards sit look at the rain , she be as self - possess and as free to occupy herself with she own thought as if she have be alone . " I think you know my sister when we be abroad together better than you know I ? " she say , look at he again . " yes , we happen to meet oftener , " he return . " we go we several way , " say , " and have little in common even before we agree to differ . it be to be regret , I suppose , but it could not be help . " again sit look at the rain . the storm soon begin to pass upon its way . the shower greatly abate , the lightning cease , the thunder roll among the distant hill , and the sun begin to glisten on the wet leave and the fall rain . as we sit there , silently , we see a little pony phaeton come towards we at a merry pace . " the messenger be come back , my , " say the keeper , " with the carriage . " as it drive up , we see that there be two people inside . there alight from it , with some cloak and wrapper , first the whom I have see in church , and secondly the pretty girl , the with a defiant confidence , the pretty girl confuse and hesitat . " what now ? " say . " two ! " " I be you maid , my , at the present , " say the . " the message be for the attendant . " " I be afraid you might mean I , my , " say the pretty girl . " I do mean you , child , " reply she mistress calmly . " put that shawl on I . " she slightly stoop she shoulders to receive it , and the pretty girl lightly drop it in its place . the stood unnoticed , look on with she lip very tightly set . " I be sorry , " say to , " that we be not likely to renew we former acquaintance . you will allow I to send the carriage back for you two wards . it shall be here directly . " but as he would on no account accept this offer , she take a graceful leave of -- none of I -- and put
put she hand upon he proffered arm , and get into the carriage , which be a little , low , park carriage with a hood . " come in , child , " she say to the pretty girl ; " I shall want you . go on ! " the carriage roll away , and the Frenchwoman , with the wrapper she have bring hang over she arm , remain stand where she have alight . I suppose there be nothing pride can so little bear with as pride itself , and that she be punish for she imperious manner . she retaliation be the most singular I could have imagine . she remain perfectly still until the carriage have turn into the drive , and then , without the least discomposure of countenance , slipp off she shoe , leave they on the ground , and walk deliberately in the same direction through the wettest of the wet grass . " be that young woman mad ? " say my guardian . " oh , no , sir ! " say the keeper , who , with he wife , be look after she . " Hortense be not one of that sort . she have as good a head - piece as the best . but she be mortal high and passionate -- powerful high and passionate ; and what will have notice to leave , and have other put above she , she do not take kindly to it . " " but why should she walk shoeless through all that water ? " say my guardian . " why , indeed , sir , unless it be to cool she down ! " say the man . " or unless she fancy it be blood , " say the woman . " she ' as soon walk through that as anything else , I think , when she own 's up ! " we pass not far from the house a few minute afterwards . peaceful as it have look when we first see it , it look even more so now , with a diamond spray glitter all about it , a light wind blow , the bird no longer hush but singe strongly , everything refresh by the late rain , and the little carriage shining at the doorway like a fairy carriage make of silver . still , very steadfastly and quietly walk towards it , a peaceful figure too in the landscape , go , shoeless , through the wet grass . it be the long vacation in the region of . the good ship law and equity , those teak - build , copper- bottom , iron - fasten , brazen - face , and not by any mean fast - sailing clipper be lay up in ordinary . the , with a crew of ghostly client implor all whom they may encounter to peruse they papers , have drift , for the time being , heaven know where . the court be all shut up ; the public office lie in a hot sleep . itself be a shady solitude where nightingale might se , and a tenderer class of suitor than be usually find there , walk . the Temple , , ' , and 's even unto the field be like tidal harbour at low water , where strand proceedings , office at anchor , idle clerk lounge on lop - sided stool that will not recover they perpendicular until the current of term set in , lie high and dry upon the ooze of the long vacation . outer door of chamber be shut up by the score , message and parcel be to be leave at the 's by the bushel . a crop of grass would grow in the chink of the stone pavement outside 's , but that the ticket - porter , who have nothing to do beyond sitting in the shade there , with they white apron over they head to keep the fly off , grub it up and eat it thoughtfully . there be only one judge in town . even he only come twice a week to sit in chamber . if the country folk of those assize town on he circuit could see he now ! no full - bottom wig , no red petticoat , no fur , no javelin-men , no white wands . merely a close - shave gentleman in white trousers and a white hat , with sea - bronze on the judicial countenance , and a strip of bark peel by the solar ray from the judicial nose , who call in at the shell - fish shop as he come along and drink ice ginger - beer ! the bar of be scatter over the face of the earth . how can get on through four long summer month without its bar -- which be its acknowledged refuge in adversity and it be only legitimate triumph in prosperity -- be beside the question ; assuredly that shield and buckler of be not in present wear . the learn gentleman who be always so tremendously indignant at the unprecedented outrage commit on the feeling of he client by the opposite party that he never seem likely to recover it be do infinitely better than might be expect in . the learn gentleman who do the withering business and who blight all opponent with he gloomy sarcasm be as merry as a grig at a french watering - place . the learn gentleman who weep by the pint on the smallest provocation have not shed a tear these six week . the very learned gentleman who have cool the natural heat of he gingery complexion in pool and fountain of law until he have become great in knotty argument for term - time , when he pose the drowsy bench with legal "
" chaff , " inexplicable to the uninitiated and to most of the initiate too , be roam , with a characteristic delight in aridity and dust , about . other disperse fragment of the same great palladium be to be find on the canal of , at the second cataract of the , in the bath of , and sprinkle on the sea -sand all over the english coast . Scarcely one be to be encounter in the desert region of . if such a lonely member of the bar do flight across the waste and come upon a prowling suitor who be unable to leave off haunt the scene of he anxiety , they frighten one another and retreat into opposite shade . it be the hottest long vacation know for many year . all the young clerk be madly in love , and accord to they various degree , pine for bliss with the beloved object , at , , or . all the middle - aged clerk think they family too large . all the unowned dog who stray into the of and pant about staircase and other dry place seek water give short howl of aggravation . all the blind man 's dog in the street draw they master against pump or trip they over buckets . a shop with a sun -blind , and a watere pavement , and a bowl of gold and silver fish in the window , be a sanctuary . get 's so hot that it be , to the adjacent and , what a heater be in a urn , and keep they simmer all night . there be office about the of in which a man might be cool , if any coolness be worth purchase at such a price in dullness ; but the little thoroughfare immediately outside those retirement seem to blaze . in 's court , it be so hot that the people turn they house inside out and sit in chair upon the pavement -- include , who there pursue he study , with he cat ( who never be too hot ) by he side . the 's Arms have discontinue the Harmonic meeting for the season , and be engage at the down the river , where he come out in quite a innocent manner and sings comic ditty of a juvenile complexion calculate ( as the bill say ) not to wound the feeling of the most fastidious mind . over all the legal neighbourhood there hang , like some great veil of rust or gigantic cobweb , the idleness and pensiveness of the long vacation . , law - stationer of 's , , be sensible of the influence not only in he mind as a sympathetic and contemplative man , but also in he business as a law - stationer aforesaid . he have more leisure for musing in and in the during the long vacation than at other season , and he say to the two ' prentice , what a thing it be in such hot weather to think that you live in a island with the sea a - rolling and a - bowling right round you . Guster be busy in the little drawing - room on this present afternoon in the long vacation , when and . have it in contemplation to receive company . the expect guest be rather select than numerous , be and and no more . from 's be much give to describe himself , both verbally and in writing , as a vessel , he be occasionally mistaken by stranger for a gentleman connect with navigation , but he be , as he express it , " in the ministry . " be attach to no particular denomination and be consider by he persecutor to have nothing so very remarkable to say on the greatest of subject as to render he volunteering , on he own account , at all incumbent on he conscience ; but he have he follower , and be of the number . have but recently take a passage upward by the vessel , ; and she attention be attract to that a 1 , when she be something flush by the hot weather . " my little woman , " say to the sparrow in , " like to have she religion rather sharp , you see ! " so Guster , much impress by regard herself for the time as the handmaid of , whom she know to be endow with the gift of hold forth for four hour at a stretch , prepare the little drawing - room for tea . all the furniture be shaken and dust , the portrait of and . be touch up with a wet cloth , the best tea - service be set forth , and there be excellent provision make of dainty new bread , crusty twist , cool fresh butter , thin slice of ham , tongue , and german sausage , and delicate little row of anchovie nestling in parsley , not to mention new -laid egg , to be bring up warm in a napkin , and hot butter toast . for be rather a consume vessel -- the persecutor say a gorge vessel -- and can wield such weapon of the flesh as a knife and fork remarkably well . in he best coat , look at all the preparations when they be complete and cough he cough of deference behind he hand , say to , " at what time do you expect and , my love ? " " at six , " say . observe in a mild and casual way that " it be go that . " " perhaps you would like to begin without they , " be 's reproachful remark . do look as if he would like it very much , but he say
say , with he cough of mildness , " no , my dear , no . I merely name the time . " " what be time , " say , " to eternity ? " " very true , my dear , " say . " only when a person lay in victual for tea , a person do it with a view -- perhaps -- more to time . and when a time be name for have tea , it be better to come up to it . " " to come up to it ! " repeat with severity . " up to it ! as if be a fighter ! " " not at all , my dear , " say . here , , who have be look out of the bedroom window , come rust and scratch down the little staircase like a popular ghost , and fall flush into the drawing - room , announce that and have appear in the court . the bell at the inner door in the passage immediatly thereafter tinkl , she be admonish by , on pain of instant reconsignment to she patron saint , not to omit the ceremony of announcement . much discompose in she nerve ( which be previously in the best order ) by this threat , she so fearfully mutilate that point of state as to announce " and , least which , Imeantersay , whatsername ! " and retire conscience - stricken from the presence . be a large yellow man with a fat smile and a general appearance of have a good deal of train oil in he system . be a stern , severe - look , silent woman . move softly and cumbrously , not unlike a bear who have be teach to walk upright . he be very much embarrassed about the arm , as if they be inconvenient to he and he want to grovel , be very much in a perspiration about the head , and never speak without first put up he great hand , as deliver a token to he hearer that he be go to edify they . " my friend , " say , " peace be on this house ! on the master thereof , on the mistress thereof , on the young maiden , and on the young man ! my friend , why do I wish for peace ? what be peace ? be it war ? no . be it strife ? no . be it lovely , and gentle , and beautiful , and pleasant , and serene , and joyful ? oh , yes ! therefore , my friend , I wish for peace , upon you and upon yours . " in consequence of . Snagsby look deeply edified , think it expedient on the whole to say amen , which be well receive . " now , my friend , " proceed , " since I be upon this theme -- " Guster present herself . , in a spectral bass voice and without remove she eye from , say with dreadful distinctness , " go away ! " " now , my friend , " say , " since I be upon this theme , and in my lowly path improve it -- " be hear unaccountably to murmur " one thousing seven hundred and eighty - two . " the spectral voice repeat more solemnly , " go away ! " " now , my friend , " say , " we will inquire in a spirit of love -- " reiterate " one thousing seven hundred and eighty - two . " , pause with the resignation of a man accustom to be persecute and languidly fold up he ching into he fat smile , say , " let we hear the maiden ! speak , maiden ! " " one thousing seven hundred and eighty - two , if you please , sir . which he wish to know what the shilling ware for , " say , breathless . " for ? " return . " for he fare ! " reply that " he insiste on one and eightpence or on summonsizze the party . " and be proceed to grow shrill in indignation when quiet the tumult by lift up he hand . " my friend , " say he , " I remember a duty unfulfilled yesterday . it be right that I should be chasten in some penalty . I ought not to yomurmu . , pay the eightpence ! " while , drawe she breath , look hard at , as who should say , " you hear this apostle ! " and while glow with humility and train oil , pay the money . it be 's habit -- it be the head and front of he pretension indeed -- to keep this sort of debtor and creditor account in the smallest item and to post it publicly on the most trivial occasion . " my friend , " say , " eightpence be not much ; it might justly have be one and fourpence ; it might justly have be half a crown . o let we be joyful , joyful ! o let we be joyful ! " with which remark , which appear from it be sound to be a extract in verse , stalk to the table , and before take a chair , lifts up he admonitory hand . " my friend , " say he , " what be this which we now behold as be spread before we ? refreshment . do we need refreshment then , my friend ? we do . and why do we need refreshment , my friend ? because we be but mortal , because we be but sinful , because we be but of the earth , because we be
be not of the air . can we fly , my friend ? we cannot . why can we not fly , my friend ? " , presum on the success of he last point , venture to observe in a cheerful and rather know tone , " no wing . " but be immediately frown down by . " I say , my friend , " pursue , utterly reject and obliterate 's suggestion , " why can we not fly ? be it because we be calculate to walk ? it be . could we walk , my friend , without strength ? we could not . what should we do without strength , my friend ? we leg would refuse to bear we , we knee would double up , we ankle would turn over , and we should come to the ground . then from whence , my friend , in a human point of view , do we derive the strength that be necessary to we limb ? be it , " say , glance over the table , " from bread in various form , from butter which be churn from the milk which be yield unto we by the cow , from the egg which be laid by the fowl , from ham , from tongue , from sausage , and from such like ? it be . then let we partake of the good thing which be set before we ! " the persecutor deny that there be any particular gift in 's piling verbose flight of stair , one upon another , after this fashion . but this can only be receive as a proof of they determination to persecute , since it must be within everybody 's experience that the style of oratory be widely receive and much admired . , however , have conclude for the present , sit down at 's table and lay about he prodigiously . the conversion of nutriment of any sort into oil of the quality already mention appear to be a process so inseparable from the constitution of this exemplary vessel that in begin to eat and drink , he may be describe as always become a kind of considerable oil mill or other large factory for the production of that article on a wholesale scale . on the present evening of the long vacation , in 's , , he do such a powerful stroke of business that the warehouse appear to be quite full when the work cease . at this period of the entertainment , , who have never recover she first failure , but have neglect no possible or impossible means of bring the establishment and herself into contempt -- among which may be briefly enumerate she unexpectedly perform clash military music on 's head with plate , and afterwards crowning that gentleman with muffin -- at which period of the entertainment , Guster whisper that he be want . " and be want in the -- not to put too fine a point upon it -- in the shop , " say , rise , " perhaps this good company will excuse I for half a minute . " descend and find the two ' prentice intently contemplate a police constable , who hold a rag boy by the arm . " why , bless my heart , " say , " what be the matter ! " " this boy , " say the constable , " although he be repeatedly tell to , will not move on -- " " I be always a - move on , sar , " cry the boy , wip away he grimy tear with he arm . " I have always be a - move and a - move on , ever since I be bear . where can I possibly move to , sir , more nor I do move ! " " he will not move on , " say the constable calmly , with a slight professional hitch of he neck involve its better settlement in he stiff stock , " although he have be repeatedly caution , and therefore I be oblige to take he into custody . he be as obstinate a young gonoph as I know . he will not move on . " " oh , my eye ! where can I move to ! " cry the boy , clutch quite desperately at he hair and beat he bare foot upon the floor of 's passage . " do not you come none of that or I shall make blesse short work of you ! " say the constable , give he a passionless shake . " my instruction be that you be to move on . I have tell you so five hundred time . " " but where ? " cry the boy . " well ! really , constable , you know , " say wistfully , and cough behind he hand he cough of great perplexity and doubt , " really , that do seem a question . where , you know ? " " my instruction do not go to that , " reply the constable . " my instruction be that this boy be to move on . " do you hear , ? it be nothing to you or to any one else that the great lights of the parliamentary sky have fail for some few year in this business to set you the example of move on . the one grand recipe remain for you -- the profound philosophical prescription -- the be - all and the end - all of you strange existence upon earth . move on ! you be by no means to move off , , for the great light can not at all agree about that . move on ! say nothing to this effect , say nothing at
at all indeed , but cough he forlornest cough , expressive of no thoroughfare in any direction . by this time and and . , hear the altercation , have appear upon the stair . Guster have never leave the end of the passage , the whole household be assemble . " the simple question be , sir , " say the constable , " whether you know this boy . he say you do . " , from she elevation , instantly cry out , " no he do not ! " " my lit - tle woman ! " say , look up the staircase . " my love , permit I ! pray have a moment 's patience , my dear . I do know something of this lad , and in what I know of he , I can not say that there be any harm ; perhaps on the contrary , constable . " to whom the law - stationer relate he Joful and woeful experience , suppresse the half - crown fact . " well ! " say the constable , " so far , it seem , he have grounds for what he say . when I take he into custody up in , he say you know he . upon that , a young man who be in the crowd say he be acquaint with you , and you be a respectable housekeeper , and if I would call and make the inquiry , he would appear . the young man do not seem inclin to keep he word , but -- oh ! here be the young man ! " , who nod to and touch he hat with the chivalry of clerkship to the ladie on the stair . " I be stroll away from the office just now when I find this row go on , " say to the law - stationer , " and as you name be mention , I think it be right the thing should be look into . " " it be very good - natured of you , sir , " say , " and I be oblige to you . " and again relate he experience , again suppresse the half - crown fact . " now , I know where you live , " say the constable , then , to . " you live down in - all - 's . that be a nice innocent place to live in , be not it ? " " I can not go and live in no nicer place , sir , " reply . " they would not have nothink to say to I if I wo to go to a nice innocent place yofu to live . who uld go and let a nice innocent lod to such a reg'lar one as I ! " " you be very poor , be not you ? " say the constable . " yes , I be indeed , sir , wery poor in gin'ral , " reply . " I leave you to judge now ! I shook these two half - crown out of he , " say the constable , produce they to the company , " in only put my hand upon he ! " " they be wot have leave , , " say , " out of a sov-ring as wos give I by a lady in a wale as s she wo a servant and as come to my crossin one night and ask to be show this ' ere ouse and the ouse wot he as you hagive the writin to die at , and the berrin - ground wot he be berrid in . she se to I she s ' be you the boy at the inkwhich ? ' she s . I se ' yes ' I s . she se to I she s ' can you show I all they place ? ' I se ' yes I can ' I s . and she se to I 'do it ' and I dun it and she hagive I a sov'ring and hook it . and I can not have much of the sov'ring neither , " say , with dirty tear , " yofu I have to pay five bob , down in - all - 's , afore they would square it yofu to give I change , and then a young man he thieve another five while I be asleep and another boy he thieve ninepence and the landlord he stand drain round with a lot more on it . " " you do not expect anybody to believe this , about the lady and the sovereign , do you ? " say the constable , eye he aside with ineffable disdain . " I do not know as I do , sir , " reply . " I do not expect nothink at all , sir , much , but that be the true hist 'ry on it . " " you see what he be ! " the constable observe to the audience . " well , , if I do not lock he up this time , will you engage for he move on ? " " no ! " cry from the stair . " my little woman ! " plead she husband . " Constable , I have no doubt he will move on . you know you really must do it , " say . " I be everyways agreeable , sir , " say the hapless . " do it , then , " observe the constable . " you know what you have get to do . do it ! and recollect you will not get off so easy next time . catch hold of you money . now , the sooner you be five mile off ,
, the better for all party . " with this farewell hind and point generally to the setting sun as a likely place to move on to , the constable bid he auditor good afternoon and make the echoe of 's perform slow music for he as he walk away on the shady side , carry he iron - bound hat in he hand for a little ventilation . now , 's improbable story concern the lady and the sovereign have awaken more or less the curiosity of all the company . , who have a inquiring mind in matter of evidence and who have be suffer severely from the lassitude of the long vacation , take that interest in the case that he enter on a regular cross - examination of the witness , which be find so interesting by the ladie that . politely invite he to step upstairs and drink a cup of tea , if he will excuse the disarrange state of the tea - table , consequent on they previous exertion . yield he assent to this proposal , be request to follow into the draw - room doorway , where take he in hand as a witness , pat he into this shape , that shape , and the other shape like a butterman deal with so much butter , and worry he accord to the best model . be the examination unlike many such model display , both in respect of its elicit nothing and of its be lengthy , for be sensible of he talent , and . feel not only that it gratify she inquisitive disposition , but that it lift she husband 's establishment higher up in the law . during the progress of this keen encounter , the vessel , be merely engage in the oil trade , get aground and wait to be float off . " well ! " say . " either this boy stick to it like cobbler 's - wax or there be something out of the common here that beat anything that ever come into my way at and 's . " , who exclaim , " you do not say so ! " " for year ! " reply . " have know and 's office for year , " . triumphantly explain to . " . -- this gentleman 's wife -- . " " oh , indeed ! " say . " before I marry my present husband , " say . " be you a party in anything , ma 'am ? " say , transfer he cross-examination . " no . " " not a party in anything , ma 'am ? " say . shake she head . " perhaps you be acquaint with somebody who be a party in something , ma 'am ? " say , who like nothing better than to model he conversation on forensic principle . " not exactly that , either , " reply , humoure the joke with a hard - favoured smile . " not exactly that , either ! " repeat . " very good . pray , ma 'am , be it a lady of you acquaintance who have some transaction ( we will not at present say what transaction ) with and 's office , or be it a gentleman of you acquaintance ? take time , ma 'am . we shall come to it presently . Man or woman , ma 'am ? " " neither , " say as before . " oh ! a child ! " say , throw on the admiring Mrs . Snagsby the regular acute professional eye which be throw on british juryman . " now , ma 'am , perhaps you will have the kindness to tell we what child . " " you have get it at last , sir , " say Chadband with another hard - favour smile . " well , sir , it be before you time , most likely , judge from you appearance . I be leave in charge of a child name , who be put out in life by Messrs . and . " " , ! " cry , exci . " I call she , " say with austerity . " there be no miss - e of the girl in my time . it be . ' Esther , do this ! Esther , do that ! ' and she be make to do it . " " my dear ma 'am , " return , move across the small apartment , " the humble individual who now address you receive that young lady in when she first come here from the establishment to which you have allude . allow I to have the pleasure of take you by the hand . " , at last see he opportunity , make he accustom signal and rise with a smoking head , which he dab with he pocket - handkerchief . whisper " Hush ! " " my friend , " say , " we have partake in moderation " ( which be certainly not the case so far as he be concerned ) " of the comfort which have be provide for we . may this house live upon the fatness of the land ; may corn and wine be plentiful therein ; may it grow , may it thrive , may it prosper , may it advance , may it proceed , may it press forward ! but , my friend , have we partaken of anything else ? we have . my friend , of what else have we partake ? of spiritual profit ? yes . from whence have we derive that spiritual profit ? my young friend , stand forth ! " Jo , thus apostrophize , give a slouch backward , and another slouch forward , and another slouch to each side
side , and confront the eloquent Chadband with evident doubt of he intention . " my young friend , " say , " you be to we a pearl , you be to we a diamond , you be to we a gem , you be to we a jewel . and why , my young friend ? " " I do not know , " reply . " I do not know nothink . " " my young friend , " say , " it be because you know nothing that you be to we a gem and jewel . for what be you , my young friend ? be you a beast of the field ? no . a bird of the air ? no . a fish of the sea or river ? no . you be a human boy , my young friend . a human boy . of glorious to be a human boy ! and why glorious , my young friend ? because you be capable of receive the lesson of wisdom , because you be capable of profit by this discourse which I now deliver for you good , because you be not a stick , or a staff , or a stock , or a stone , or a post , or a pillar . " o run stream of sparkling joy to be a soaring human boy ! " and do you cool yourself in that stream now , my young friend ? no . why do you not cool yourself in that stream now ? because you be in a state of darkness , because you be in a state of obscurity , because you be in a state of sinfulness , because you be in a state of bondage . my young friend , what be bondage ? let we , in a spirit of love , inquire . " at this threatening stage of the discourse , , who seem to have be gradually go out of he mind , smear he right arm over he face and give a terrible yawn . indignantly express she belief that he be a limb of the arch -fiend . " my friend , " say with he persecute ching fold itself into its fat smile again as he look round , " it be right that I should be humble , it be right that I should be try , it be right that I should be mortified , it be right that I should be correct . I stumble , on Sabbath last , when I think with pride of my three hour ' improve . the account be now favourably balance : my creditor have accept a composition . o let we be joyful , joyful ! o let we be joyful ! " great sensation on the part of . " my friend , " say , look round he in conclusion , " I will not proceed with my young friend now . will you come to - morrow , my young friend , and inquire of this good lady where I be to be find to deliver a discourse unto you , and will you come like the thirsty swallow upon the next day , and upon the day after that , and upon the day after that , and upon many pleasant day , to hear discourse ? " ( this with a cow - like lightness . ) Jo , whose immediate object seem to be to get away on any term , give a shuffling nod . then throw he a penny , and . call to Guster to see he safely out of the house . but before he go downstairs , load he with some break meat from the table , which he carry away , hugge in he arm . so , -- of whom the persecutor say that it be no wonder he should go on for any length of time utter such abominable nonsense , but that the wonder rather be that he should ever leave off , have once the audacity to begin -- retire into private life until he invest a little capital of supper in the oil - trade . move on , through the long vacation , down to , where he find a baking stony corner wherein to settle to he repast . and there he sit , munch and gnaw , and look up at the great cross on the summit of 's , glitter above a red -and - violet - tinte cloud of smoke . from the boy 's face one might suppose that sacr emblem to be , in he eye , the crown confusion of the great , confused city -- so golden , so high up , so far out of he reach . there he sit , the sun go down , the river run fast , the crowd flow by he in two stream -- everything move on to some purpose and to one end -- until he be stir up and tell to " move on " too . the long vacation saunter on towards term - time like a idle river very leisurely stroll down a flat country to the sea . saunter along with it congenially . he have blunt the blade of he penknife and break the point off by sticking that instrument into he desk in every direction . not that he bear the desk any ill will , but he must do something , and it must be something of a unexciting nature , which will lay neither he physical nor he intellectual energie under too heavy contribution . he find that nothing agree with he so well as to make little gyration on one leg of he stool , and stab he desk , and gape . and be out of town , and the article clerk have
have take out a shoote license and go down to he father 's , and 's two fellow - stipendiary be away on leave . and divide the dignity of the office . but be for the time be establish in 's room , whereat chafe . so exceedingly that he will bit sarcasm inform he mother , in the confidential moment when he sup with she off a lobster and lettuce in the , that he be afraid the office be hardly good enough for swell , and that if he have know there be a swell come , he would have get it pain . suspect everybody who enter on the occupation of a stool in and 's office of entertaining , as a matter of course , sinister designs upon he . he be clear that every such person want to depose he . if he be ever ask how , why , when , or wherefore , he shut up one eye and shake he head . on the strength of these profound views , he in the most ingenious manner take infinite pain to counterplot when there be no plot , and play the deepest game of chess without any adversary . it be a source of much gratification to , therefore , to find the new - comer constantly po over the papers in and , for he well know that nothing but confusion and failure can come of that . he satisfaction communicate itself to a third saunterer through the long vacation in and 's office , to wit , yong . whether young ( metaphorically call Small and eke , as it be jocularly to express a fledgling ) be ever a boy be much doubt in 's . he be now something under fifteen and a old limb of the law . he be facetiously understand to entertain a passion for a lady at a cigar - shop in the neighbourhood of and for she sake to have break off a contract with another lady , to whom he have be engage some year . he be a town - make article , of small stature and weazen feature , but may be perceive from a considerable distance by means of he very tall hat . to become a Guppy be the object of he ambition . he dress at that gentleman ( by whom he be patronize ) , talk at he , walk at he , found himself entirely on he . he be honoured with 's particular confidence and occasionally advise he , from the deep well of he experience , on difficult point in private life . have be lol out of window all the morning after try all the stool in succession and find none of they easy , and after several time put he head into the iron safe with a notion of cool it . have be twice dispatch for effervescent drink , and have twice mix they in the two official tumbler and stir they up with the ruler . propound for 's consideration the paradox that the more you drink the thirstier you be and recline he head upon the window - sill in a state of hopeless languor . while thus look out into the shade of , 's , survey the intolerable brick and mortar , become conscious of a manly whisker emerge from the cloistered walk below and turn itself up in the direction of he face . at the same time , a low whistle be waft through the and a suppress voice cry , " Hip ! Gup - py ! " " why , you do not mean it ! " say , arouse . " small ! here be Jobling ! " 's head look out of window too and nod to . " where have you spring up from ? " inquire . " from the market - garden down by . I can not stand it any longer . I must enlist . I say ! I wish you would lend I half a crown . upon my soul , I be hungry . " look hungry and also have the appearance of have run to see in the market - garden down by . " I say ! just throw out half a crown if you have get one to spare . I want to get some dinner . " " will you come and dine with I ? " say , throw out the coin , which catch neatly . " how long should I have to hold out ? " say . " not half a hour . I be only wait here till the enemy go , return , but inward with he head . " what enemy ? " " a new one . go to be article . will you wait ? " " can you give a fellow anything to read in the meantime ? " say . suggest the law list . but declare with much earnestness that he " can not stand it . " " you shall have the paper , " say . " he shall bring it down . but you have better not be see about here . sit on we staircase and read . it be a quiet place . " Jobl nod intelligence and acquiescence . the sagacious supply he with the newspaper and occasionally drop he eye upon he from the landing as a precaution against he become disgusted with waiting and make a untimely departure . at last the enemy retreat , and then Smallweed fetch up . " well , and how be you ? " say , shak hand with he . " so , so . how be you ? " reply that he be not much to boast of , venture on the question , " how be she ? " this resent
resent as a liberty , retort , " , there be chord in the human mind -- " Jobl beg pardon . " any subject but that ! " say with a gloomy enjoyment of he injury . " for there be chord , Jobling -- " pardon again . during this short colloquy , the active , who be of the dinner party , have write in legal character on a slip of paper , " return immediately . " this notification to all whom it may concern , he insert in the letter - box , and then put on the tall hat at the angle of inclination at which wear he , inform he patron that they may now make themselves scarce . accordingly they betake themselves to a neighbour dining - house , of the class know among its frequenter by the denomination slap - bang , where the waitress , a bouncing young female of forty , be suppose to have make some impression on the susceptible , of whom it may be remark that he be a weird changeling to whom year be nothing . he stand precociously possessed of century of owlish wisdom . if he ever lay in a cradle , it seem as if he must have lain there in a tail - coat . he have a old , old eye , have Smallweed ; and he drink and smoke in a monkeyish way ; and he neck be stiff in he collar ; and he be never to be take in ; and he know all about it , whatever it be . in short , in he bring up he have be so nurse by law and equity that he have become a kind of fossil imp , to account for whose terrestrial existence it be report at the public office that he father be and he mother the only female member of the family , also that he first long - clothes be make from a blue bag . into the dining - house , unaffected by the seductive show in the window of artificially white cauliflower and poultry , verdant basket of pea , coolly bloom cucumber , and joint ready for the spit , lead the way . they know he there and defer to he . he have he favourite box , he bespeak all the papers , he be down upon bald patriarch , who keep they more than ten minute afterwards . it be of no use try he with anything less than a full - size " bread " or propose to he any joint in cut unless it be in the very best cut . in the matter of gravy he be adamant . conscious of he elfin power and submit to he dread experience , consult he in the choice of that day 's banquet , turn a appealing look towards he as the waitress repeat the catalogue of viand and say " what do you take , ? " , out of the profundity of he artfulness , prefer " veal and ham and french bean -- and do not you forget the stuffing , " ( with a unearthly cock of he venerable eye ) , and give the like order . three pint pot of half - and - half be superad . quickly the waitress return bear what be apparently a model of the of but what be really a pile of plate and flat tin dish - cover . , approve of what be set before he , convey intelligent benignity into he ancient eye and wink upon she . then , amid a constant come in , and go out , and run about , and a clatter of crockery , and a rumbl up and down of the machine which bring the nice cut from the kitchen , and a shrill cry for more nice cut down the speaking - pipe , and a shrill reckoning of the cost of nice cut that have be dispose of , and a general flush and steam of hot joint , cut and uncut , and a considerably heated atmosphere in which the soiled knife and tablecloth seem to break out spontaneously into eruption of grease and blotch of beer , the legal triumvirate appease they appetite . be buttone up closer than mere adornment might require . he hat present at the rim a peculiar appearance of a glistening nature , as if it have be a favourite snail - promenade . the same phenomenon be visible on some part of he coat , and particularly at the seam . he have the faded appearance of a gentleman in embarrassed circumstance ; even he light whisker droop with something of a shabby air . he appetite be so vigorous that it suggest spare living for some little time back . he make such a speedy end of he plate of veal and ham , bring it to a close while he companion be yet midway in theirs , that propose another . " thank you , , " say , " I really do not know but what I will take another . " another be bring , he fall to with great goodwill . take silent notice of he at interval until he be half way through this second plate and stop to take a enjoy pull at he pint pot of half - and - half ( also renew ) and stretch out he leg and rub he hand . Behold he in which glow of contentment , say , " you be a man again , ! " " well , not quite yet , " say . " say , just bear . " " will you take any other vegetable ? Grass ? pea ? summer cabbage ? " " thank you , , " say . " I really
really do not know but what I will take summer cabbage . " order give ; with the sarcastic addition ( from ) of " without slug , ! " and cabbage produce . " I be grow up , , " say , ply he knife and fork with a relishing steadiness . " to hear it . " " in fact , I have just turn into my teens , " say . he say no more until he have perform he task , which he achieve as Messrs . Guppy and Smallweed finish theirs , thus get over the ground in excellent style and beat those two gentleman easily by a veal and ham and a cabbage . " now , small , " say , " what would you recommend about pastry ? " " Marrow pudding , " say instantly . " aye , aye ! " cry Jobling with a arch look . " you be there , be you ? thank you , , I do not know but what I will take a marrow pudding . " three marrow pudding be produce , add in a pleasant humour that he be come of age fast . to these succeed , by command of , " three Cheshires , " and to those " three small rum . " this apex of the entertainment happily reach , put up he leg on the carpet seat ( have he own side of the box to himself ) , lean against the wall , and say , " I be grow up now , . I have arrive at maturity . " " what do you think , now , " say , " about -- you do not mind Smallweed ? " " not the least in the worid . I have the pleasure of drinking he good health . " " , to you ! " say . " I be say , what do you think now , " pursue , " of enlisting ? " " why , what I may think after dinner , " return , " be one thing , my dear Guppy , and what I may think before dinner be another thing . still , even after dinner , I ask myself the question , what be I to do ? how be I to live ? Ill of manger , you know , " say , pronounce that word as if he mean a necessary fixture in a english stable . " Ill of manger . that be the french say , and mangering be as necessary to I as it be to a . or more so . " be decidedly of opinion " much more so . " " if any man have tell I , " pursue , " even so lately as when you and I have the frisk down in , , and drive over to see that house at - - " Smallweed correct he -- . " . ( I thank my honourable friend for that cheer . ) if any man have tell I then that I should be as hard up at the present time as I literally find myself , I should have -- well , I should have pitch into he , " say , take a little rum -and - water with a air of desperate resignation ; " I should have let fly at he head . " " , , you be on the wrong side of the post then , " remonstrate . " you be talk about nothing else in the gig . " " Guppy , " say , " I will not deny it . I be on the wrong side of the post . but I trust to thing come round . " that very popular trust in flat thing come round ! not in they be beaten round , or work round , but in they " come " round ! as through a lunatic should trust in the world 's " come " triangular ! " I have confident expectation that thing would come round and be all square , " say Jobling with some vagueness of expression and perhaps of meaning too . " but I be disappoint . they never do . and when it come to creditor make row at the office and to people that the office deal with make complaint about dirty trifle of borrowed money , why there be a end of that connexion . and of any new professional connexion too , for if I be to give a reference to - morrow , it would be mention and would sow I up . then what be a fellow to do ? I have be keep out of the way and live cheap down about the market - garden , but what be the use of live cheap when you have get no money ? you might as well live dear . " " better , " think . " certainly . it be the fashionable way ; and fashion and whisker have be my weakness , and I do not care who know it , " say . " they be great weakness -- , sir , they be great . well , " proceed Jobling after a defiant visit to he rum -and - water , " what can a fellow do , I ask you , but enlist ? " come more fully into the conversation to state what , in he opinion , a fellow can do . he manner be the gravely impressive manner of a man who have not commit himself in life otherwise than as he have become the victim of a tender sorrow of the heart . " Jobling , " say , " myself and we mutual friend Smallweed - - " modestly obserf , " gentlemen both !
! " and drink . " -- have have a little conversation on this matter more than once since you -- " " , get the sack ! " cry bitterly . " say it , . you mean it . " " no -o - of ! leave the , " delicately suggest . " since you leave the , , " say ; " and I have mention to we mutual friend Smallweed a plan I have lately think of proposing . you know Snagsby the stationer ? " " I know there be such a stationer , " return . " he be not ours , and I be not acquaint with he . " " he be ours , Jobling , and I be acquaint with he , " retort . " well , sir ! I have lately become better acquaint with he through some accidental circumstance that have make I a visitor of he in private life . those circumstance it be not necessary to offer in argument . they may -- or they may not -- have some reference to a subject which may -- or may not -- have cast it be shadow on my existence . " as it be 's perplex way with boastful misery to tempt he particular friend into this subject , and the moment they touch it , to turn on they with that trenchant severity about the chord in the human mind , both and decline the pitfall by remain silent . " such thing may be , " repeat , " or they may not be . they be no part of the case . it be enough to mention that both and . be very willing to oblige I and that have , in busy time , a good deal of copying work to give out . he have all 's , and a excellent business beside . I believe if we mutual friend Smallweed be put into the box , he could prove this ? " nods and appear greedy to be swear . " now , gentleman of the jury , " say , " -- I mean , now , Jobling -- you may say this be a poor prospect of a living . . but it be better than nothing , and better than enlistment . you want time . there must be time for these late affair to blow over . you might live through it on much worse term than by writing for . " be about to interrupt when the sagacious Smallweed check he with a dry cough and the word , " ! Shakspeare ! " " there be two branch to this subject , , " say . " that be the first . I come to the second . you know , the , across the lane . , , " say in he encouraging cross-examination - tone , " I think you know , the , across the lane ? " " I know he by sight , " say . " you know he by sight . very well . and you know little ? " " everybody know she , " say . " everybody know she . very well . now it have be one of my duty of late to pay Flite a certain weekly allowance , deduct from it the amount of she weekly rent , which I have pay ( in consequence of instruction I have receive ) to Krook himself , regularly in she presence . this have bring I into communication with and into a knowledge of he house and he habits . I know he have a room to let . you may live there at a very low charge under any name you like , as quietly as if you be a hundred mile off . he will ask no question and would accept you as a tenant at a word from I -- before the clock strike , if you choose . and I tell you another thing , Jobling , " say , who have suddenly lower he voice and become familiar again , " he be a extraordinary old chap -- always rummage among a litter of papers and grubb away at teaching himself to read and write , without get on a bit , as it seem to I . he be a most extraordinary old chap , sir . I do not know but what it might be worth a fellow ' while to look he up a bit . " " you do not mean -- " begin . " I mean , " return , shrugge he shoulders with become modesty , " that I can not make he out . I appeal to we mutual friend Smallweed whether he have or have not hear I remark that I can not make he out . " bear the concise testimony , " a few ! " " I have see something of the profession and something of life , , " say , " and it be seldom I can not make a man out , more or less . but such a old card as this , so deep , so sly , and secret ( though I do not believe he be ever sober ) , I never come across . now , he must be precious old , you know , and he have not a soul about he , and he be report to be immensely rich ; and whether he be a smuggler , or a receiver , or a unlicensed pawnbroker , or a money - lender -- all of which I have think likely at different time -- it might pay you to knock up a sort of knowledge of he . I do not see why you should not go in for it , when everything else suits .
. " , , and Smallweed all lean they elbow on the table and they chin upon they hand , and look at the ceiling . after a time , they all drink , slowly lean back , put they hand in they pocket , and look at one another . " if I have the energy I once possess , ! " say with a sigh . " but there be chord in the human mind --" Express the remainder of the desolate sentiment in rum -and - water , conclude by resign the adventure to and inform he that during the vacation and while thing be slack , he purse , " as far as three or four or even five pound go , " will be at he disposal . " for never shall it be say , " add with emphasis , " that turn he back upon he friend ! " the latter part of the proposal be so directly to the purpose that say with emotion , " Guppy , my trump , you fist ! " present it , say , " Jobling , my boy , there it be ! " return , " Guppy , we have be pal now for some year ! " reply , " Jobling , we have . " they then shake hand , and add in a feeling manner , " thank you , Guppy , I do not know but what I will take another glass for old acquaintance sake . " " 's last lodger die there , " observe in a incidental way . " do he though ! " say . " there be a verdict . accidental death . you do not mind that ? " " no , " say , " I do not mind it ; but he might as well have die somewhere else . it be devilish odd that he need go and die at my place ! " quite resent this liberty , several time return to it with such remark as , " there be place enough to die in , I should think ! " or , " he would not have like my die at this place , I dare say ! " however , the compact be virtually make , propose to dispatch the trusty Smallweed to ascertain if be at home , as in that case they may complete the negotiation without delay . Jobling approve , put himself under the tall hat and convey it out of the dining - room in the Guppy manner . he soon return with the intelligence that be at home and that he have see he through the shop - door , sit in the back premise , sleep " like one o'clock . " " then I will pay , " say , " and we will go and see he . small , what will it be ? " Smallweed , compelle the attendance of the waitress with one hitch of he eyelash , instantly reply as follow : " four veal and hams be three , and four potatoe be three and four , and one summer cabbage be three and six , and three marrow be four and six , and six breads be five , and three Cheshires be five and three , and four half - pint of half - and - half be six and three , and four small rum be eight and three , and three Polly be eight and six . and six in half a sovereign , , and eighteenpence out ! " not at all accit by these stupendous calculation , dismiss he friend with a cool nod and remain behind to take a little admiring notice of , as opportunity may serve , and to read the daily papers , which be so very large in proportion to himself , shorn of he hat , that when he hold up the to run he eye over the column , he seem to have retire for the night and to have disappear under the bedclothes . and repair to the rag and bottle shop , where they find still sleep like one o'clock , that be to say , breathe stertorously with he ching upon he breast and quite insensible to any external sound or even to gentle shaking . on the table beside he , among the usual lumber , stand a empty gin - bottle and a glass . the unwholesome air be so stain with this liquor that even the green eye of the cat upon she shelf , as they open and shut and glimmer on the visitor , look drunk . " hold up here ! " say , give the relaxed figure of the old man another shake . " ! , sir ! " but it would seem as easy to wake a bundle of old clothes with a spirituous heat smoulder in it . " do you ever see such a stupor as he fall into , between drink and sleep ? " say . " if this be he regular sleep , " return , rather alarme , " it will last a long time one of these day , I be think . " " it be always more like a fit than a nap , " say , shak he again . " , you lordship ! why , he might be rob fifty time over ! open you eye ! " after much ado , he open they , but without appear to see he visitor or any other object . though he cross one leg on another , and fold he hand , and several time close and open he parch lip , he seem to all intent and purpose as insensible as before . " he be alive , at any rate , " say . "
" how be you , my . I have bring a friend of mine , sir , on a little matter of business . " the old man still sit , often smack he dry lip without the least consciousness . after some minute he make a attempt to rise . they help he up , and he stagger against the wall and stare at they . " how do you do , ? " say in some discomfiture . " how do you do , sy ? you be look charming , . I hope you be pretty well ? " the old man , in aim a purposeless blow at , or at nothing , feebly swing himself round and come with he face against the wall . so he remain for a minute or two , heape up against it , and then stagger down the shop to the front door . the air , the movement in the court , the lapse of time , or the combination of these thing recover he . he come back pretty steadily , adjust he fur cap on he head and look keenly at they . " you servant , gentleman ; I have be do . hi ! I be hard to wake , odd time . " " Rather so , indeed , sir , " respond . " what ? you have be a - try to do it , have you ? " say the suspicious . " only a little , " explain . the old man 's eye rest on the empty bottle , he take it up , examine it , and slowly tilt it upside down . " I say ! " he cry like the hobgoblin in the story . " somebody be be make free here ! " " I assure you we find it so , " say . " would you allow I to get it fill for you ? " " yes , certainly I would ! " cry in high glee . " certainly I would ! do not mention it ! get it fill next door -- 's Arms -- the 's fourteenpenny . bless you , they know I ! " he so press the empty bottle upon that that gentleman , with a nod to he friend , accept the trust and hurrie out and hurrie in again with the bottle fill . the old man receive it in he arm like a beloved grandchild and pat it tenderly . " but , I say , " he whisper , with he eye screw up , after taste it , " this be not the 's fourteenpenny . this be eighteenpenny ! " " I think you might like that better , " say . " you be a nobleman , sir , " return with another taste , and he hot breath seem to come towards they like a flame . " you be a baron of the land . " take advantage of this auspicious moment , present he friend under the impromptu name of and state the object of they visit . Krook , with he bottle under he arm ( he never get beyond a certain point of either drunkenness or sobriety ) , take time to survey he propose lodger and seem to approve of he . " you would like to see the room , young man ? " he say . " ah ! it be a good room ! be whitewashed . be clean down with soft soap and soda . hi ! it be worth twice the rent , let alone my company when you want it and such a cat to keep the mouse away . " Commend the room after this manner , the old man take they upstairs , where indeed they do find it cleaner than it use to be and also contain some old article of furniture which he have dug up from he inexhaustible store . the term be easily conclude -- for the can not be hard on , associate as he be with and , and , and other famous claim on he professional consideration -- and it be agree that shall take possession on the morrow . and then repair to 's , , where the personal introduction of the former to be effect and ( more important ) the vote and interest of be secure . they then report progress to the eminent Smallweed , wait at the office in he tall hat for that purpose , and separate , explain that he would terminate he little entertainment by stand treat at the play but that there be chord in the human mind which would render it a hollow mockery . on the morrow , in the dusk of evening , modestly appear at 's , by no means incommod with luggage , and establish himself in he new lodging , where the two eye in the shutter stare at he in he sleep , as if they be full of wonder . on the follow day , who be a handy good - for - nothing kind of young fellow , borrow a needle and thread of and a hammer of he landlord and go to work devising apology for window - curtain , and knock up apology for shelf , and hang up he two teacup , milkpot , and crockery sundry on a pennyworth of little hook , like a shipwrecked sailor make the best of it . but what prize most of all he few possession ( next after he light whisker , for which he have a attachment that only whisker can awake in the breast of man ) be a choice collection of copper - plate impressions from that truly national work the Divinity of , or of british beauty , represent lady of title and fashion in
in every variety of smirk that art , combine with capital , be capable of producing . with these magnificent portrait , unworthily confine in a band - box during he seclusion among the market - garden , he decorate he apartment ; and as the of wear every variety of fancy dress , play every variety of musical instrument , fondle every variety of dog , ogle every variety of prospect , and be back up by every variety of flower - pot and balustrade , the result be very imposing . but fashion be 's , as it be 's , weakness . to borrow yesterday 's paper from the 's arm of a evening and read about the brilliant and distinguished meteor that be shoot across the fashionable sky in every direction be unspeakable consolation to he . to know what member of what brilliant and distinguished circle accomplish the brilliant and distinguished feat of join it yesterday or contemplate the no less brilliant and distinguished feat of leave it to - morrow give he a thrill of joy . to be inform what the of be about , and mean to be about , and what Galaxy marriage be on the tapis , and what Galaxy rumour be in circulation , be to become acquainted with the most glorious destiny of mankind . revert from this intelligence to the portrait implicate , and seem to know the original , and to be know of they . for the rest he be a quiet lodger , full of handy shifts and device as before mention , able to cook and clean for himself as well as to carpenter , and develop social inclination after the shade of evening have fall on the court . at those time , when he be not visit by or by a small light in he likeness quench in a dark hat , he come out of he dull room -- where he have inherit the deal wilderness of desk bespatter with a rain of ink -- and talk to or be " very free , " as they call it in the court , commendingly , with any one dispose for conversation . Wherefore , , who lead the court , be impelled to offer two remark to : firstly , that if she be to have whisker , she could wish th'ey to be identically like that young man 's ; and secondly , " Mark my word , , ma 'am , and do not you be surprised , bless you , if that young man come in at last for old 's money ! " the family in a rather ill - favoured and ill - savoured neighbourhood , though one of its rising grounds bear the name of , the , christen and know on the domestic hearth as , pass that limited portion of he time on which the office and its contingency have no claim . he dwell in a little narrow street , always solitary , shady , and sad , closely brick in on all side like a tomb , but where there yet linger the stump of a old forest tree whose flavou be about as fresh and natural as the Smallweed smack of youth . there have be only one child in the Smallweed family for several generation . little old man and woman there have been , but no child , until 's grandmother , now live , become weak in she intellect and fell ( for the first time ) into a childish state . with such infantine graces as a total want of observation , memory , understanding , and interest , and a eternal disposition to fall asleep over the fire and into it , 's grandmother have undoubtedly brighten the family . 's grandfather be likewise of the party . he be in a helpless condition as to he lower , and nearly so as to he upper , limb , but he mind be unimpaired . it hold , as well as it ever hold , the first four rule of arithmetic and a certain small collection of the hardest fact . in respect of ideality , reverence , wonder , and other such phrenological attributes , it be no worse off than it use to be . everything that 's grandfather ever put away in he mind be a grub at first , and be a grub at last . in all he life he have never breed a single butterfly . the father of this pleasant grandfather , of the neighbourhood of , be a horny - skinn , two - leg , money - get species of spider who spun web to catch unwary fly and retire into hole until they be entrap . the name of this old pagan 's god be . he live for it , marry it , die of it . meet with a heavy loss in a honest little enterprise in which all the loss be intend to have be on the other side , he break something -- something necessary to he existence , therefore it could not have be he heart -- and make a end of he career . as he character be not good , and he have be breed at a charity school in a complete course , accord to question and answer , of those ancient people the and , he be frequently quote as a example of the failure of education . he spirit shone through he son , to whom he have always preach of " go out " early in life and whom he make a clerk in a sharp scrivener 's office at twelve year old . there the young gentleman improve he mind , which be of a lean and anxious character , and develop the family gift , gradually elevate himself into the discounting profession
profession . go out early in life and marry late , as he father have do before he , he too begat a lean and anxious - minded son , who in he turn , go out early in life and marry late , become the father of and , twin . during the whole time consume in the slow growth of this family tree , the house of , always early to go out and late to marry , have strengthen itself in its practical character , have discard all amusement , discountenance all story - book , fairy - tale , fiction , and fable , and banish all levity whatsoever . hence the gratify fact that it have have no child bear to it and that the complete little man and woman whom it have produce have be observe to bear a likeness to old monkey with something depressing on they minds . at the present time , in the dark little parlour certain foot below the level of the street -- a grim , hard , uncouth parlour , only ornament with the coarsest of baize table - cover , and the hardest of sheet - iron tea - tray , and offer in its decorative character no bad allegorical representation of 's mind -- seat in two black horsehair porter 's chair , one on each side of the fire - place , the superannuate and . Smallweed while away the rosy hour . on the stove be a couple of trivet for the pot and kettle which it be 's usual occupation to watch , and project from the chimney - piece between they be a sort of brass gallow for roasting , which he also superintend when it be in action . under the venerable 's seat and guard by he spindle leg be a drawer in he chair , report to contain property to a fabulous amount . beside he be a spare cushion with which he be always provide in order that he may have something to throw at the venerable partner of he respect age whenever she make a allusion to money -- a subject on which he be particularly sensitive . " and where be ? " grandfather Smallweed inquire of , 's twin sister . " he can not come in yet , " say . " it be he tea - time , be not it ? " " no . " " how much do you mean to say it want then ? " " ten minute . " " hey ? " " ten minute . " ( loud on the part of . ) " ! " say . " ten minute . " , who have be mumbl and shake she head at the trivet , hear figure mention , connect they with money and screech like a horrible old parrot without any plumage , " ten ten - pound note ! " immediately throw the cushion at she . " Drat you , be quiet ! " say the good old man . the effect of this act of jaculation be twofold . it not only double up . 's head against the side of she porter 's chair and cause she to present , when extricate by she granddaughter , a highly unbecoming state of cap , but the necessary exertion recoil on Smallweed himself , whom it throw back into this porter 's chair like a broken puppet . the excellent old gentleman be at these time a mere clothes - bag with a black skull - cap on the top of it , do not present a very animated appearance until he have undergo the two operation at the hand of he granddaughter of be shake up like a great bottle and pok and punch like a great bolster . some indication of a neck be develop in he by these means , he and the sharer of he life 's evening again front one another in they two porter 's chair , like a couple of sentinel long forget on they post by the , . the twin be worthy company for these associate . she be so indubitably sister to Smallweed the younger that the two knead into one would hardly make a young person of average proportion , while she so happily exemplify the before - mention family likeness to the monkey tribe that attire in a spangled robe and cap she might walk about the table - land on the top of a barrel - organ without excit much remark as a unusual specimen . under exist circumstance , however , she be dress in a plain , spare gown of brown stuff . never own a doll , never hear of , never play at any game . she once or twice fall into child 's company when she be about ten year old , but the child could not get on with , and could not get on with they . she seem like a animal of another species , and there be instinctive repugnance on both side . it be very doubtful whether know how to laugh . she have so rarely see the thing do that the probability be strong the other way . of anything like a youthful laugh , she certainly can have no conception . if she be to try one , she would find she tooth in she way , model that action of she face , as she have unconsciously model all its other expression , on she pattern of sordid age . be . and she twin brother could not wind up a top for he life . he know no more of the or of the than he know of the people in the star . he could have soon play at leap - frog or at cricket as change into a cricket or a
a frog himself . but he be so much the better off than he sister that on he narrow world of fact a opening have dawn into such broader region as lie within the ken of . hence he admiration and he emulation of that shin enchanter . , with a gong - like clash and clatter , set one of the sheet - iron tea - tray on the table and arrange cup and saucer . the bread she put on in a iron basket , and the butter ( and not much of it ) in a small pewter plate . look hard after the tea as it be serve out and ask where the girl be . " , do you mean ? " say . " hey ? " from . " , do you mean ? " this touch a spring in , who , chuckl as usual at the trivet , cry , " over the water ! over the water , over the water , over the water to , over the water , over the water to ! " and become quite energetic about it . look at the cushion but have not sufficiently recover he late exertion . " ! " he say when there be silence . " if that be she name . she eat a deal . it would be better to allow she for she keep . " , with she brother 's wink , shake she head and purse up she mouth into no without say it . " no ? " return the old man . " why not ? " " she would want sixpence a day , and we can do it for less , " say . " sure ? " answer with a nod of deepest meaning and call , as she scrape the butter on the loaf with every precaution against waste and cut it into slice , " you , , where be you ? " Timidly obedient to the summon , a little girl in a rough apron and a large bonnet , with she hand cover with soap and water and a scrubb brush in one of they , appear , and curtsy . " what work be you about now ? " say , make a ancient snap at she like a very sharp old beldame . " I be a - clean the upstairs back room , miss , " reply . " mind you do it thoroughly , and do not loiter . Shirk will not do for I . make haste ! go along ! " cry with a stamp upon the ground . " you girl be more trouble than you be worth , by half . " on this severe matron , as she return to she task of scrape the butter and cut the bread , fall the shadow of she brother , look in at the window . for whom , knife and loaf in hand , she open the street - door . " aye , aye , ! " say . " here you be , hey ? " " here I be , " say . " be along with you friend again , ? " small nod . " dine at he expense , ? " small nod again . " that be right . live at he expense as much as you can , and take warning by he foolish example . that be the use of such a friend . the only use you can put he to , " say the venerable sage . he grandson , without receive this good counsel as dutifully as he might , honour it with all such acceptance as may lie in a slight wink and a nod and take a chair at the tea - table . the four old face then hover over teacup like a company of ghastly cherubim , . Smallweed perpetually twitch she head and chatter at the trivet and Smallweed require to be repeatedly shake up like a large black dratch . " yes , yes , " say the good old gentleman , revert to he lesson of wisdom . " that be such advice as you father would have give you , . you never see you father . more be the pity . he be my true son . " whether it be intend to be convey that he be particularly pleasant to look at , on that account , do not appear . " he be my true son , " repeat the old gentleman , fold he bread and butter on he knee , " a good accountant , and die fifteen year ago . " , follow she usual instinct , break out with " hundred pound . Fifteen hundr pound in a black box , fifteen hundred pound lock up , fifteen hundred pound put away and hide ! " she worthy husband , set aside he bread and butter , immediately discharge the cushion at she , crush she against the side of she chair , and fall back in he own , overpowered . he appearance , after visit Smallweed with one of these admonition , be particularly impressive and not wholly prepossesse , firstly because the exertion generally twist he black skull - cap over one eye and give he a air of goblin rakishness , secondly because he mutter violent imprecation against , and thirdly because the contrast between those powerful expression and he powerless figure be suggestive of a baleful old malignant who would be very wicked if he could . all this , however , be so common in the Smallweed family circle that it produce no impression . the old gentleman be merely shaken and have he internal feather beat up , the cushion be restore to its usual place beside he , and the old lady
lady , perhaps with she cap adjust and perhaps not , be plan in she chair again , ready to be bowle down like a ninepin . some time elapse in the present instance before the old gentleman be sufficientely cool to resume he discourse , and even then he mix it up with several edifying expletive address to the unconscious partner of he bosom , who hold communication with nothing on earth but the trivet . as thus : " if you father , , have live longer , he might have be worth a deal of money -- you brimsto chatterer !-- but just as he be begin to build up the house that he have be make the foundation for , through many a year -- you jay of a magpie , jackdaw , and poll - parrot , what do you mean !-- he take ill and die of a low fever , always be a sparing and a spare man , full of business care -- I should like to throw a cat at you instead of a cushion , and I will too if you make such a confound fool of yourself ! -- and you mother , who be a prudent woman as dry as a chip , just dwindle away like touchwood after you and be bear -- you be a old pig . you be a brimstone pig . you be a head of swine ! " , not interested in what she have often hear , begin to collect in a basin various tributary streams of tea , from the bottom of cup and saucer and from the bottom of the tea - pot for the little charwoman 's evening meal . in like manner she get together , in the iron bread - basket , as many outside fragment and worn - down heel of loave as the rigid economy of the house have leave in existence . " but you father and I be partner , , " say the old gentleman , " and when I be go , you and will have all there be . it be rare for you both that you go out early in life -- to the flower business , and you to the law . you will not want to spend it . you will get you living without it , and put more to it . when I be go , will go back to the flower business and you will still stick to the law . " one might infer from 's appearance that she business rather lay with the thorn than the flower , but she have in she time be apprentice to the art and mystery of artificial flower - making . a close observer might perhaps detect both in she eye and she brother 's , when they venerable grandsire anticipate he be go , some little impatience to know when he may be go , and some resentful opinion that it be time he go . " now , if everybody have do , " say , complete she preparations , " I will have that girl in to she tea . she would never leave off if she take it by herself in the kitchen . " be accordingly introduce , and under a heavy fire of eye , sit down to she basin and a Druidical ruin of bread and butter . in the active superintendence of this young person , appear to attain a perfectly geological age and to date from the remotest period . she systematic manner of fly at she and pounce on she , with or without pretence , whether or no , be wonderful , evince a accomplishment in the art of girl - drive seldom reach by the oldest practitioner . " now , do not stare about you all the afternoon , " cry , shak she head and stamp she foot as she happen to catch the glance which have be previously sound the basin of tea , " but take you victual and get back to you work . " " yes , miss , " say . " do not say yes , " return , " for I know what you girl be . do it without say it , and then I may begin to believe you . " swallow a great gulp of tea in token of submission and so disperse the Druidical ruin that charge she not to gormandize , which " in you girl , " she observe , be disgusting . Charley might find some more difficulty in meet she view on the general subject of girl but for a knock at the door . " see who it be , and do not chew when you open it ! " cry . the object of she attention withdraw for the purpose , take that opportunity of jumble the remainder of the bread and butter together and launch two or three dirty tea-cup into the ebb - tide of the basin of tea as a hint that she consider the eating and drinking terminate . " now ! who be it , and what be want ? " say the snappish . it be one , it appear . without other announcement or ceremony , walk in . " Whew ! " say . " you be hot here . always a fire , eh ? well ! perhaps you do right to get used to one . " make the latter remark to himself as he nod to . " ! it be you ! " cry the old gentleman . " how de do ? how de do ? " " Middle , " reply , take a chair . " you granddaughter I have have the honour of see before ; my service to you , miss . " " this be my grandson
grandson , " say . " you ha ' not see he before . he be in the law and not much at home . " " my service to he , too ! he be like he sister . he be very like he sister . he be devilish like he sister , " say , lay a great and not altogether complimentary stress on he last adjective . " and how do the world use you , ? " grandfather Smallweed inquire , slowly rubb he leg . " pretty much as usual . like a football . " he be a swarthy brown man of fifty , well make , and good look , with crisp dark hair , bright eye , and a broad chest . he sinewy and powerful hand , as sunburnt as he face , have evidently be use to a pretty rough life . what be curious about he be that he sit forward on he chair as if he be , from long habit , allow space for some dress or accoutrement that he have altogether laid aside . he step too be measure and heavy and would go well with a weighty clash and jingle of spur . he be close - shave now , but he mouth be set as if he upper lip have be for year familiar with a great moustache ; and he manner of occasionally lay the open palm of he broad brown hand upon it be to the same effect . altogether one might guess to have be a trooper once upon a time . a special contrast make to the Smallweed family . be never yet billet upon a household more unlike he . it be a broadsword to a oyster - knife . he develop figure and they stunt form , he large manner fill any amount of room and they little narrow pinched way , he sound voice and they sharp spare tone , be in the strongest and the strangest opposition . as he sit in the middle of the grim parlour , lean a little forward , with he hand upon he thigh and he elbow square , he look as though , if he remain there long , he would absorb into himself the whole family and the whole four -roomed house , extra little back - kitchen and all . " do you rub you leg to rub life into th'ey ? " he ask of after look round the room . " why , it be partly a habit , , and -- yes -- it partly help the circulation , " he reply . " the cir - cu - la - tion ! " repeat , fold he arm upon he chest and seem to become two size larger . " not much of that , I should think . " " truly I be old , , " say . " but I can carry my year . I be older than , " nodd at he wife , " and see what she be ? you be a brimstone chatterer ! " with a sudden revival of he late hostility . " Unlucky old soul ! " say , turn he head in that direction . " do not scold the old lady . look at she here , with she poor cap half off she head and she poor hair all in a muddle . hold up , ma 'am . that be better . there we be ! think of you mother , , " say , come back to he seat from assist she , " if you wife can not enough . " " I suppose you be a excellent son , ? " the old man hint with a leer . the colour of 's face rather deepen as he reply , " why no . I be not . " " I be astonish at it . " " so be I . I ought to have be a good son , and I think I mean to have be one . but I be not . I be a thundering bad son , that be the long and the short of it , and never be a credit to anybody . " " surprise ! " cry the old man . " however , " resume , " the less say about it , the better now . come ! you know the agreement . always a pipe out of the two month ' interest ! ( Bosh ! it be all correct . you need not be afraid to order the pipe . here be the new bill , and here be the two month ' interest - money , and a devil - and - all of a scrape it be to get it together in my business . ) " sit , with he arm fold , consum the family and the parlour while be assist by to two black leathern case out of a locked bureau , in one of which he secure the document he have just receive , and from the other take another similar document which he hand to , who twist it up for a pipelight . as the old man inspect , through he glassis , every up - stroke and down - stroke of both document before he release they from they leathern prison , and as he count the money three time over and require to say every word she utter at least twice , and be as tremulously slow of speech and action as it be possible to be , this business be a long time in progress . when it be quite concluded , and not before , he disengage he ravenous eye and finger from it and answer 's last remark by say , " afraid to order the pipe ? we
we be not so mercenary as that , sir . , see directly to the pipe and the glass of cold brandy - and - water for . " the sportive twin , who have be look straight before they all this time except when they have be engross by the black leathern case , retire together , generally disdainful of the visitor , but leave he to the old man as two young cub might leave a traveller to the parental bear . " and there you sit , I suppose , all the day long , eh ? " say with fold arm . " just so , just so , " the old man nod . " and do not you occupy yourself at all ? " " I watch the fire -- and the boiling and the roasting -- " " when there be any , " say with great expression . " just so . when there be any . " " do not you read or get read to ? " the old man shake he head with sharp sly triumph . " no , no . we have never be reader in we family . it do not pay . stuff . Idleness . Fobably . no , no ! " " there be not much to choose between you two state , " say the visitor in a key too low for the old man 's dull hear as he look from he to the old woman and back again . " I say ! " in a louder voice . " I hear you . " " you will sell I up at last , I suppose , when I be a day in arrear . " " my dear friend ! " cry , stretch out both hand to embrace he . " never ! never , my dear friend ! but my friend in the city that I get to lend you the money -- he might ! " " oh ! you can not answer for he ? " say , finish the inquiry in he lower key with the word " you lie old rascal ! " " my dear friend , he be not to be depend on . I would not trust he . he will have he bond , my dear friend . " " doubt he , " say . appear with a tray , on which be the pipe , a small paper of tobacco , and the brandy - and - water , he ask she , " how do you come here ! you have not get the family face . " " I go out to work , sir , " return . the trooper ( if trooper he be or have be ) take she bonnet off , with a light touch for so strong a hand , and pat she on the head . " you give the house almost a wholesome look . it want 's a bit of youth as much as it want fresh air . " then he dismiss she , light he pipe , and drink to 's friend in the city -- the one solitary flight of that esteem old gentleman 's imagination . " so you think he might be hard upon I , eh ? " " I think he might -- I be afraid he would . I have know he do it , " say incautiously , " twenty time . " Incautiously , because he stricken better - half , who have be do over the fire for some time , be instantly arouse and jabber " twenty thousand pound , twenty twenty - pound note in a money - box , twenty guinea , twenty million twenty per cent , twenty -- " and be then cut short by the fly cushion , which the visitor , to whom this singular experiment appear to be a novelty , snatch from she face as it crush she in the usual manner . " you be a brimstone idiot . you be a scorpion -- a brimstone scorpion ! you be a swelter toad . you be a chatter clattering broomstick witch that ought to be burnt ! " gasp the old man , prostrate in he chair . " my dear friend , will you shake I up a little ? " , who have be look first at one of they and then at the other , as if he be dement , take he venerable acquaintance by the throat on receive this request , and drag he upright in he chair as easily as if he be a doll , appear in two mind whether or no to shake all future power of cushion out of he and shake he into he grave . Resist the temptation , but agitat he violently enough to make he head roll like a harlequin 's , he put he smartly down in he chair again and adjust he skull - cap with such a rub that the old man wink with both eye for a minute afterwards . " o ! " gasp . " that will do . thank you , my dear friend , that will do . oh , dear I , I be out of breath . of ! " and say it not without evident apprehension of he dear friend , who still stand over he loom larger than ever . the alarming presence , however , gradually subside into its chair and fall to smoke in long puffs , consol itself with the philosophical reflection , " the name of you friend in the city begin with a d , comrade , and you be about right respect the bond . " " do you speak , ? " inquire the old man . the trooper shake he head , and lean
lean forward with he right elbow on he right knee and he pipe support in that hand , while he other hand , rest on he left leg , square he leave elbow in a martial manner , continue to smoke . meanwhile he look at with grave attention and now and then fan the cloud of smoke away in order that he may see he the more clearly . " I take it , " he say , make just as much and as little change in he position as will enable he to reach the glass to he lip with a round , full action , " that I be the only man alive ( or dead either ) that get 's the value of a pipe out of you ? " " well , " return the old man , " it be true that I do not see company , , and that I do not treat . I can not afford to it . but as you , in you pleasant way , make you pipe a condition --" " why , it be not for the value of it ; that be no great thing . it be a fancy to get it out of you . to have something in for my money . " " ! you be prudent , prudent , sir ! " cry , rub he leg . " very . I always be . " puff . " it be a sure sign of my prudence that I ever find the way here . " puff . " also , that I be what I be . " puff . " I be well know to be prudent , " say , composedly smoke . " I rise in life that way . " " do not he down - hear , sir . you may rise yet . " laugh and drink . " ' not you no relation , now , " ask Smallweed with a twinkle in he eye , " who would pay off this little principal or who would lend you a good name or two that I could persuade my friend in the city to make you a further advance upon ? two good name would be sufficient for my friend in the city . ' not you no such relation , ? " , still composedly smoke , reply , " if I have , I should not trouble they . I have be trouble enough to my belonging in my day . it may be a very good sort of penitence in a vagabond , who have waste the best time of he life , to go back then to decent people that he never be a credit to and live upon they , but it be not my sort . the best kind of amend then for have away be to keep away , in my opinion . " " but natural affection , , " hint . " for two good name , hey ? " say , shak he head and still composedly smoke . " no . that be not my sort either . " have be gradually slide down in he chair since he last adjustment and be now a bundle of clothes with a voice in it call for . that houri , appear , shake he up in the usual manner and be charge by the old gentleman to remain near he . for he seem chary of put he visitor to the trouble of repea he late attention . " ! " he observe when he be in trim again . " if you could have trace out the , , it would have be the making of you . if when you first come here , in consequence of we advertisement in the newspaper -- when I say ' we ,' I be allud to the advertisement of my friend in the city , and one or two other who embark they capital in the same way , and be so friendly towards I as sometimes to give I a lift with my little pittance -- if at that time you could have help we , , it would have be the making of you . " " I be willing enough to be 's make , ' as you call it , " say , smoke not quite so placidly as before , for since the entrance of he have be in some measure disturb by a fascination , not of the admiring kind , which oblige he to look at she as she stand by she grandfather 's chair , " but on the whole , I be glad I be not now . " " why , ? in the name of -- of brimstone , why ? " say Smallweed with a plain appearance of exasperation . ( apparently suggest by he eye light on in she slumber . ) " for two reason , comrade . " " and what two reason , ? in the name of the -- " " of we friend in the city ? " suggest , composedly drink . " aye , if you like . what two reason ? " " in the first place , " return , but still look at as if she be so old and so like she grandfather it be indifferent which of the two he address , " you gentlemen take I in . you advertise that ( , if you hold to the say ' once a captain , always a captain ' ) be to hear of something to he advantage . " " well ? " return the old man shrilly and sharply . " well ! " say , smoke on . " it would not have be much to he advantage to have be clap into prison by
by the whole bill and judgment trade of . " " how do you know that ? some of he rich relation might have pay he debt or compound for th'ey . besides , he have take in . he owed we immense sum all round . I would sooner have strangle he than have no return . if I sit here think of he , " snarl the old man , hold up he impotent ten finger , " I want to strangle he now . " and in a sudden access of fury , he throw the cushion at the unoffending , but it pass harmlessly on one side of she chair . " I do not need to be tell , " return the trooper , take he pipe from he lip for a moment and carry he eye back from follow the progress of the cushion to the pipe - bowl which be burn low , " that he carry on heavily and go to ruin . I have be at he right hand many a day when he be charge upon ruin full - gallop . I be with he when he be sick and well , rich and poor . I lay this hand upon he after he have run through everything and break down everything beneath he -- when he hold a pistol to he head . " " I wish he have let it off , " say the benevolent old man , " and blow he head into as many piece as he owe pound ! " " that would have be a smash indeed , " return the trooper coolly ; " any way , he have be young , hopeful , and handsome in the day go by , and I be glad I never find he , when he be neither , to lead to a result so much to he advantage . that be reason number one . " " I hope number two 's as good ? " snarl the old man . " why , no . it be more of a selfish reason . if I have find he , I must have go to the other world to look . he be there . " " how do you know he be there ? " " he be not here . " " how do you know he be not here ? " " do not lose you temper as well as you money , " say , calmly knock the ash out of he pipe . " he be drown long before . I be convince of it . he go over a ship 's side . whether intentionally or accidentally , I do not know . perhaps you friend in the city do . do you know what that tune be , ? " he add after break off to whistle one , accompany on the table with the empty pipe . " ! " reply the old man . " no . we never have tune here . " " that be the dead in . they bury soldier to it , so it be the natural end of the subject . now , if you pretty granddaughter -- excuse I , miss -- will condescmend to take care of this pipe for two month , we shall save the cost of one next time . good evening , ! " " my dear friend ! " the old man give he both he hand . " so you think you friend in the city will be hard upon I if I fall in a payment ? " say the trooper , look down upon he like a giant . " my dear friend , I be afraid he will , " return the old man , look up at he like a pygmy . laugh , and with a glance at and a parte salutation to the scornful , stride out of the parlour , clash imaginary sabre and other metallic appurtenance as he go . " you be a damned rogue , " say the old gentleman , make a hideous grimace at the door as he shut it . " but I will lime you , you dog , I will lime you ! " after this amiable remark , he spirit soars into those enchant region of reflection which its education and pursuit have open to it , and again he and . Smallweed while away the rosy hour , two unrelieved sentinel forgote as aforesay by the . while the twain be faithful to they post , stride through the street with a massive kind of swagger and a grave - enough face . it be eight o'clock now , and the day be fast draw in . he stop hard by and read a playbill , decide to go to 's . be there , be much delighted with the horse and the feat of strength ; look at the weapon with a critical eye ; disapprove of the combat as give evidence of unskilful swordsmanship ; but be touch home by the sentiment . in the last scene , when the emperor of get up into a cart and condescends to bless the united lover by hovering over they with the , he eyelash be moisten with emotion . the theatre over , come across the water again and make he way to that curiious region lie about the and which be a centre of attraction to indifferent foreign hotel and indifferent foreigner , racket - court , fighting - man , swordsmen , footguard , old china , gaming - house , exhibition , and a large medley of shabbiness and shrink out of sight . Penetrat to the heart of this region , he arrive by a court and a long whitewashed passage at a great brick building compose of bare wall
wall , floor , roof - rafter , and skylight , on the front of which , if it can be say to have any front , be paint 's , . 's , & c. , he go ; and in it there be gaslight ( partly turn off now ) , and two whitened target for rifle - shoot , and archery accommodation , and fence appliance , and all necessary for the british art of boxing . none of these sport or exercise be pursue in 's to - night , which be so devoid of company that a little grotesque man with a large head have it all to himself and lie asleep upon the floor . the little man be dress something like a gunsmith , in a green - baize apron and cap ; and he face and hand be dirty with gunpowder and begrim with the loading of gun . as he lie in the light before a glaring white target , the black upon he shine again . not far off be the strong , rough , primitive table with a vice upon it at which he have be work . he be a little man with a face all crush together , who appear , from a certain blue and speckle appearance that one of he cheek present , to have be blow up , in the way of business , at some odd time or time . " ! " say the trooper in a quiet voice . " all right ! " cry , scrambl to he foot . " anything be do ? " " flat as ever so much swipe , " say . " five dozen rifle and a dozen pistol . as to aim ! " give a howl at the recollection . " shut up shop , ! " as move about to execute this order , it appear that he be lame , though able to move very quickly . on the speckled side of he face he have no eyebrow , and on the other side he have a bushy black one , which want of uniformity give he a very singular and rather sinister appearance . everything seem to have happene to he hand that could possibly take place consistently with the retention of all the finger , for they be notche , and seam , and crumple all over . he appear to be very strong and lift heavy bench about as if he have no idea what weight be . he have a curiious way of limping round the gallery with he shoulder against the wall and tacke off at object he want to lay hold of instead of go straight to they , which have leave a smear all round the four wall , conventionally call " 's . " this custodian of 's in 's absence conclude he proceedings , when he have lock the great door and turn out all the light but one , which he leave to glimmer , by drag out from a wooden cabin in a corner two mattress and bedding . these be draw to opposite end of the gallery , the trooper make he own bed and make he . " ! " say the master , walk towards he without he coat and waistcoat , and look more soldierly than ever in he brace . " you be find in a doorway , be not you ? " " Gutter , " say . " tumble over I . " " the vagabondizing come natural to you from the beginning . " " as nat'ral as possible , " say . " good night ! " " good night , guv'ner . " can not even go straight to bed , but find it necessary to shoulder round two side of the gallery and then tack off at he mattress . the trooper , after take a turn or two in the rifle - distance and look up at the moon now shine through the skylight , strides to he own mattress by a shorter route and go to be too . look pretty cool in 's , though the evening be hot , for both 's window be wide open , and the room be lofy , gusty , and gloomy . these may not be desirable characteristic when come with fog and sleet or with ice and snow , but they have they merit in the sultry long vacation weather . they enable , though it have cheek like peach , and knee like bunch of blossom , and rosy swelling for calve to its leg and muscle to its arm , to look tolerably cool to - night . plenty of dust come in at 's window , and plenty more have generate among he furniture and papers . it lie thick everywhere . when a breeze from the country that have lose its way take fright and make a blind hurry to rush out again , it fling as much dust in the eyes of as the law -- or , one of its trustiest representative -- may scatter , on occasion , in the eyes of the laity . in he lowering magazine of dust , the universal article into which he papers and himself , and all he client , and all thing of earth , animate and inanimate , be resolve , sit at one of the open window enjoy a bottle of old port . through a hard - graine man , close , dry , and silent , he can enjoy old wine with the best . he have a priceless bin of port in some artful cellar under the field , which be one of he many secret . when he dine alone in chamber , as he have dine to - day , and have he bit of fish
fish and he steak or chicken bring in from the coffee - house , he descend with a candle to the echoing region below the desert mansion , and herald by a remote reverberation of thundering door , come gravely back encircle by a earthy atmosphere and carry a bottle from which he pour a radiant nectar , two score and ten year old , that blush in the glass to find itself so famous and fill the whole room with the fragrance of southern grape . , sit in the twilight by the open window , enjoy he wine . as if it whisper to he of its fifty year of silence and seclusion , it shut he up the closer . more impenetrable than ever , he sit , and drink , and mellow as it be in secrecy , ponder at that twilight hour on all the mystery he know , associate with darkening wood in the country , and vast blank shut - up house in town , and perhaps spare a thought or two for himself , and he family history , and he money , and he will -- all a mystery to every one -- and that one bachelor friend of he , a man of the same mould and a lawyer too , who liv the same kind of life until he be seventy - five year old , and then suddenly conceive ( as it be suppose ) a impression that it be too monotonous , give he gold watch to he hair - dresser one summer evening and walk leisurely home to the Temple and hang himself . but be not alone to - night to ponder at he usual length . seat at the same table , though with he chair modestly and uncomfortably draw a little way from it , sit a bald , mild , shine man who cough respectfully behind he hand when the lawyer bid he fill he glass . " now , , " say , " to go over this odd story again . " " if you please , sir . " " you tell I when you be so good as to step round here last night -- " " for which I must ask you to excuse I if it be a liberty , sir ; but I remember that you have take a sort of a interest in that person , and I think it possible that you might-- just -- wish -- to -- " be not the man to help he to any conclusion or to admit anything as to any possibility concern himself . so trail off into say , with a awkward cough , " I must ask you to excuse the liberty , sir , I be sure . " " not at all , " say . " you tell I , , that you put on you hat and come round without mention you intention to you wife . that be prudent I think , because it be not a matter of such importance that it require to be mention . " " well , sir , " return , " you see , my little woman be -- not to put too fine a point upon it -- inquisitive . she be inquisitive . poor little thing , she be liable to spasm , and it be good for she to have she mind employ . in consequence of which she employ it -- I should say upon every individual thing she can lay hold of , whether it concern she or not --especially not . my little woman have a very active mind , sir . " drink and murmur with a admir cough behind he hand , " dear I , very fine wine indeed ! " " therefore you keep you visit to yourself last night ? " say . " and to - night too ? " " yes , sir , and to - night , too . my little woman be at present in -- not to put too fine a point on it -- in a pious state , or in what she consider such , and attend the evening Exertions ( which be the name they go by ) of a reverend party of the name of . he have a great deal of eloquence at he command , undoubtedly , but I be not quite favourable to he style myself . that be neither here nor there . my little woman be engage in that way make it easier for I to step round in a quiet manner . " assent . " fill you glass , . " " thank you , sir , I be sure , " return the stationer with he cough of deference . " this be wonderfully fine wine , sir ! " " it be a rare wine now , " say . " it be fifty year old . " " be it indeed , sir ? but I be not surprised to hear it , I be sure . it might be -- any age almost . " after render this general tribute to the port , in he modesty cough a apology behind he hand for drink anything so precious . " will you run over , once again , what the boy say ? " ask , put he hand into the pocket of he rusty smallclothes and lean quietly back in he chair . " with pleasure , sir . " then , with fidelity , though with some prolixity , the law - stationer repeat 's statement make to the assemble guest at he house . on come to the end of he narrative , he give a great start and break off with , " dear I , sir , I be not aware there be any other gentleman
gentleman present ! " be dismay to see , stand with a attentive face between himself and the lawyer at a little distance from the table , a person with a hat and stick in he hand who be not there when he himself come in and have not since enter by the door or by either of the window . there be a press in the room , but it be hinge have not creak , nor have a step be audible upon the floor . yet this third person stand there with he attentive face , and he hat and stick in he hand , and he hand behind he , a composed and quiet listener . he be a stoutly built , steady - look , sharp - eyed man in black , of about the middle - age . except that he look at as if he be go to take he portrait , there be nothing remarkable about he at first sight but he ghostly manner of appear . " do not mind this gentleman , " say in he quiet way . " this be only . " " oh , indeed , sir ? " return the stationer , express by a cough that he be quite in the dark as to who may be . " I want he to hear this story , " say the lawyer , " because I have half a mind ( for a reason ) to know more of it , and he be very intelligent in such thing . what do you say to this , ? " " it be very plain , sir . since we people have move this boy on , and he be not to be find on he old lay , if do not object to go down with I to - all - 's and point he out , we can have he here in less than a couple of hour ' time . I can do it without , of course , but this be the shortest way . " " be a detective officer , , " say the lawyer in explanation . " be he indeed , sy ? " say with a strong tendency in he clump of hair to stand on end . " and if you have no real objection to accompany to the place in question , " pursue the lawyer , " I shall feel obliged to you if you will do so . " in a moment 's hesitation on the part of , dip down to the bottom of he mind . " do not you be afraid of hurt the boy , " he say . " you will not do that . it be all right as far as the boy 's concerned . we shall only bring he here to ask he a question or so I want to put to he , and he will be pay for he trouble and send away again . it will be a good job for he . I promise you , as a man , that you shall see the boy send away all right . do not you be afraid of hurt he ; you a not go to do that . " " very well , ! " cry cheerfully . and reassure , " Since that be the case -- " " yes ! and lookee here , , " resume bucket , take he aside by the arm , tap he familiarly on the breast , and speak in a confidential tone . " you be a man of the world , you know , and a man of business , and a man of sense . that be what you be . " " I be sure I be much oblige to you for you good opinion , " return the stationer with he cough of modesty , " but -- " " that be what you be , you know , " say . " now , it can not necessary to say to a man like you , engage in you business , which be a business of trust and require a person to be wide awake and have he sense about he and he head screw on tight ( I have a uncle in you business once ) -- it a not necessary to say to a man like you that it be the best and wisest way to keep little matter like this quiet . do not you see ? quiet ! " " certainly , certainly , " return the other . " I do not mind tell you , " say with a engage appearance of frankness , " that as far as I can understand it , there seem to be a doubt whether this dead person be not entitle to a little property , and whether this female have not be up to some game respect that property , do not you see ? " " oh ! " say , but not appear to see quite distinctly . " now , what you want , " pursue , again tap on the breast in a comfortable and soothing manner , " be that every person should have they rights accord to justice . that be what you want . " " to be sure , " return with a nod . " on account of which , and at the same time to oblige a -- do you call it , in you business , customer or client ? I forget how my uncle use to call it . " " why , I generally say customer myself , " reply . " you be right ! " return , shak hand with he quite affectionately . " -- on account of which , and at the same time to oblige a real good
good customer , you mean to go down with I , in confidence , to -all - 's and to keep the whole thing quiet ever afterwards and never mention it to any one . that be about you intentions , if I understand you ? " " you be right , sir . you be right , " say . " then here be you hat , " return he new friend , quite as intimate with it as if he have make it ; " and if you be ready , I be . " they leave , without a ruffle on the surface of he unfathomable depth , drink he old wine , and go down into the street . " you do not happen to know a very good sort of person of the name of , do you ? " say in friendly converse as they descmend the stair . " no , " say , consider , " I do not know anybody of that name . why ? " " nothing particular , " say ; " only have allow he temper to get a little the better of he and have be threaten some respectable people , he be keep out of the way of a warrant I have get against he -- which it be a pity that a man of sense should do . " as they walk along , observe , as a novelty , that however quick they pace may be , he companion still seem in some undefinable manner to lurk and lounge ; also , that whenever he be go to turn to the right or leave , he pretend to have a fix purpose in he mind of go straight ahead , and wheel off , sharply , at the very last moment . now and then , when they pass a police - constable on he beat , notice that both the constable and he guide fall into a deep abstraction as they come towards each other , and appear entirely to overlook each other , and to gaze into space . in a few instance , , come behind some under - size young man with a shining hat on , and he sleek hair twist into one flat curl on each side of he head , almost without glance at he touch he with he stick , upon which the young man , look round , instantly evaporate . for the most part notice thing in general , with a face as unchanging as the great mourning ring on he little finger or the brooch , compose of not much diamond and a good deal of setting , which he wear in he shirt . when they come at last to - all - 's , stop for a moment at the corner and take a lighted bull 's - eye from the constable on duty there , who then accompany he with he own particular bull 's - eye at he waist . between he two conductor , pass along the middle of a villainous street , undrained , unventilated , deep in black mud and corrupt water -- though the roads be dry elsewhere -- and reek with such smell and sight that he , who have live in all he life , can scarce believe he sense . Branche from this street and it be heap of ruin be other streets and court so infamous that sicken in body and mind and feel as if he be go every moment deeper down into the infernal gulf . " draw off a bit here , , " say as a kind of shabby palanquin be borne towards they , surround by a noisy crowd . " here be the fever come up the street ! " as the unseen wretch go by , the crowd , leave that object of attraction , hover round the three visitor like a dream of horrible face and fades away up alley and into ruin and behind wall , and with occasional cry and shrill whistle of warning , thenceforth flit about they until they leave the place . " be those the fever - house , ? " coolly ask as he turn he bull 's - eye on a line of stinking ruin . reply that " all they be , " and further that in all , for month and month , the people " have be down by dozen " and have be carry out dead and die " like sheep with the rot . " obserive to as they go on again that he look a little poorly , answer that he feel as if he could not breathe the dreadful air . there be inquiry make at various house for a boy name . as few people be know in - all - 's by any sign , there be much reference to Snagsby whether he mean carrots , or the , or , or yong , or , or , or the . describe over and over again . there be conflict opinion respect the original of he picture . some think it must be carrots , some say the . the Colonel be produce , but be not at all near the thing . whenever and he conductor be stationary , the crowd flow round , and from its squalid depth obsequious advice heafe up to . whenever they move , and the angry bull 's - eye glare , it fade away and flit about they up the alley , and in the ruin , and behind the wall , as before . at last there be a lair find out where Toughy , or the tough subject , lay he down at night ; and it be think that the tough subject may be . comparison of note between and the proprietress of the house
house -- a drunken face tie up in a black bundle , and flar out of a heap of rag on the floor of a dog - hutch which be she private apartment -- lead to the establishment of this conclusion . have go to the doctor 's to get a bottle of stuff for a sick woman but will be here anon . " and who have we get here to - night ? " say , open another door and glar in with he bull 's - eye . " two drunken man , eh ? and two woman ? the man be sound enough , " turn back each sleeper 's arm from he face to look at he . " be these you good man , my dear ? " " yes , sir , " return one of the woman . " they be we husband . " " Brickmaker , eh ? " " yes , sir . " " what be you do here ? you do not belong to . " " no , sir . we belong to . " " whereabouts in ? " " . " " come up on the tramp ? " " we walk up yesterday . there be no work down with we at present , but we have do no good by come here , and shall do none , I expect . " " that be not the way to do much good , " say , turn he head in the direction of the unconscious figure on the ground . " it a not indeed , " reply the woman with a sigh . " and I know it full well . " the room , though two or three foot higher than the door , be so low that the head of the tallest of the visitor would touch the blacken ceiling if he stand upright . it be offensive to every sense ; even the gross candle burn pale and sickly in the pollute air . there be a couple of bench and a higher bench by way of table . the man lie asleep where they stumble down , but the woman sit by the candle . lie in the arm of the woman who have speak be a very young child . " why , what age do you call that little creature ? " say . " it look as if it be bear yesterday . " he be not at all rough about it ; and as he turn he light gently on the infant , be strangely remind of another infant , encircle with light , that he have see in picture . " he be not three week old yet , sir , " say the woman . " be he you child ? " " mine . " the other woman , who be bend over it when they come in , stoop down again and kiss it as it lie asleep . " you seem as fond of it as if you be the mother yourself , " say . " I be the mother of one like it , master , and it die . " " ah , , ! " say the other woman to she . " better so . much better to think of dead than alive , ! much better ! " " why , you can not such a unnatural woman , I hope , " return sternly , " as to wish you own child dead ? " " know you be right , master , " she return . " I be not . I would stand between it and death with my own life if I could , as true as any pretty lady . " " then do not talk in that wrong manner , " say , mollify again . " why do you do it ? " " it be brotch into my head , master , " return the woman , she eye fill with tear , " when I look down at the child lie so . if it be never to wake no more , you would think I mad , I should take on so . I know that very well . I be with when she lose hers -- war not I , ?-- and I know how she grieve . but look around you at this place . look at they , " glance at the sleeper on the ground . " look at the boy you be wait for , who be go out to do I a good turn . think of the child that you business lay with often and often , and that you see grow up ! " " well , well , " say , " you train he respectable , and he will be a comfort to you , and look after you in you old age , you know . " " I mean to try hard , " she answer , wip she eye . " but I have be a - thinking , be over -tired to - night and not well with the ague , of all the many thing that will come in he way . my master will be against it , and he will be beat , and see I beat , and make to fear he home , and perhaps to stray wild . if I work for he ever so much , and ever so hard , there be no one to help I ; and if he should be turn bad ' spite of all I could do , and the time should come when I should sit by he in he sleep , make hard and change , a n't it likely I should think of he as he lie in my lap now and wish
wish he have die as 's child di ! " " there , there ! " say . " , you be tired and ill . let I take he . " in do so , she displace the mother 's dress , but quickly readjust it over the wounded and bruise bosom where the baby have be lie . " it be my dead child , " say , walk up and down as she nurse , " that make I love this child so dear , and it be my dead child that make she love it so dear too , as even to think of its be take away from she now . while she think that , I think what fortune would I give to have my darling back . but we mean the same thing , if we know how to say it , we two mother do in we poor heart ! " as blow he nose and cough he cough of sympathy , a step be hear without . throw he light into the doorway and say to , " now , what do you say to Toughy ? will he do ? " " that be , " say . stand amaze in the disk of light , like a rag figure in a magic - lantern , trembl to think that he have offend against the law in not have move on far enough . , however , give he the consolatory assurance , " it be only a job you will be pay for , , " he recover ; and on be take outside by for a little private confabulation , tell he tale satisfactorily , though out of breath . " I have square it with the lad , " say , return , " and it be all right . now , , we be ready for you . " first , have to complete he errand of good nature by hand over the physic he have be to get , which he deliver with the laconic verbal direction that " it be to be all take d'rectly . " secondly , have to lay upon the table half a crown , he usual panacea for a immense variety of affliction . thirdly , have to take by the arm a little above the elbow and walk he on before he , without which observance neither the tough subject nor any other subject could be professionally conduct to 's . these arrangement complete , they give the woman good night and come out once more into black and foul Tom -all - 's . by the noisome way through which they descend into that pit , they gradually emerge from it , the crowd flitt , and whistling , and skulk about they until they come to the verge , where restoration of the bull 's - eye be make to . here the crowd , like a concourse of imprison demon , turn back , yell , and be see no more . through the clearer and fresher streets , never so clear and fresh to 's mind as now , they walk and ride until they come to 's gate . as they ascend the dim stair ( 's chamber be on the first floor ) , mention that he have the key of the outer door in he pocket and that there be no need to ring . for a man so expert in most thing of that kind , take time to open the door and make some noise too . it may be that he sound a note of preparation . Howbein , they come at last into the hall , where a lamp be burn , and so into 's usual room -- the room where he drank he old wine to - night . he be not there , but he two old - fashioned candlestick be , and the room be tolerably light . , still have he professional hold of and appear to to possess a unlimited number of eye , make a little way into this room , when start and stop . " what be the matter ? " say in a whisper . " there she be ! " cry . " who ! " " the lady ! " a female figure , closely veil , stand in the middle of the room , where the light fall upon it . it be quite still and silent . the front of the figure be towards they , but it take no notice of they entrance and remain like a statue . " now , tell I , " say aloud , " how you know that to be the lady . " " I know the wale , " reply , star , " and the bonnet , and the gownd . " " be quite sure of what you say , tough , " return , narrowly observant of he . " look again . " " I be a - look as hard as ever I can look , " say with start eye , " and that there be the wale , the bonnet , and the gownd . " " what about those ring you tell I of ? " ask . " a - sparkl all over here , " say , rub the finger of he left hand on the knuckle of he right without take he eye from the figure . the figure remove the right - hand glove and show the hand . " now , what do you say to that ? " ask . shake he head . " not ring a bit like they . not a hand like that . " " what be you talk of ? " say , evidently pleased though , and well pleas too . " be a
a deal whiter , a deal delicater , and a deal smaller , " return . " why , you will tell I I be my own mother next , " say . " do you recollect the lady 's voice ? " " I think I do , " say . the figure speak . " be it at all like this ? I will speak as long as you like if you be not sure . be it this voice , or at all like this voice ? " look aghast at . " not a bit ! " " then , what , " retort that worthy , point to the figure , " do you say it be the lady for ? " " cos , " say with a perplexed stare but without be at all shaken in he certainty , " cos that there be the wale , the bonnet , and the gownd . it be she and it can not she . it a not she hand , nor yet she ring , nor yet she woice . but that there be the wale , the bonnet , and the gownd , and they be wear the same way wot she wear th'ey , and it be she height wot she wos , and she hagive I a sov'ring and hook it . " " well ! " say slightly , " we have not get much good out of you . but , however , here be five shilling for you . take care how you spend it , and do not get yourself into trouble . " stealthily tell the coin from one hand into the other like counter -- which be a way he have , he principal use of they be in these game of skill -- and then put they , in a little pile , into the boy 's hand and take he out to the door , leave , not by any means comfortable under these mysterious circumstance , alone with the veiled figure . but on 's come into the room , the veil be raise and a sufficiently good - look be reveal , though she expression be something of the intensest . " thank you , , " say with he usual equanimity . " I will give you no further trouble about this little wager . " " you will do I the kindness to remember , sir , that I be not at present place ? " say mademoiselle . " certainly , certainly ! " " and to confer upon I the favour of you distinguished recommendation ? " " by all means , . " " a word from be so powerful . " " it shall not be want , mademoiselle . " " receive the assurance of my devoted gratitude , dear sir . " " good night . " Mademoiselle go out with a air of native gentility ; and , to whom it be , on a emergency , as natural to be groom of the ceremony as it be to be anything else , show she downstair , not without gallantry . " well , ? " quoth on he return . " it be all square , you see , as I square it myself , sir . there a not a doubt that it be the other one with this one 's dress on . the boy be exact respecte colour and everything . , I promise you as a man that he should be send away all right . do not say it be not do ! " " you have keep you word , sir , " return the stationer ; " and if I can be of no further use , Tulkinghorn , I think , as my little woman will be get anxious -- " " thank you , Snagsby , no further use , " say . " I be quite indebt to you for the trouble you have take already . " " not at all , sir . I wish you good night . " " you see , , " say , accompany he to the door and shake hand with he over and over again , " what I like in you be that you be a man it be of no use pump ; that be what you be . when you know you have do a right thing , you put it away , and it be do with and gone , and there be a end of it . that be what you do . " " that be certainly what I endeaavor to do , sir , " return . " no , you do not do yourself justice . it a not what you endeaavor to do , " say , shak hand with he and bless he in the tenderest manner , " it be what you do . that be what I estimate in a man in you way of business . " make a suitable response and go homeward so confused by the event of the evening that he be doubtful of he be awake and out -- doubtful of the reality of the street through which he go -- doubtful of the reality of the moon that shine above he . he be presently reassure on these subject by the unchallengeable reality of Snagsby , sit up with she head in a perfect beehive of curl -paper and night - cap , who have dispatch to the police - station with official intelligence of she husband 's be make away with , and who within the last two hour have pass through every stage of swoon with the greatest decorum . but as the little woman feelingly say , many thanks she get for it ! 's we come home from 's after six
six pleasant week . we be often in the park and in the woods and seldom pass the lodge where we have take shelter without look in to speak to the keeper 's wife ; but we see no more of , except at church on . there be company at ; and although several beautiful face surround she , she face retain the same influence on I as at first . I do not quite know even now whether it be painful or pleasurable , whether it draw I towards she or make I shrink from she . I think I admire she with a kind of fear , and I know that in she presence my thought always wander back , as they have do at first , to that old time of my life . I have a fancy , on more than one of these , that what this lady so curiously be to I , I be to she -- I mean that I disturb she thought as she influence mine , though in some different way . but when I steal a glance at she and see she so compose and distant and unapproachable , I feel this to be a foolish weakness . indeed , I feel the whole state of my mind in reference to she to be weak and unreasonable , and I remonstrate with myself about it as much as I could . one incident that occur before we quit 's house , I have better mention in this place . I be walk in the garden with and when I be tell that some one wish to see I . go into the breakfast - room where this person be wait , I find it to be the french maid who have cast off she shoe and walk through the wet grass on the day when it thunder and lighten . " Mademoiselle , " she begin , look fixedly at I with she too - eager eye , though otherwise present a agreeable appearance and speak neither with boldness nor servility , " I have take a great liberty in come here , but you know how to excuse it , be so amiable , mademoiselle . " " no excuse be necessary , " I return , " if you wish to speak to I . " " that be my desire , mademoiselle . a thousand thanks for the permission . I have you leave to speak . be it not ? " she say in a quick , natural way . " certainly , " say I . " Mademoiselle , you be so amiable ! listen then , if you please . I have leave my . we could not agree . my Lady be so high , so very high . ! , you be right ! " she quickness anticipate what I might have say presently but as yet have only thought . " it be not for I to come here to complain off my . but I say she be so high , so very high . I will not say a word more . all the world know that . " " go on , if you please , " say I . " Assuredly ; mademoiselle , I be thankful for you politeness . , I have a inexpressible desire to find service with a young lady who be good , accomplished , beautiful . you be good , accomplish , and beautiful as a angel . ah , could I have the honour of be you domestic ! " " I be sorry -- " I begin . " do not dismiss I so soon , mademoiselle ! " she say with a involuntary contraction of she fine black eyebrow . " let I hope a moment ! , I know this service would be more retired than that which I have quit . well ! I wish that . I know this service would be less distinguished than that which I have quit . well ! I wish that , I know that I should win less , as to wage here . good . I be content . " " I assure you , " say I , quite embarrasse by the mere idea of have such a attendant , " that I keep no maid -- " " ah , mademoiselle , but why not ? why not , when you can have one so devoted to you ! who would be enchant to serve you ; who would be so true , so zealous , and so faithful every day ! , I wish with all my heart to serve you . do not speak of money at present . take I as I be . for nothing ! " she be so singularly earnest that I draw back , almost afraid of she . without appear to notice it , in she ardour she still press herself upon I , speak in a rapid subdue voice , though always with a certain grace and propriety . " Mademoiselle , I come from the country where we be quick and where we like and dislike very strong . my Lady be too high for I ; I be too high for she . it be done -- past -- finish ! receive I as you domestic , and I will serve you well . I will do more for you than you figure to yourself now . ! , I will -- no matter , I will do my utmost possible in all thing . if you accept my service , you will not repent it . , you will not repent it , and I will serve you well . you do not know how well ! " there be a lowering energy in she face as she stand look at I while
while I explain the impossibility of my engage she ( without think it necessary to say how very little I desire to do so ) , which seem to bring visibly before I some woman from the street of in the reign of terror . she hear I out without interruption and then say with she pretty accent and in she mildest voice , " hey , mademoiselle , I have receive my answer ! I be sorry of it . but I must go elsewhere and seek what I have not find here . will you graciously let I kiss you hand ? " she look at I more intently as she take it , and seem to take note , with she momentary touch , of every vein in it . " I fear I surprise you , mademoiselle , on the day of the storm ? " she say with a parting curtsy . I confess that she have surprise we all . " I take a oath , mademoiselle , " she say , smile , " and I want to stamp it on my mind so that I might keep it faithfully . and I will ! , ! " so end we conference , which I be very glad to bring to a close . I suppose she go away from the village , for I see she no more ; and nothing else occur to disturb we tranquil summer pleasur until six week be out and we return home as I begin just now by say . at that time , and for a good many week after that time , be constant in he visit . besides come every or and remain with we until morning , he sometimes ride out on horseback unexpectedly and pass the evening with we and ride back again early next day . he be as vivacious as ever and tell we he be very industrious , but I be not easy in my mind about he . it appear to I that he industry be all misdirect . I could not find that it lead to anything but the formation of delusive hope in connexion with the suit already the pernicious cause of so much sorrow and ruin . he have get at the core of that mystery now , he tell we , and nothing could be plainer than that the will under which he and be to take I do not know how many thousand of pound must be finally establish if there be any sense or justice in the court of -- but oh , what a great if that sound in my ear -- and that this happy conclusion could not be much longer delay . he prove this to himself by all the weary argument on that side he have read , and every one of they sink he deeper in the infatuation . he have even begin to haunt the court . he tell we how he see there daily , how they talk together , and how he do she little kindness , and how , while he laugh at she , he pitie she from he heart . but he never think -- never , my poor , dear , sanguine , capable of so much happiness then , and with such better thing before he -- what a fatal link be rivet between he fresh youth and she fad age , between he free hope and she cage bird , and she hungry garret , and she wander mind . love he too well to mistrust he much in anything he say or do , and my guardian , though he frequently complain of the east wind and read more than usual in the growlery , preserve a strict silence on the subject . so I think one day when I go to to meet , at she solicitation , I would ask to be in wait for I at the coach - office , that we might have a little talk together . I find he there when I arrive , and we walk away arm in arm . " well , , " say I as soon as I could begin to be grave with he , " be you begin to feel more settled now ? " " oh , yes , my dear ! " return . " I be all right enough . " " but settle ? " say I . " how do you mean , settle ? " return with he gay laugh . " settle in the law , " say I . " oh , aye , " reply , " I be all right enough . " " you say that before , my dear . " " and you do not think it be a answer , eh ? well ! perhaps it be not . settle ? you mean , do I feel as if I be settle down ? " " yes . " " why , no , I can not say I be settle down , " say , strongly emphasize " down , " as if that express the difficulty , " because one can not settle down while this business remain in such a unsettled state . when I say this business , of course I mean the -- forbidden subject . " " do you think it will ever be in a settled state ? " say I . " not the least doubt of it , " answer . we walk a little way without speak , and presently address I in he frankest and most feeling manner , thus : " my dear Esther , I understand you , and I wish to heave I be a more constant sort of fellow . I do not mean constant to , for I love she dearly -- better
better and better every day -- but constant to myself . ( somehow , I mean something that I can not very well express , but you will make it out . ) if I be a more constant sort of fellow , I should have hold on either to or to and like grim death , and should have begin to be steady and systematic by this time , and should not be in debt , and -- " " be you in debt , ? " " yes , " say , " I be a little so , my dear . also , I have take rather too much to billiards and that sort of thing . now the murder 's out ; you despise I , , do not you ? " " you know I do not , " say I . " you be kinder to I than I often be to myself , " he return . " my dear Esther , I be a very unfortunate dog not to be more settled , but how can I be more settled ? if you live in a unfinished house , you could not settle down in it ; if you be condemn to leave everything you undertake unfinished , you would find it hard to apply yourself to anything ; and yet that be my unhappy case . I be bear into this unfinished contention with all its chance and change , and it begin to unsettle I before I quite know the difference between a suit at law and a suit of clothes ; and it have go on unsettling I ever since ; and here I be now , conscious sometimes that I be but a worthless fellow to love my confiding cousin . " we be in a solitary place , and he put he hand before he eye and sob as he say the word . " oh , ! " say I . " do not be so move . you have a noble nature , and 's love may make you worthier every day . " " I know , my dear , " he reply , press my arm , " I know all that . you must not mind my be a little soft now , for I have have all this upon my mind for a long time , and have often mean to speak to you , and have sometimes want opportunity and sometimes courage . I know what the thought of ought to do for I , but it do not do it . I be too unsettled even for that . I love she most devotedly , and yet I do she wrong , in do myself wrong , every day and hour . but it can not last for ever . we shall come on for a final hearing and get judgment in we favour , and then you and shall see what I can really be ! " it have give I a pang to hear he sob and see the tear start out between he finger , but that be infinitely less affect to I than the hopeful animation with which he say these word . " I have look well into the papers , . I have be deep in they for month , " he continue , recover he cheerfulness in a moment , " and you may rely upon it that we shall come out triumphant . as to year of delay , there have be no want of they , heaven know ! and there be the greater probability of we bring the matter to a speedy close ; in fact , it be on the paper now . it will be all right at last , and then you shall see ! " Recall how he have just now place Messrs . and in the same category with , I ask he when he intend to be article in 's . " there again ! I think not at all , , " he return with a effort . " I fancy I have have enough of it . have work at and like a galley slave , I have slak my thirst for the law and satisfy myself that I should not like it . besides , I find it unsettle I more and more to be so constantly upon the scene of action . so what , " continue , confident again by this time , " do I naturally turn my thought to ? " " I can not imagine , " say I . " do not look so serious , " return , " because it be the best thing I can do , my dear Esther , I be certain . it be not as if I want a profession for life . these proceedings will come to a termination , and then I be provide for . no . I look upon it as a pursuit which be in it be nature more or less unsettled , and therefore suit to my temporary condition -- I may say , precisely suit . what be it that I naturally turn my thought to ? " I look at he and shake my head . " what , " say , in a tone of perfect conviction , " but the army ! " " the army ? " say I . " the army , of course . what I have to do be to get a commission ; and -- there I be , you know ! " say . and then he show I , prove by elaborate calculation in he pocket - book , that suppose he have contract , say , two hundred pound of debt in six month out of the army ; and that he contract no debt at all within a
a corresponding period in the army -- as to which he have quite make up he mind ; this step must involve a saving of four hundred pound in a year , or two thousand pound in five year , which be a considerable sum . and then he speak so ingenuously and sincerely of the sacrifice he make in withdraw himself for a time from , and of the earnestness with which he aspire -- as in think he always do , I know full well -- to repay she love , and to ensure she happiness , and to conquer what be amiss in himself , and to acquire the very soul of decision , that he make my heart aco keenly , sorely . for , I think , how would this end , how could this end , when so soon and so surely all he manly quality be touch by the fatal blight that ruin everything it rest on ! I speak to with all the earnestness I feel , and all the hope I could not quite feel then , and implor he for 's sake not to put any trust in . to all I say , readily assent , ride over the court and everything else in he easy way and draw the brightest picture of the character he be to settle into -- ala , when the grievous suit should loose it be hold upon he ! we have a long talk , but it always come back to that , in substance . at last we come to , where have appoint to wait for I , as a quiet place in the neighbourhood of . be in the garden in the centre and hurry out as soon as I appear . after a few cheerful word , leave we together . " have a pupil over the way , , " say , " and get the key for we . so if you will walk round and round here with I , we can lock ourselves in and I can tell you comfortably what I want to see you dear good face about . " " very well , my dear , " say I . " nothing could be better . " so Caddy , after affectionately squeeze the dear good face as she call it , lock the gate , and take my arm , and we begin to walk round the garden very cosily . " you see , , " say , who thoroughly enjoy a little confidence , " after you speak to I about it be be wrong to marry without ma 's knowledge , or even to keep ma long in the dark respect we engagement -- though I do not believe ma care much for I , I must say -- I think it right to mention you opinion to . in the first place because I want to profit by everything you tell I , and in the second place because I have no secret from . " " I hope he approve , ? " " oh , my dear ! I assure you he would approve of anything you could say . you have no idea what a opinion he have of you ! " " indeed ! " " , it be enough to make anybody but I jealous , " say , laugh and shake she head ; " but it only make I joyful , for you be the first friend I ever have , and the best friend I ever can have , and nobody can respect and love you too much to please I . " " upon my word , , " say I , " you be in the general conspiracy to keep I in a good humour . well , my dear ? " " well ! I be go to tell you , " reply , cross she hand confidentially upon my arm . " so we talk a good deal about it , and so I say to , ' , as -- ' " " I hope you do not say ' ' ? " " no . I do not ! " cry , greatly pleased and with the brightest of face . " I say , ' . ' I say to , be decidedly of that opinion , , and have express it to I , and always hint it when she write those kind note , which you be so fond of hear I read to you , I be prepare to disclose the truth to Ma whenever you think proper . and I think , , ' say I , ' that think that I should be in a better , and truer , and more honourable position altogether if you do the same to you papa. ' " " yes , my dear , " say I . " Esther certainly do think so . " " so I be right , you see ! " exclaim . " well ! this troublead a good deal , not because he have the least doubt about it , but because he be so considerate of the feeling of old ; and he have he apprehension that old Turveydrop might break he heart , or faint away , or be very much overcome in some affect manner or other if he make such a announcement . he fear old might consider it undutiful and might receive too great a shock . for old 's deportment be very beautiful , you know , , " say , " and he feeling be extremely sensitive . " " be they , my dear ? " " oh , extremely sensitive . say so . now , this have cause my darling child -- I do not mean to use the expression to you , ,
, " apologize , she face suffuse with blush , " but I generally call Prince my darling child . " I laugh ; and laugh and blush , and go on . " this have cause he , -- " " cause whom , my dear ? " " oh , you tiresome thing ! " say , laugh , with she pretty face on fire . " my darling child , if you insist upon it ! this have cause he weenks of uneasiness and have make he delay , from day to day , in a very anxious manner . at last he say to I , ' Caddy , if , who be a great favourite with my father , could be prevail upon to be present when I break the subject , I think I could do it . ' so I promise I would ask you . and I make up my mind , beside , " say , look at I hopefully but timidly , " that if you consent , I would ask you afterwards to come with I to Ma . this be what I mean when I say in my note that I have a great favour and a great assistance to beg off you . and if you think you could grant it , , we should both be very grateful . " " let I see , , " say I , pretend to consider . " really , I think I could do a greater thing than that if the need be pressing . I be at you service and the darling child 's , my dear , whenever you like . " be quite transport by this reply of mine , being , I believe , as susceptible to the least kindness or encouragement as any tender heart that ever beat in this world ; and after another turn or two round the garden , during which she put on a entirely new pair of glove and make herself as resplendent as possible that she might do no avoidable discredit to the master of Deportment , we go to direct . be teache , of course . we find he engage with a not very hopeful pupil -- a stubborn little girl with a sulky forehead , a deep voice , and a inanimate , dissatisfied mama --whose case be certainly not render more hopeful by the confusion into which we throw she preceptor . the lesson at last come to a end , after proceed as discordantly as possible ; and when the little girl have change she shoe and have have she white muslin extinguish in shawl , she be take away . after a few word of preparation , we then go in search of , whom we find , group with he hat and glove , as a model of deportment , on the sofa in he private apartment -- the only comfortable room in the house . he appear to have dress at he leisure in the interval of a light collation , and he dressing - case , brush , and so forth , all of quite a elegant kind , lay about . " , ; . " " Charm ! Enchant ! " say , rise with he high - shouldered bow . " permit I ! " hand chair . " be seat ! " Kisse the tip of he left finger . " Overjoy ! " Shutt he eye and roll . " my little retreat be make a paradise . " Recompose himself on the sofa like the second gentleman in . " again you find we , , " say he , " use we little art to polish , polish ! again the sex stimulate we and reward we by the condescension of its lovely presence . it be much in these time ( and we have make a awfully degenerat business of it since the day of he the -- my patron , if I may presume to say so ) to experience that deportment be not wholly trode under foot by mechanic . that it can yet bask in the smile of beauty , my dear madam . " I say nothing , which I think a suitable reply ; and he take a pinch of snuff . " my dear son , " say , " you have four school this afternoon . I would recommend a hasty sandwich . " " thank you , father , " return , " I will be sure to be punctual . my dear father , may I beg you to prepare you mind for what I be go to say ? " " good heaven ! " exclaim the model , pale and aghast as and , hand in hand , bend down before he . " what be this ? be this lunacy ! or what be this ? " " , " return with great submission , " I love this young lady , and we be engage . " " engage ! " cry , recline on the sofa and shut out the sight with he hand . " a arrow launch at my brain by my own child ! " " we have be engage for some time , father , " falter , " and , hearing of it , advise that we should declare the fact to you and be so very kind as to attend on the present occasion . be a young lady who deeply respect you , father . " utter a groan . " no , pray do not ! pray do not , father , " urge he son . " be a young lady who deeply respect you , and we first desire be to consider you comfort . " sob . " no , pray do not , father !
! " cry he son . " , " say , " it be well that you saint mother be spare this pang . Strike deep , and spare not . Strike home , sir , strike home ! " " pray do not say so , father , " implor , in tear . " it go to my heart . I do assure you , father , that we first wish and intention be to consider you comfort . and I do not forget we duty -- what be my duty be 's , as we have often say together -- and with you approval and consent , father , we will devote ourselves to make you life agreeable . " " Strike home , " murmure . " Strike home ! " but he seem to listen , I think , too . " my dear father , " return , " we well know what little comforts you be accustom to and have a right to , and it will always be we study and we pride to provide those before anything . if you will bless we with you approval and consent , father , we shall not think of be marry until it be quite agreeable to you ; and when we be marry , we shall always make you -- of course -- we first consideration . you must ever be the head and master here , father ; and we feel how truly unnatural it would be in we if we fail to know it or if we fail to exert ourselves in every possible way to please you . " undergo a severe internal struggle and come upright on the sofa again with he cheek puffe over he stiff cravat , a perfect model of parental deportment . " my son ! " say . " my child ! I can not resist you prayer . be happy ! " he benignity as he raise he future daughter - in - law and stretch out he hand to he son ( who kiss it with affectionate respect and gratitude ) be the most confusing sight I ever see . " my child , " say , paternally encircle with he left arm as she sit beside he , and put he right hand gracefully on he hip . " my son and daughter , you happiness shall be my care . I will watch over you . you shall always live with I " -- mean , of course , I will always live with you -- " this house be henceforth as much yours as mine ; consider it you home . may you long live to share it with I ! " the power of he deportment be such that they really be as much overcome with thankfulness as if , instead of quarter himself upon they for the rest of he life , he be make some munificent sacrifice in they favour . " for myself , my child , " say Turveydrop , " I be fall into the sear and yellow leaf , and it be impossible to say how long the last feeble trace of gentlemanly deportment may linger in this weaving and spinning age . but , so long , I will do my duty to society and will show myself , as usual , about town . my want be few and simple . my little apartment here , my few essential for the toilet , my frugal morning meal , and my little dinner will suffice . I charge you dutiful affection with the supply of these requirement , and I charge myself with all the rest . " they be overpower afresh by he uncommon generosity . " my son , " say , " for those little point in which you be deficient -- point of deportment , which be bear with a man , which may be improve by cultivation , but can never be originate -- you may still rely on I . I have be faithful to my post since the day of he the , and I will not desert it now . no , my son . if you have ever contemplate you father 's poor position with a feeling of pride , you may rest assure that he will do nothing to tarnish it . for yourself , , whose character be different ( we can not be all alike , nor be it advisable that we should ) , work , be industrious , earn money , and extend the connexion as much as possible . " " that you may depend I will do , dear father , with all my heart , " reply . " I have no doubt of it , " say . " you quality be not shin , my dear child , but they be steady and useful . and to both of you , my child , I would merely observe , in the spirit of a saint wooman on whose path I have the happiness of casting , I believe , some ray of light , take care of the establishment , take care of my simple want , and bless you both ! " then become so very gallant , in honour of the occasion , that I tell we must really go to Thavies Inn at once if we be to go at all that day . so we take we departure after a very loving farewell between and she betroth , and during we walk she be so happy and so full of old 's praise that I would not have say a word in he disparagement for any consideration . the house in have bill in the window annoucing that it be to let , and it look dirtier and gloomier and ghastlier than ever . the name of poor have
have appear in the list of bankrupt but a day or two before , and he be shut up in the dining - room with two gentleman and a heap of blue bag , account - book , and papers , make the most desperate endeavour to understand he affair . they appear to I to be quite beyond he comprehension , for when take I into the dining - room by mistake and we come upon in he spectacle , forlornly fence into a corner by the great dining - table and the two gentleman , he seem to have give up the whole thing and to be speechless and insensible . go upstairs to 's room ( the child be all scream in the kitchen , and there be no servant to be see ) , we find that lady in the midst of a voluminous correspondence , open , read , and sort letter , with a great accumulation of torn cover on the floor . she be so preoccupy that at first she do not know I , though she sit look at I with that curiious , bright - eyed , far - off look of hers . " ah ! ! " she say at last . " I be think of something so different ! I hope you be well . I be happy to see you . and quite well ? " I hope in return that be quite well . " why , not quite , my dear , " say in the calmest manner . " he have be unfortunate in he affair and be a little out of spirit . happily for I , I be so much engage that I have no time to think about it . we have , at the present moment , one hundred and seventy family , , average five person in each , either go or go to the left bank of the . " I think of the one family so near we who be neither go nor go to the left bank of the , and wonder how she could be so placid . " you have bring back , I see , " observe with a glance at she daughter . " it have become quite a novelty to see she here . she have almost desert she old employment and in fact oblige I to employ a boy . " " I be sure , ma -- " begin . " now you know , , " she mother mildly interpose , " that I do employ a boy , who be now at he dinner . what be the use of you contradict ? " " I be not go to contradict , ma , " return . " I be only go to say that surely you would not have I be a mere drudge all my life . " " I believe , my dear , " say , still open she letter , cast she bright eye smilingly over they , and sort they as she speak , " that you have a business example before you in you mother . . a mere drudge ? if you have any sympathy with the destiny of the human race , it would raise you high above any such idea . but you have none . I have often tell you , Caddy , you have no such sympathy . " " not if it be , ma , I have not . " " of course you have not . now , if I be not happily so much engage , , " say , sweetly caste she eye for a moment on I and consider where to put the particular letter she have just open , " this would distress and disappoint I . but I have so much to think of , in connexion with - and it be so necessary I should concentrate myself that there be my remedy , you see . " as give I a glance of entreaty , and as be look far away into straight through my bonnet and head , I think it a good opportunity to come to the subject of my visit and to attract 's attention . " perhaps , " I begin , " you will wonder what have bring I here to interrupt you . " " I be always delighted to see , " say , pursue she employment with a placid smile . " though I wish , " and she shook she head , " she be more interested in the project . " " I have come with , " say I , " because justly think she ought not to have a secret from she mother and fancie I shall encourage and aid she ( though I be sure I do not know how ) in imparting one . " " Caddy , " say , pause for a moment in she occupation and then serenely pursue it after shak she head , " you be go to tell I some nonsense . " untie the string of she bonnet , take she bonnet off , and let it dangle on the floor by the string , and cry heartily , say , " ma , I be engage . " " oh , you ridiculous child ! " observ with a abstracted air as she look over the dispatch last open ; " what a goose you be ! " " I be engage , ma , " sob , " to young , at the academy ; and old ( who be a very gentlemanly man indeed ) have give he consent , and I beg and pray you will give we yours , ma , because I never could be happy without it . I never , never could ! " sob , quite
quite forgetful of she general complainings and of everything but she natural affection . " you see again , , " observe serenely , " what a happiness it be to be so much occupy as I be and to have this necessity for self - concentration that I have . here be engage to a dancing - master 's son -- mix up with people who have no more sympathy with the destiny of the human race than she have herself ! this , too , when , one of the first philanthropist of we time , have mention to I that he be really dispose to be interested in she ! " " ma , I always hate and detest ! " sob . " Caddy , ! " return , open another letter with the greatest complacency . " I have no doubt you do . how could you do otherwise , be totally destitute of the sympathy with which he overflow ! now , if my public duty be not a favourite child to I , if I be not occupy with large measure on a vast scale , these petty detail might grieve I very much , . but can I permit the film of a silly proceeding on the part of ( from whom I expect nothing else ) to interpose between I and the great african continent ? no . no , " repeat . in a calm clear voice , and with a agreeable smile , as she open more letter and sort they . " no , indeed . " I be so unprepared for the perfect coolness of this reception , though I might have expect it , that I do not know what to say . seem equally at a loss . continue to open and sort letter and to repeat occasionally in quite a charming tone of voice and with a smile of perfect composure , " no , indeed . " " I hope , ma , " sob poor Caddy at last , " you be not angry ? " " oh , Caddy , you really be a absurd girl , " return , " to ask such question after what I have say of the preoccupation of my mind . " " and I hope , ma , you give we you consent and wish we well ? " say . " you be a nonsensical child to have do anything of this kind , " say ; " and a degenerate child , when you might have devote yourself to the great public measure . but the step be take , and I have engage a boy , and there be no more to be say . now , pray , , " say , for be kiss she , " do not delay I in my work , but let I clear off this heavy batch of papers before the afternoon post come in ! " I think I could not do better than take my leave ; I be detain for a moment by 's say , " you will not object to my bring he to see you , ma ? " " oh , dear I , , " cry , who have relapse into that distant contemplation , " have you begin again ? bring whom ? " " , . " " , ! " say , quite weary of such little matters . " then you must bring he some evening which be not a parent society night , or a branch night , or a ramification night . you must accommodate the visit to the demand upon my time . my dear , it be very kind of you to come here to help out this silly chit . good - bye ! when I tell you that I have fifty - eight new letter from manufacturing family anxious to understand the detail of the native and coffee -cultivation question this morning , I need not apologize for have very little leisure . " I be not surprise by 's be in low spirits when we go downstairs , or by she sobb afresh on my neck , or by she say she would far rather have be scold than treat with such indifference , or by she confid to I that she be so poor in clothes that how she be ever to be marry creditably she do not know . I gradually cheer she up by dwelling on the many thing she would do for she unfortunate father and for Peepy when she have a home of she own ; and finally we go downstairs into the damp dark kitchen , where and he little brothers and sister be grovell on the stone floor and where we have such a game of play with they that to prevent myself from be quite torn to piece I be oblige to fall back on my fairy - tale . from time to time I hear loud voice in the parlour overhead , and occasionally a violent tumbling about of the furniture . the last effect I be afraid be cause by poor 's breaking away from the dining - table and make rush at the window with the intention of throw himself into the area whenever he make any new attempt to understand he affair . as I ride quietly home at night after the day 's bustle , I think a good deal of 's engagement and felt confirm in my hope ( in spite of the elder ) that she would be the happier and better for it . and if there seem to be but a slender chance of she and she husband ever find out what the model of deportment really be , why that be all for the best too , and who would wish they to be wiser ? I
I do not wish they to be any wiser and indeed be half asham of not entirely believe in he myself . and I look up at the star , and think about traveller in distant country and the star they see , and hope I might always be so blest and happy as to be useful to some one in my small way . they be so glad to see I when I get home , as they always were , that I could have sit down and cry for joy if that have not be a method of make myself disagreeable . everybody in the house , from the lowest to the highest , show I such a bright face of welcome , and spoke so cheerily , and be so happy to do anything for I , that I suppose there never be such a fortunate little creature in the world . we get into such a chatty state that night , through and my guardian draw I out to tell they all about , that I go on prose , prose , prose for a length of time . at last I get up to my own room , quite red to think how I have be hold forth , and then I hear a soft tap at my door . so I say , " come in ! " and there come in a pretty little girl , neatly dress in mourning , who drop a curtsy . " if you please , miss , " say the little girl in a soft voice , " I be . " " why , so you be , " say I , stoop down in astonishment and give she a kiss . " how glad am I to see you , ! " " if you please , miss , " pursue in the same soft voice , " I be you maid . " " ? " " if you please , miss , I be a present to you , with 's love . " I sit down with my hand on 's neck and look at . " and oh , miss , " say , clapp she hand , with the tear start down she dimple cheek , " 's at school , if you please , and learn so good ! and little , she be with , miss , a - be take such care of ! and , he would have be at school -- and , she would have be leave with -- and I , I should have be here -- all a deal sooner , miss ; only think that and and I have better get a little used to part first , we be so small . do not cry , if you please , miss ! " " I can not help it , . " " no , miss , nor I can not help it , " say . " and if you please , miss , 's love , and he think you will like to teach I now and then . and if you please , and and I be to see each other once a month . and I be so happy and so thankful , miss , " cry with a heaving heart , " and I will try to be such a good maid ! " " oh , dear , never forget who do all this ! " " no , miss , I never will . will not . yet . it be all you , miss . " " I have know nothing of it . it be , . " " yes , miss , but it be all do for the love of you and that you might be my mistress . if you please , miss , I be a little present with he love , and it be all do for the love of you . I and be to be sure to remember it . " dry she eye and enter on she function , go in she matronly little way about and about the room and fold up everything she could lay she hand upon . presently come creep back to my side and say , " oh , do not cry , if you please , miss . " and I say again , " I can not help it , . " and say again , " no , miss , nor I can not help it . " and so , after all , I do cry for joy indeed , and so do she . a case as soon as and I have hold the conversation of which I have give a account , communicate the state of he mind to . I doubt if my guardian be altogether take by surprise when he receive the representation , though it cause he much uneasiness and disappointment . he and be often close together , late at night and early in the morning , and pass whole day in , and have innumerable appointment with , and laboure through a quantity of disagreeable business . while they be thus employ , my guardian , though he undergo considerable inconvenience from the state of the wind and rub he head so constantly that not a single hair upon it ever rest in its right place , be as genial with and I as at any other time , but maintain a steady reserve on these matters . and as we utmost endeavour could only elicit from himself swee assurance that everything be go on capitally and that it really be all right at last , we anxiety be not much relieve by he . we learn , however , as the time go on , that a new application be make to the on 's behalf as
as a infant and a ward , and I do not know what , and that there be a quantity of talk , and that the describe he in open court as a vexatious and capricious infant , and that the matter be adjourn and readjourn , and refer , and report on , and petition about begin to doubt ( as he tell we ) whether , if he enter the army at all , it would not be as a veteran of seventy or eighty year of age . at last a appointment be make for he to see the again in he private room , and there the very seriously reprove he for trifling with time and not know he mind --" a pretty good joke , I think , " say , " from that quarter ! " -- and at last it be settle that he application should be grant . he name be enter at the horse Guard as a applicant for a ensign 's commission ; the purchase - money be deposite at a agent 's ; and , in he usual characteristic way , plunge into a violent course of military study and get up at five o'clock every morning to practise the broadsword exercise . thus , vacation succeed term , and term succeed vacation . we sometimes hear of and as be in the paper or out of the paper , or as be to be mention , or as be to be speak to ; and it come on , and it go off . , who be now in a professor 's house in , be able to be with we less frequently than before ; my guardian still maintain the same reserve ; and so time pass until the commission be obtain and receive direction with it to join a regiment in . he arrive post-haste with the intelligence one evening , and have a long conference with my guardian . Upward of a hour elapse before my guardian put he head into the room where and I be sit and say , " come in , my dear ! " we go in and find , whom we have last seen in high spirit , lean on the chimney - piece look mortified and angry . " and I , , " say , " be not quite of one mind . come , come , , put a brighter face upon it ! " " you be very hard with I , sir , " say . " the harder because you have be so considerate to I in all other respects and have do I kindness that I can never acknowledge . I never could have be set right without you , sir . " " well , well ! " say . " I want to set you more right yet . I want to set you more right with yourself . " " I hope you will excuse my say , sir , " return in a fiery way , but yet respectfully , " that I think I be the best judge about myself . " " I hope you will excuse my say , my dear , " observe with the sweetest cheerfulness and good humour , " that it be quite natural in you to think so , but I do not think so . I must do my duty , , or you could never care for I in cool blood ; and I hope you will always care for I , cool and hot . " have turn so pale that he make she sit down in he reading - chair and sit beside she . " it be nothing , my dear , " he say , " it be nothing . and I have only have a friendly difference , which we must state to you , for you be the theme . now you be afraid of what be come . " " I be not indeed , cousin , " reply with a smile , " if it be to come from you . " " thank you , my dear . do you give I a minute 's calm attention , without look at . and , little woman , do you likewise . my dear girl , " put he hand on hers as it lay on the side of the easy - chair , " you recollect the talk we have , we four when the little woman tell I of a little love affair ? " " it be not likely that either or I can ever forget you kindness that day , cousin . " " I can never forget it , " say . " and I can never forget it , " say . " so much the easier what I have to say , and so much the easier for we to agree , " return my guardian , he face irradiate by the gentleness and honour of he heart . " , my bird , you should know that have now choose he profession for the last time . all that he have of certainty will be expend when he be fully equip . he have exhaust he resource and be bound henceforward to the tree he have plan . " " quite true that I have exhaust my present resource , and I be quite content to know it . but what I have of certainty , sir , " say , " be not all I have . " " , ! " cry my guardian with a sudden terror in he manner , and in a altered voice , and put up he hand as if he would have stop he ear . " for the love of , do not find a hope or expectation on the family curse ! whatever
whatever you do on this side the grave , never give one lingering glance towards the horrible phantom that have haunt we so many year . better to borrow , better to beg , better to die ! " we be all start by the fervour of this warning . bit he lip and hold he breath , and glance at I as if he feel , and know that I feel too , how much he need it . " , my dear , " say , recover he cheerfulness , " these be strong word of advice , but I live in and have see a sight here . enough of that . all have to start he in the race of life be venture . I recommend to he and you , for he sake and you own , that he should depart from we with the understanding that there be no sort of contract between you . I must go further . I will be plain with you both . you be to confide freely in I , and I will confide freely in you . I ask you wholly to relinquish , for the present , any tie but you relationship . " " better to say at once , sir , " return , " that you renounce all confidence in I and that you advise to do the same . " " better to say nothing of the sort , , because I do not mean it . " " you think I have begin ill , sir , " retort . " I have , I know . " " how I hope you would begin , and how go on , I tell you when we speak of these thing last , " say Jarndyce in a cordial and encourage manner . " you have not make that begin yet , but there be a time for all thing , and yours be not go by ; rather , it be just now fully come . make a clear begin altogether . you two ( very young , my dear ) be cousin . as yet , you be nothing more . what more may come must come of be work out , , and no sooner . " " you be very hard with I , sir , " say . " harder than I could have suppose you would be . " " my dear boy , " say , " I be harder with myself when I do anything that give you pain . you have you remedy in you own hand . , it be better for he that he should be free and that there should be no youthful engagement between you . , it be better for she , much better ; you owe it to she . come ! each of you will do what be best for the other , if not what be best for yourselves . " " why be it best , sir ? " return hastily . " it be not when we open we heart to you . you do not say so then . " " I have have experience since . I do not blame you , , but I have have experience since . " " you mean of I , sir . " " well ! yes , of both of you , " say kindly . " the time be not come for you standing pledge to one another . it be not right , and I must not recognize it . come , come , my young cousins , begin afresh ! Bygones shall be bygone , and a new page turn for you to write you life in . " give a anxious glance at but say nothing . " I have avoid say one word to either of you or to , " say , " until now , in order that we might be open as the day , and all on equal term . I now affectionately advise , I now most earnestly entreat , you two to part as you come here . leave all else to time , truth , and steadfastness . if you do otherwise , you will do wrong , and you will have make I do wrong in ever bring you together . " a long silence succeed . " , " say then , raise she blue eye tenderly to he face , " after what we cousin have say , I think no choice be leave we . you mind may he quite at ease about I , for you will leave I here under he care and will be sure that I can have nothing to wish for -- quite sure if I guide myself by he advice . I -- I do not doubt , cousin , " say , a little confused , " that you be very fond of I , and I -- I do not think you will fall in love with anybody else . but I should like you to consider well about it too , as I should like you to be in all thing very happy . you may trust in I , cousin . I be not at all changeable ; but I be not unreasonable , and should never blame you . even cousin may be sorry to part ; and in truth I be very , very sorry , , though I know it be for you welfare . I shall always think of you affectionately , and often talk of you with , and -- and perhaps you will sometimes think a little of I , cousin . so now , " say , go up to he and give he she trembl hand , " we be only cousin again , -- for the time perhaps --
-- and I pray for a blessing on my dear cousin , wherever he go ! " it be strange to I that should not be able to forgive my guardian for entertain the very same opinion of he which he himself have express of himself in much stronger term to I . but it be certainly the case . I observ with great regret that from this hour he never be as free and open with as he have be before . he have every reason give he to be so , but he be not ; and solely on he side , a estrangement begin to arise between they . in the business of preparation and equipment he soon lose himself , and even he grief at parting from , who remaine in while he , , and I go up to for a week . he remembe she by fit and start , even with burst of tear , and at such time would confide to I the heaviest self - reproach . but in a few minute he would recklessly conjure up some undefinable means by which they be both to be make rich and happy for ever , and would become as gay as possible . it be a busy time , and I trott about with he all day long , buy a variety of thing of which he stand in need . of the thing he would have buy if he have be leave to he own way I say nothing . he be perfectly confidential with I , and often talk so sensibly and feelingly about he fault and he vigorous resolutions , and dwelt so much upon the encouragement he derive from these conversation that I could never have be tired if I have try . there use , in that week , to come backward and forward to we lodging to fence with a person who have formerly be a cavalry soldier ; he be a fine bluff - look man , of a frank free bearing , with whom have practise for some month . I hear so much about he , not only from , but from my guardian too , that I be purposely in the room with my work one morning after breakfast when he come . " good morning , , " say my guardian , who happen to be alone with I . " will be here directly . meanwhile , be very happy to see you , I know . sit down . " he sit down , a little disconcert by my presence , I think , and without look at I , draw he heavy sunbur not hand across and across he upper lip . " you be as punctual as the sun , " say . " military time , sir , " he reply . " Force of habit . a mere habit in I , sir . I be not at all business - like . " " yet you have a large establishment , too , I be tell ? " say . " not much of a one , sir . I keep a shooting gallery , but not much of a one . " " and what kind of a shot and what kind of a swordsman do you make of ? " say my guardian . " pretty good , sir , " he reply , fold he arm upon he broad chest and look very large . " if be to give he full mind to it , he would come out very good . " " but he do not , I suppose ? " say my guardian . " he do at first , sir , but not afterwards . not he full mind . perhaps he have something else upon it -- some young lady , perhaps . " he bright dark eye glance at I for the first time . " he have not I upon he mind , I assure you , , " say I , laugh , " though you seem to suspect I . " he redden a little through he brown and make I a trooper 's bow . " no offence , I hope , miss . I be one of the roug . " " not at all , " say I . " I take it as a compliment . " if he have not look at I before , he look at I now in three or four quick successive glance . " I beg you pardon , sir , " he say to my guardian with a manly kind of diffidence , " but you do I the honour to mention the young lady 's name -- " " . " " , " he repeat , and look at I again . " do you know the name ? " I ask . " no , miss . to my knowledge I never hear it . I think I have see you somewhere . " " I think not , " I return , raise my head from my work to look at he ; and there be something so genuine in he speech and manner that I be glad of the opportunity . " I remember face very well . " " so do I , miss ! " he return , meet my look with the fullness of he dark eye and broad forehead . " Humph ! what set I off , now , upon that ! " he once more redden through he brown and be disconcert by he effort to remember the association bring my guardian to he relief . " have you many pupil , ? " " they vary in they number , sir . mostly they be but a small lot to live by . " " and what class of
of chance people come to practise at you gallery ? " " all sort , sir . native and foreigners . from gentleman to ' prentice . I have have come , before now , and show themselves dabs at pistol - shooting . mad people out of number , of course , but they go everywhere where the door stand open . " " people do not come with grudge and scheme of finish they practice with live target , I hope ? " say my guardian , smile . " not much of that , sir , though that happen . mostly they come for skill -- or idleness . six of one , and half - a - dozen of the other . I beg you pardon , " say , sit stifinitely upright and square a elbow on each knee , " but I believe you be a suitor , if I have hear correct ? " " I be sorry to say I be . " " I have have one of you compatriot in my time , sir . " " a suitor ? " return my guardian . " how be that ? " " why , the man be so badgered and worried and torture by be knock about from post to pillar , and from pillar to post , " say , " that he get out of sort . I do not believe he have any idea of take aim at anybody , but he be in that condition of resentment and violence that he would come and pay for fifty shot and fire away till he be red hot . one day I say to he when there be nobody by and he have be talk to I angrily about he wrongs , ' if this practice be a safety - valve , comrade , well and good ; but I do not altogether like you be so bent upon it in you present state of mind ; I would rather you take to something else . ' I be on my guard for a blow , he be that passionate ; but he receive it in very good part and leave off directly . we shook hand and strike up a sort of friendship . " " what be that man ? " ask my guardian in a new tone of interest . " why , he begin by be a small Shropshire farmer before they make a bait bull of he , " say . " be he name ? " " it be , sir . " direct another succession of quick bright glance at I as my guardian and I exchange a word or two of surprise at the coincidence , and I therefore explain to he how we know the name . he make I another of he soldierly bow in acknowledgment of what he call my condescension . " I do not know , " he say as he look at I , " what it be that set I off again -- but -- bosh ! what be my head run against ! " he pass one of he heavy hand over he crisp dark hair as if to sweep the broken thought out of he mind and sit a little forward , with one arm akimbo and the other resting on he leg , look in a brown study at the ground . " I be sorry to learn that the same state of mind have get this into new trouble and that he be in hiding , " say my guardian . " so I be tell , sir , " return , still muse and look on the ground . " so I be tell . " " you do not know where ? " " no , sir , " return the trooper , lifte up he eye and come out of he reverie . " I can not say anything about he . he will be wear out soon , I expect . you may file a strong man 's heart away for a good many year , but it will tell all of a sudden at last . " 's entrance stop the conversation . rise , make I another of he soldierly bow , wish my guardian a good day , and strode heavily out of the room . this be the morning of the day appoint for 's departure . we have no more purchase to make now ; I have complete all he packing early in the afternoon ; and we time be disengage until night , when he be to go to for . and be again expect to come on that day , propose to I that we should go down to the court and hear what pass . as it be he last day , and he be eager to go , and I have never be there , I give my consent and we walk down to , where the court be then sitte . we beguil the way with arrangement concern the letter that be to write to I and the letter that I be to write to he and with a great many hopeful project . my guardian know where we be go and therefore be not with we . when we come to the court , there be the -- the same whom I have see in he private room in 's Inn--sitt in great state and gravity on the bench , with the mace and seal on a red table below he and a immense flat nosegay , like a little garden , which scent the whole court . below the table , again , be a long row of solicitor , with bundle of papers on the matting at they foot ; and then there be the gentleman of the bar in wig and gowns
gowns -- some awake and some asleep , and one talk , and nobody pay much attention to what he say . the lean back in he very easy chair with he elbow on the cushioned arm and he forehead rest on he hand ; some of those who be present doze ; some read the newspaper ; some walk about or whisper in group : all seem perfectly at they ease , by no means in a hurry , very unconcerned , and extremely comfortable . to see everything go on so smoothly and to think of the roughness of the suitor 's life and death ; to see all that full dress and ceremony and to think of the waste , and want , and beggar misery it represent ; to consider that while the sickness of hope deferred be rage in so many heart this polite show go calmly on from day to day , and year to year , in such good order and composure ; to behold the and the whole array of practitioner under he look at one another and at the spectator as if nobody have ever hear that all over the name in which they be assemble be a bitter jest , be hold in universal horror , contempt , and indignation , be know for something so flagrant and bad that little short of a miracle could bring any good out of it to any one -- this be so curious and self - contradictory to I , who have no experience of it , that it be at first incredible , and I could not comprehend it . I sit where put I , and try to listen , and look about I ; but there seem to be no reality in the whole scene except poor little , the madwoman , stand on a bench and nodding at it . soon espy we and come to where we sit . she give I a gracious welcome to she domain and indicate , with much gratification and pride , its principal attraction . also come to speak to we and do the honour of the place in much the same way , with the bland modesty of a proprietor . it be not a very good day for a visit , he say ; he would have prefer the first day of term ; but it be imposing , it be imposing . when we have be there half a hour or so , the case in progress -- if I may use a phrase so ridiculous in such a connexion -- seem to die out of its own vapidity , without come , or be by anybody expect to come , to any result . the then throw down a bundle of papers from he desk to the gentleman below he , and somebody say , " and . " upon this there be a buzz , and a laugh , and a general withdrawal of the bystander , and a bring in of great heap , and pile , and bag and bag full of papers . I think it come on " for further direction " -- about some bill of cost , to the best of my understanding , which be confused enough . but I count twenty - three gentleman in wig who say they be " in it , " and none of they appear to understand it much better than I . they chat about it with the , and contradict and explain among themselves , and some of they say it be this way , and some of they say it be that way , and some of they jocosely propose to read huge volume of affidavit , and there be more buzzing and laugh , and everybody concerned be in a state of idle entertainment , and nothing could be make of it by anybody . after a hour or so of this , and a good many speech be begin and cut short , it be " refer back for the present , " as say , and the papers be bundle up again before the clerk have finish bring they in . I glance at on the termination of these hopeless proceedings and be shocked to see the worn look of he handsome young face . " it can not last for ever , . better luck next time ! " be all he say . I have see bring in papers and arrange they for ; and he have see I and make I a forlorn bow , which render I desirous to get out of the court . have give I he arm and be take I away when come up . " I beg you pardon , , " say he in a whisper , " and 's also , but there be a lady here , a friend of mine , who know she and wish to have the pleasure of shaking hand . " as he speak , I see before I , as if she have start into bodily shape from my remembrance , of my godmother 's house . " how do you do , ? " say she . " do you recollect I ? " I give she my hand and tell she yes and that she be very little altered . " I wonder you remember those time , , " she return with she old asperity . " they be change now . well ! I be glad to see you , and glad you be not too proud to know I . " but indeed she seem disappoint that I be not . " , ! " I remonstrate . " I be marry , , " she return , coldly correcte I , " and be . well ! I wish you good day , and I
I hope you will do well . " , who have be attentive to this short dialogue , heav a sigh in my ear and elbow he own and 's way through the confused little crowd of people come in and go out , which we be in the midst of and which the change in the business have bring together . and I be make we way through it , and I be yet in the first chill of the late unexpected recognition when I see , come towards we , but not see we , no less a person than . he make nothing of the people about he as he tramp on , star over they head into the body of the court . " ! " say as I call he attention to he . " you be well meet , sir , " he return . " and you , miss . could you point a person out for I , I want ? I do not understand these place . " turn as he speak and make a easy way for we , he stop when we be out of the press in a corner behind a great red curtain . " there be a little crack old woman , " he begin , " that -- " I put up my finger , for be close by I , have keep beside I all the time and have call the attention of several of she legal acquaintance to I ( as I have overheard to my confusion ) by whispering in they ear , " Hush ! on my left ! " " ! " say . " you remember , miss , that we pass some conversation on a certain man this morning ? , " in a low whisper behind he hand . " yes , " say I . " he be hide at my place . I could not mention it . have not he authority . he be on he last march , miss , and have a whim to see she . he say they can feel for one another , and she have be almost as good as a friend to he here . I come down to look for she , for when I sit by this afternoon , I seem to hear the roll of the muffled drum . " " shall I tell she ? " say I . " would you be so good ? " he return with a glance of something like apprehension at . " it be a providence I meet you , miss ; I doubt if I should have know how to get on with that lady . " and he put one hand in he breast and stood upright in a martial attitude as I inform little , in she ear , of the purport of he kind errand . " my angry friend from ! almost as celebrate as myself ! " she exclaim . " now really ! my dear , I will wait upon he with the greatest pleasure . " " he be live concealed at 's , " say I . " Hush ! this be . " " in -- deed ! " return . " very proud to have the honour ! a military man , my dear . you know , a perfect general ! " she whisper to I . poor deem it necessary to be so courtly and polite , as a mark of she respect for the army , and to curtsy so very often that it be no easy matter to get she out of the court . when this be at last done , and address as " , " she give he she arm , to the great entertainment of some idler who be look on , he be so discompose and beg I so respectfully " not to desert he " that I could not make up my mind to do it , especially as be always tractable with I and as she too say , " , my dear , you will accompany we , of course . " as seem quite willing , and even anxious , that we should see they safely to they destination , we agree to do so . and as inform we that 's mind have run on all the afternoon after hearing of they interview in the morning , I write a hasty note in pencil to my guardian to say where we be gone and why . seal it at a coffee - house , that it might lead to no discovery , and we send it off by a ticket - porter . we then take a hackney - coach and drive away to the neighbourhood of . we walk through some narrow court , for which aologize , and soon come to the shooting gallery , the door of which be closed . as he pull a bell - handle which hang by a chain to the door - post , a very respectable old gentleman with grey hair , wear spectacle , and dress in a black spencer and gaiter and a broad - brim hat , and carry a large gold - bead cane , address he . " I ask you pardon , my good friend , " say he , " but be this 's ? " " it be , sir , " return , glance up at the great letter in which that inscription be pain on the whitewashed wall . " oh ! to be sure ! " say the old gentleman , follow he eye . " thank you . have you ring the bell ? " " my name be , sir , and I have ring the bell . " " oh , indeed ? " say the old gentleman .
. " you name be ? then I be here as soon as you , you see . you come for I , no doubt ? " " no , sir . you have the advantage of I . " " oh , indeed ? " say the old gentleman . " then it be you young man who come for I . I be a physician and be request -- five minute ago -- to come and visit a sick man at 's . " " the muffled drum , " say , turn to and I and gravely shak he head . " it be quite correct , sir . will you please to walk in . " the door be at that moment open by a very singular - look little man in a green - baize cap and apron , whose face and hand and dress be blacken all over , we pass along a dreary passage into a large building with bare brick wall where there be target , and gun , and sword , and other thing of that kind . when we have all arrive here , the physician stop , and take off he hat , appear to vanish by magic and to leave another and quite a different man in he place . " now lookee here , , " say the man , turn quickly round upon he and tap he on the breast with a large forefinger . " you know I , and I know you . you be a man of the world , and I be a man of the world . my name 's bucket , as you be aware , and I have get a peace - warrant against . you have keep he out of the way a long time , and you have be artful in it , and it do you credit . " , look hard at he , bit he lip and shake he head . " now , , " say the other , keep close to he , " you be a sensible man and a well - conduct man ; that be what you be , beyond a doubt . and mind you , I do not talk to you as a common character , because you have serve you country and you know that when duty call we must obey . consequently you be very far from want to give trouble . if I require assistance , you would assist I ; that be what you would do . , do not you go a - sidling round the gallery like that " -- the dirty little man be shuffl about with he shoulder against the wall , and he eye on the intruder , in a manner that look threatening -- " because I know you and will not have it . " " ! " say . " yes , guv'ner . " " be quiet . " the little man , with a low growl , stand still . " Lady and gentleman , " say , " you will excuse anything that may appear to be disagreeable in this , for my name 's inspector bucket of the detective , and I have a duty to perform . , I know where my man be because I be on the roof last night and see he through the skylight , and you along with he . he be in there , you know , " point ; " that be where he be -- on a sofy . now I must see my man , and I must tell my man to consider himself in custody ; but you know I , and you know I do not want to take any uncomfortable measure . you give I you word , as from one man to another ( and a old soldier , mind you , likewise ) , that it be honourable between we two , and I will accommodate you to the utmost of my power . " " I give it , " be the reply . " but it be not handsome in you , . " " , ! not handsome ? " say , tap he on he broad breast again and shak hand with he . " I do not say it be not handsome in you to keep my man so close , do I ? be equally good - temper to I , old boy ! , , the ! why , he be a model of the whole british army in himself , lady and gentleman . I would give a fifty - pun ' note to be such a figure of a man ! " the affair be brotch to this head , , after a little consideration , propose to go in first to he comrade ( as he call he ) , take with he . agree , they go away to the further end of the gallery , leave we sit and stand by a table cover with gun . take this opportunity of enter into a little light conversation , ask I if I be afraid of fire - arm , as most young lady be ; ask if he be a good shot ; ask which he consider the best of those rifle and what it might be worth first - hand , tell he in return that it be a pity he ever give way to he temper , for he be naturally so amiable that he might have be a young woman , and make himself generally agreeable . after a time he follow we to the further end of the gallery , and and I be go quietly away when come after we . he say that if we have no objection to see he comrade , he would take a visit from
from we very kindly . the word have hardly pass he lip when the bell be rung and my guardian appear , " on the chance , " he slightly observe , " of be able to do any little thing for a poor fellow involved in the same misfortune as himself . " we all four go back together and go into the place where be . it be a bare room , partitione off from the gallery with unpainted wood . as the screening be not more than eight or ten foot high and only enclose the side , not the top , the rafter of the high gallery roof be overhead , and the skylight through which have look down . the sun be low -- near setting -- and it be light come redly in above , without descende to the ground . upon a plain canva - cover sofa lay the man from , dress much as we have see he last , but so change that at first I recognize no likeness in he colourless face to what I recollect . he have be still write in he hiding - place , and still dwell on he grievance , hour after hour . a table and some shelf be cover with manuscript papers and with worn pens and a medley of such token . Touchingly and awfully draw together , he and the little mad woman be side by side and , as it be , alone . she sit on a chair hold he hand , and none of we go close to they . he voice have fade , with the old expression of he face , with he strength , with he anger , with he resistance to the wrongs that have at last subdue he . the faintest shadow of a object full of form and colour be such a picture of it as he be of the man from whom we have speak with before . he inclin he head to and I and speak to my guardian . " , it be very kind of you to come to see I . I be not long to be see , I think . I be very glad to take you hand , sir . you be a good man , superior to injustice , and know I honour you . " they shook hand earnestly , and my guardian say some word of comfort to he . " it may seem strange to you , sir , " return ; " I should not have like to see you if this have be the first time of we meeting . but you know i make a fight for it , you know I stand up with my single hand against they all , you know I tell they the truth to the last , and tell they what they be , and what they have do to I ; so I do not mind you see I , this wreck . " " you have be courageous with they many and many a time , " return my guardian . " Sir , I have be , " with a faint smile . " I tell you what would come of it when I cease to be so , and see here ! look at we -- look at we ! " he draw the hand hold through she arm and bring she something nearer to he . " this end it . of all my old associations , of all my old pursuits and hope , of all the living and the dead world , this one poor soul alone come natural to I , and I be fit for . there be a tie of many suffer year between we two , and it be the only tie I ever have on earth that have not break . " " accept my blessing , , " say in tear . " accept my blessing ! " " I think , boastfully , that they never could break my heart , . I be resolve that they should not . I do believe that I could , and would , charge they with be the mockery they be until I die of some bodily disorder . but I be wear out . how long I have be wear out , I do not know ; I seem to break down in a hour . I hope they may never come to hear of it . I hope everybody here will lead they to believe that I die defy they , consistently and perseveringly , as I do through so many year . " here , who be sit in a corner by the door , good - naturedly offer such consolation as he could administer . " come , come ! " he say from he corner . " do not go on in that way , . you be only a little low . we be all of we a little low sometimes . I be . hold up , hold up ! you will lose you temper with the whole round of th'ey , again and again ; and I shall take you on a score of warrant yet , if I have luck . " he only shook he head . " do not shake you head , " say . " Nod it ; that be what I want to see you do . why , bless you soul , what time we have have together ! have not I see you in the over and over again for contempt ? have not I come into court , twenty afternoons for no other purpose than to see you pin the like a bull - dog ? do not you remember when you first begin to threat the lawyer , and the peace be swear
swear against you two or three time a week ? ask the little old lady there ; she have be always present . hold up , , hold up , sir ! " " what be you go to do about he ? " ask in a low voice . " I do not know yet , " say in the same tone . then resume he encouragement , he pursue aloud : " wear out , ? after dodge I for all these week and force I to climb the roof here like a tom cat and to come to see you as a doctor ? that be not like be wear out . I should think not ! now I tell you what you want . you want excitement , you know , to keep you up ; that be what you want . you be use to it , and you can not do without it . I could not myself . very well , then ; here be this warrant get by of 's , and back into half - a - dozen counties since . what do you say to come along with I , upon this warrant , and have a good angry argument before the magistrate ? it will do you good ; it will freshen you up and get you into training for another turn at the Chancellor . give in ? why , I be surprised to hear a man of you energy talk of give in . you must not do that . you be half the fun of the fair in the of . , you lend a hand , and let 's see now whether he will not be better up than down . " " he be very weak , " say the trooper in a low voice . " be he ? " return anxiously . " I only want to rouse he . I do not like to see a old acquaintance give in like this . it would cheer he up more than anything if I could make he a little waxy with I . he be welcome to drop into I , right and leave , if he like . I shall never take advantage of it . " the roof ring with a scream from , which still ring in my ear . " oh , no , ! " she cry as he fall heavily and calmly back from before she . " not without my blessing . after so many year ! " the sun be down , the light have gradually steal from the roof , and the shadow have creep upward . but to I the shadow of that pair , one living and one dead , fall heavier on 's departure than the darkness of the darkest night . and through 's farewell word I hear it echo : " of all my old associations , of all my old pursuit and hope , of all the living and the dead world , this one poor soul alone come natural to I , and I be fit for . there be a tie of many suffer year between we two , and it be the only tie I ever have on earth that have not break ! " it all there be disquietude in 's , . black suspicion hide in that peaceful region . the mass of 's Courtier be in they usual state of mind , no better and no worse ; but be change , and he little woman know it . for -all - 's and 's persist in harnesse themselves , a pair of ungovernable courser , to the chariot of 's imagination ; and drive ; and the passenger be and ; and the complete equipage whirl though the law - stationery business at wild speed all round the clock . even in the little front kitchen where the family meal be take , it rattle away at a smoking pace from the dinner - table , when pause in carve the first slice of the leg of mutton bake with potatoe and stare at the kitchen wall . can not make out what it be that he have have to do with . something be wrong somewhere , but what something , what may come of it , to whom , when , and from which unthotch of and unheard of quarter be the puzzle of he life . he remote impression of the robes and coronet , the star and garter , that sparkle through the surface - dust of 's chamber ; he veneration for the mystery preside over by that best and closest of he customer , whom all the Inns of Court , all , and all the legal neighbourhood agree to hold in awe ; he remembrance of detective with he forefinger and he confidential manner , impossible to be evad or decline , persuade he that he be a party to some dangerous secret without know what it be . and it be the fearful peculiarity of this condition that , at any hour of he daily life , at any opening of the shop - door , at any pull of the bell , at any entrance of a messenger , or any delivery of a letter , the secret may take air and fire , explode , and blow up -- . only know whom . for which reason , whenever a man unknown come into the shop ( as many man unknown do ) and say , " be in ? " or word to that innocent effect , 's heart knock hard at he guilty breast . he undergo so much from such inquiry that when they be make by boy he revenge himself by flipping at they ear over the counter and ask the young dog what they mean by
by it and why they can not speak out at once ? more impracticable man and boy persist in walk into 's sleep and terrifie he with unaccountable question , so that often when the cock at the little dairy in break out in he usual absurd way about the morning , find himself in a crisis of nightmare , with he little woman shak he and say " what be the matter with the man ! " the little woman herself be not the least item in he difficulty . to know that he be always keep a secret from she , that he have under all circumstance to conceal and hold fast a tender double tooth , which she sharpness be ever ready to twist out of he head , give , in she dentistical presence , much of the air of a dog who have a reservation from he master and will look anywhere rather than meet he eye . these various sign and token , mark by the little woman , be not lose upon she . they impel she to say , " have something on he mind ! " and thus suspicion get into 's , . from suspicion to , . find the road as natural and short as from 's to . and thus jealousy get into 's , . once there ( and it be always lurk thereabout ) , it be very active and nimble in 's breast , prompt she to nocturnal examination of 's pocket ; to secret perusal of 's letter ; to private research in the day book and ledger , till , cash - box , and iron safe ; to watching at window , listenings behind door , and a general putting of this and that together by the wrong end . be so perpetually on the alert that the house become ghostly with creaking board and rust garment . the ' prentice think somebody may have be murder there in bygone time . Guster hold certain loose atom of a idea ( pick up at , where they be find float among the orphan ) that there be bury money underneath the cellar , guard by a old man with a white beard , who can not get out for seven thousand year because he say the 's backward . " who be ? " repeatedly inquire of herself . " who be that lady -- that creature ? and who be that boy ? " now , be as dead as the mighty hunter whose name . have appropriate , and the lady be unproducible , she direct she mental eye , for the present , with redouble vigilance to the boy . " and who , " quoth . for the thousand and first time , " be that boy ? who be that -- ! " and there be seize with a inspiration . he have no respect for . no , to be sure , and he would not have , of course . naturally he would not , under those contagious circumstance . he be invite and appoint by -- why , . hear it herself with she own ears ! -- to come back , and be tell where he be to go , to be address by ; and he never come ! why do he never come ? because he be tell not to come . who tell he not to come ? who ? , ha ! see it all . but happily ( and . tightly shake she head and tightly smile ) that boy be meet by yesterday in the street ; and that boy , as afforde a subject which desire to improve for the spiritual delight of a select congregation , be seize by and threaten with be deliver over to the police unless he show the reverend gentleman where he liv and unless he enter into , and fulfil , a undertaking to appear in 's to - morrow night , " to -- mor -- row -- night , " . Snagsby repeat for mere emphasis with another tight smile and another tight shake of she head ; and to - morrow night that boy will be here , and to - morrow night Mrs . Snagsby will have she eye upon he and upon some one else ; and oh , you may walk a long while in you secret way ( say with haughtiness and scorn ) , but you can not blind sound no timbrel in anybody 's ears , but hold she purpose quietly , and keep she counsel . to -morrow come , the savoury preparation for the oil Trade come , the evening come . in he black coat ; come the Chadband ; come ( when the gorging vessel be replete ) the ' prentice and Guster , to be edify ; come at last , with he slouching head , and he shuffle backward , and he shuffle forward , and he shuffle to the right , and he shuffle to the left , and he bit of fur cap in he muddy hand , which he pick as if it be some mangy bird he have catch and be plucking before eat raw , , the very , very tough subject be to improve . screw a watchful glance on as he be bring into the little drawing - room by . he look at the moment he come in . Aha ! why do he look at ? look at he . why should he do that , but that see it all ? why else should that look pass between they , why else should be confuse and cough a signal cough behind he hand ? it be as clear as crystal that be that boy 's father . " peace , my friend , " say ,
, rise and wip the oily exudation from he reverend visage . " peace be with we ! my friend , why with we ? because , " with he fat smile , " it can not be against we , because it must be for we ; because it be not harden , because it be soften ; because it do not make war like the hawk , but come home unto we like the dove . therefore , my friend , peace be with we ! my human boy , come forward ! " stretch forth he flabby paw , lay the same on Jo's arm and consider where to station he . Jo , very doubtful of he reverend friend 's intention and not at all clear but that something practical and painful be go to be do to he , mutter , " you let I alone . I never say nothink to you . you let I alone . " " no , my young friend , " say smoothly , " I will not let you alone . and why ? because I be a harvest - labourer , because I be a toiler and a moiler , because you be deliver over unto I and be become as a precious instrument in my hand . my friend , may I so employ this instrument as to use it to you advantage , to you profit , to you gain , to you welfare , to you enrichment ! my young friend , sit upon this stool . " Jo , apparently possess by a impression that the reverend gentleman want to cut he hair , shield he head with both arm and be get into the require position with great difficulty and every possible manifestation of reluctance . when he be at last adjust like a lay - figure , , retire behind the table , hold up he bear 's - paw and say , " my friend ! " this be the signal for a general settlement of the audience . the ' prentice giggle internally and nudge each other . Guster fall into a staring and vacant state , compound of a stun admiration of and pity for the friendless outcast whose condition touch she nearly . silently lay train of gunpowder . compose herself grimly by the fire and warm she knee , finde that sensation favourable to the reception of eloquence . it happen that have a pulpit habit of fixing some member of he congregation with he eye and fatly argue he point with that particular person , who be understand to be expect to be move to a occasional grunt , groan , gasp , or other audible expression of inward work , which expression of inward work , be echo by some elderly lady in the next pew and so communicate like a game of forfeit through a circle of the more fermentable sinner present , serve the purpose of parliamentary cheer and get 's steam up . from mere force of habit , in say " my friend ! " have rest he eye on and proceed to make that ill - starr stationer , already sufficiently confused , the immediate recipient of he discourse . " we have here among we , my friend , " say , " a and a heathan , a dweller in the tent of - all - 's and a mover - on upon the surface of the earth . we have here among we , my friend , " and , untwist the point with he dirty thumb -nail , bestow a oily smile on , signify that he will throw he a argumentative back - fall presently if he be not already down , " a brother and a boy . devoid of parent , devoid of relation , devoid of flock and herds , devoid of gold and silver and of precious stone . now , my friend , why do I say he be devoid of these possession ? why ? why be he ? " state the question as if he be propound a entirely new riddle of much ingenuity and merit to and entreat he not to give it up . , greatly perplex by the mysterious look he receive just now from he little woman -- at about the period when mention the word parent -- be temp into modestly remark , " I do not know , I be sure , sir . " on which interruption Chadband glare and say , " for shame ! " " I hear a voice , " say ; " be it a still small voice , my friend ? I fear not , though I fain would hope so --" " ah -- h ! " from . " which say , 'I do not know . ' then I will tell you why . I say this brother present here among we be devoid of parent , devoid of relation , devoid of flock and herds , devoid of gold , of silver , and of precious stone because he be devoid of the light that shine in upon some of we . what be that light ? what be it ? I ask you , what be that light ? " draw back he head and pause , but be not to be lure on to he destruction again . , lean forward over the table , pierce what he have get to follow directly into with the thumb -nail already mention . " it be , " say , " the ray of ray , the sun of suns , the moon of moons , the star of star . it be the light of . " draw himself up again and look triumphantly at as if he would be glad to know how he feel after that .
. " of , " say , hit he again . " say not to I that it be not the lamp of lamp . I say to you it be . I say to you , a million of time over , it be . it be ! I say to you that I will proclaim it to you , whether you like it or not ; nay , that the less you like it , the more I will proclaim it to you . with a speak - trumpet ! I say to you that if you rear yourself against it , you shall fall , you shall be bruise , you shall be batter , you shall be flaw , you shall be smashed . " the present effect of this flight of oratory -- much admire for its general power by 's follower -- be not only to make unpleasantly warm , but to represent the innocent in the light of a determined enemy to virtue , with a forehead of brass and a heart of adamant , that unfortunate tradesman become yet more disconcerted and be in a very advanced state of low spirit and false position when accidentally finish he . " my friend , " he resume after dabb he fat head for some time -- and it smoke to such a extent that he seem to light he pocket - handkerchief at it , which smoke , too , after every dab --" to pursue the subject we be endeavour with we lowly gift to improve , let we in a spirit of love inquire what be that to which I have allude . for , my young friend , " suddenly address the ' prentice and , to they consternation , " if I be tell by the doctor that calomel or castor -oil be good for I , I may naturally ask what be calomel , and what be castor - oil . I may wish to be inform of that before I dose myself with either or with both . now , my young friend , what be this then ? firstly ( in a spirit of love ) , what be the common sort of -- the work clothes -- the every - day wear , my young friend ? be it deception ? " " ah -- h ! " from . " be it suppression ? " a shiver in the negative from . " be it reservation ? " a shake of the head from . -- very long and very tight . " no , my friend , it be neither of these . neither of these name belong to it . when this yoing heathen now among we -- who be now , my friend , asleep , the seal of indifference and perdition be set upon he eyelid ; but do not wake he , for it be right that I should have to wrestle , and to combat and to struggle , and to conquer , for he sake -- when this young harden heathen tell we a story of a cock , and of a bull , and of a lady , and of a sovereign , be that the Terewth ? no . or if it be partly , be it wholly and entirely ? no , my friend , no ! " if could withstand he little woman 's look as it enter at he eye , the window of he soul , and search the whole tenement , he be other than the man he be . he cower and droops . " or , my juvenile friend , " say , descende to the level of they comprehension with a very obtrusive demonstration in he greasily meek smile of come a long way downstairs for the purpose , " if the master of this house be to go forth into the city and there see a eel , and be to come back , and be to call unto he the mistress of this house , and be to say , ' Sarah , rejoice with I , for I have see a elephant ! ' would that be ? " in tear . " or put it , my juvenile friend , that he see a elephant , and return say , the city be barren , I have see but a eel , ' would that be ? " Snagsby sobb loudly . " or put it , my juvenile friend , " say , stimulate by the sound , " that the unnatural parent of this slumber heathan -- for parent he have , my juvenile friend , beyond a doubt -- after cast he forth to the wolf and the vulture , and the wild dog and the young gazelle , and the serpent , go back to they dwelling and have they pipe , and they pots , and they fluting and they dancing , and they malt liquor , and they butcher 's meat and poultry , would that be ? " reply by deliver herself a prey to spasm , not a unresisting prey , but a crying and a tearing one , so that 's re-echoe with she shriek . finally , become cataleptic , she have to be carry up the narrow staircase like a grand piano . after unspeakable suffering , productive of the utmost consternation , she be pronounce , by express from the bedroom , free from pain , though much exhaust , in which state of affair , trample and crush in the piano - forte removal , and extremely timid and feeble , venture to come out from behind the door in the drawing - room . all this time have be stand on the spot where he wake up , ever pick he cap and put bit of fur in he mouth
mouth . he spit they out with a remorseful air , for he feel that it be in he nature to be a unimprovable reprobate and that it be no good he try to keep awake , for he will not never know nothink . though it may be , , that there be a history so interesting and affect even to mind as near the brute as thine , record deeds do on this earth for common man , that if the Chadband , remove they own person from the light , would but show it thee in simple reverence , would but leave it unimprove , would but regard it as be eloquent enough without they modest aid -- it might hold thee awake , and thou might learn from it yet ! never hear of any such book . its compiler and the be all one to he , except that he know the and would rather run away from he for a hour than hear he talk for five minute . " it can not know good my waiting here no longer , " think . " can not a - go to say nothink to I to - night . " and downstairs he shuffle . but downstairs be the charitable Guster , hold by the handrail of the kitchen stair and warde off a fit , as yet doubtfully , the same have be induce by 's screaming . she have she own supper of bread and cheese to hand to , with whom she venture to interchange a word or so for the first time . " here be something to eat , poor boy , " say . " thank 'ee , mum , " say . " be you hungry ? " " ! " say . " what be gone of you father and you mother , eh ? " stop in the middle of a bite and look petrified . for this orphan charge of the saint whose shrine be at have pat he on the shoulder , and it be the first time in he life that any decent hand have be so laid upon he . " I never know would nothink about th'ey , " say . " no more do not I of mine , " cry . she be repress symptom favourable to the fit when she seem to take alarm at something and vanish down the stair . " , " whisper the law - stationer softly as the boy linger on the step . " here I be , ! " " I do not know you be go -- there be another half - crown , . it be quite right of you to say nothing about the lady the other night when we be out together . it would breed trouble . you can not be too quiet , . " " I be fly , master ! " and so , good night . a ghostly shade , frilled and night - cap , follow the law - stationer to the room he come from and glides higher up . and henceforth he begin , go where he will , to be attend by another shadow than he own , hardly less constant than he own , hardly less quiet than he own . and into whatsoever atmosphere of secrecy he own shadow may pass , let all concern in the secrecy beware ! for the watchful . be there too -- bone of he bone , flesh of he flesh , shadow of he shadow . morning , look with dull eye and sallow face upon the neighbourhood of , find its inhabitant unwilling to get out of bed . many of they be not early riser at the brightest of time , be bird of night who roost when the sun be high and be wide awake and keen for prey when the star shine out . behind dingy blind and curtain , in upper story and garret , skulk more or less under false name , false hair , false title , false jewellery , and false histories , a colony of brigand lie in they first sleep . gentleman of the green - baize road who could discourse from personal experience of foreign galley and home treadmill ; spy of strong government that eternally quake with weakness and miserable fear , break traitor , coward , bully , gamester , shuffler , swindler , and false witness ; some not unmarked by the branding - iron beneath they dirty braid ; all with more cruelty in they than be in , and more crime than be in . for howsoever bad the devil can be in fustian or smock - frock ( and he can be very bad in both ) , he be a more designing , callous , and intolerable devil when he stick a pin in he shirt - front , call himself a gentleman , back a card or colour , play a game or so of billiards , and know a little about bill and promissory note than in any other form he wear . and in such form shall find he , when he will , still pervad the tributary channel of . but the wintry morning want he not and wake he not . it wake of the shoot gallery and he familiar . they arise , roll up and stow away they mattress . , have shave himself before a look - glass of minute proportion , then march out , bare - head and bear - chest , to the pump in the little yard and anon come back shining with yellow soap , friction , drift rain , and exceedingly cold water . as he rub himself upon a large jack - towel , blow like a military sort of diver just come up , he
he hair curl tighter and tighter on he sunbur not temple the more he rub it so that it look as if it never could be loose by any less coercive instrument than a iron rake or a curry -comb -- as he rub , and puffs , and polish , and blow , turn he head from side to side the more conveniently to excoriate he throat , and stand with he body well bend forward to keep the wet from he martial leg , , on he knee light a fire , look round as if it be enough wash for he to see all that do , and sufficient renovation for one day to take in the superfluous health he master throw off . when be dry , he go to work to brush he head with two hard brush at once , to that unmerciful degree that , shouldere he way round the gallery in the act of sweep it , wink with sympathy . this chaf over , the ornamental part of 's toilet be soon perform . he fill he pipe , light it , and march up and down smoke , as he custom be , while , raise a powerful odour of hot roll and coffee , prepare breakfast . he smoke gravely and march in slow time . perhaps this morning 's pipe be devote to the memory of in he grave . " and so , , " say of the shoot gallery after several turn in silence , " you be dream of the country last night ? " , by the by , say as much in a tone of surprise as he scramble out of bed . " yes , guv'ner . " " what be it like ? " " I hardly know what it be like , guv'ner , " say , consider . " how do you know it be the country ? " " on account of the grass , I think . and the swan upon it , " say after further consideration . " what be the swan do on the grass ? " " they be a - eating of it , I expect , " say . the master resume he march , and the man resume he preparation of breakfast . it be not necessarily a lengthened preparation , be limit to the setting forth of very simple breakfast requisite for two and the broiling of a rasher of bacon at the fire in the rusty grate ; but as have to sidle round a considerable part of the gallery for every object he want , and never bring two object at once , it take time under the circumstance . at length the breakfast be ready . Phil announce it , knock the ash out of he pipe on the hob , stand he pipe itself in the chimney corner , and sit down to the meal . when he have help himself , follow suit , sit at the extreme end of the little oblong table and take he plate on he knee . either in humility , or to hide he blacken hand , or because it be he natural manner of eating . " the country , " say , ply he knife and fork ; " why , I suppose you never clap you eye on the country , ? " " I see the marsh once , " say , contentedly eat he breakfast . " what marsh ? " " the marsh , commander , " return . " where be they ? " " I do not know where they be , " say ; " but I see th'ey , guv'ner . they be flat . and miste . " and commander be interchangeable term with , expressive of the same respect and deference and applicable to nobody but . " I be bear in the country , . " " be you indeed , commander ? " " yes . and breed there . " elevate he one eyebrow , and after respectfully star at he master to express interest , swallow a great gulp of coffee , still star at he . " there be not a bird 's note that I do not know , " say . " not many a english leaf or berry that I could not name . not many a tree that I could not climb yet if I be put to it . I be a real country boy , once . my good mother live in the country . " " she must have be a fine old lady , guv'ner , " obserf . " aye ! and not so old either , five and thirty year ago , " say . " but I will wager that at ninety she would be near as upright as I , and near as broad across the shoulders . " " do she die at ninety , guv'ner ? " inquire . " no . ! let she rest in peace , bless she ! " say the trooper . " what set I on about country boy , and runaway , and good - for - nothing ? you , to be sure ! so you never clap you eye upon the country -- marsh and dream excepted. Eh ? " shake he head . " do you want to see it ? " " N - no , I do not know as I do , particular , " say . " the town 's enough for you , eh ? " " why , you see , commander , " say , " I be not acquaint with anythink else , and I doubt if I be not a - get too old to take to novelty . " " how old be you , ? " ask
ask the trooper , pause as he convey he smoke saucer to he lip . " I be something with a eight in it , " say . " it can not be eighty . yet eighteen . it be betwixt 'em , somewhere . " , slowly put down he saucer without taste its contents , be laughingly begin , " why , what the deuce , -- " when he stop , see that be count on he dirty finger . " I be just eight , " say , " agreeable to the parish calculation , when I go with the tinker . I be send on a errand , and I see he a - sittin under a old buildin with a fire all to himself wery comfortable , and he say , ' would you like to come along a I , my man ? ' I say ' yes , ' and he and I and the fire go home to Clerkenwell together . that be . I be able to count up to ten ; and when come round again , I say to myself , ' now , old chap , you be one and a eight in it . ' after that , I say , ' now , old chap , you be two and a eight in it . ' in course of time , I come to ten and a eight in it ; two ten and a eight in it . when it get so high , it get the upper hand of I , but this be how I always know there be a eight in it . " " ah ! " say , resum he breakfast . " and where be the tinker ? " " drink put he in the hospital , guv'ner , and the hospital put he -- in a glass - case , I have heerd , " reply mysteriously . " by that mean you get promotion ? take the business , ? " " yes , commander , I take the business . such as it be . it be not much of a beat -- round , , , , and there -- poor neighbourhood , where they use up the kettle till they be past mende . most of the tramping tinker use to come and lodge at we place ; that be the best part of my master 's earning . but they do not come to I . I war not like he . he could se th'ey a good song . I could not ! he could play th'ey a tune on any sort of pot you please , so as it be iron or block tin . I never could do nothing with a pot but mmend it or bile it -- never have a note of music in I . besides , I be too ill - look , and they wife complain of I . " " they be mighty particular . you would pass muster in a crowd , ! " say the trooper with a pleasant smile . " no , guv'ner , " return , shak he head . " no , I should not . I be passable enough when I go with the tinker , though nothing to boast of then ; but what will blow the fire with my mouth when I be young , and spile my complexion , and singe my hair off , and swaller the smoke , and what with be nat'rally unfort'nate in the way of run against hot metal and mark myself by sich mean , and what will have turn - up with the tinker as I get older , almost whenever he be too far gone in drink -- which be almost always -- my beauty be queer , wery queer , even at that time . as to , what with a dozen year in a dark forge where the man be give to lark , and what with be scorch in a accident at a gas - work , and what with be blow out of winder case - fill at the firework business , I be ugly enough to be make a show on ! " Resign himself to which condition with a perfectly satisfied manner , beg the favour of another cup of coffee . while drink it , he say , " it be after the case - filling blow - up when I first see you , commander . you remember ? " " I remember , . you be walk along in the sun . " " crawling , guv'ner , again a wall -- " " true , -- shoulder you way on -- " " in a night - cap ! " exclaim , excited . " in a night- cap -- " " and hobbl with a couple of stick ! " cry , still more excited . " with a couple of sticnks . when -- " " when you stop , you know , " cry , put down he cup and saucer and hastily remove he plate from he knee , " and say to I , ' what , comrade ! you have be in the war ! ' I do not say much to you , commander , then , for I be take by surprise that a person so strong and healthy and bold as you be should stop to speak to such a limping bag of bone as I be . but you say to I , say you , deliver it out of you chest as hearty as possible , so that it be like a glass of something hot , ' what accident have you meet with ? you have be badly hurt . what be amiss , old boy ? Cheer up , and tell we about
about it ! ' Cheer up ! I be cheer already ! I say as much to you , you say more to I , I say more to you , you say more to I , and here I be , commander ! here I be , commander ! " cry , who have start from he chair and unaccountably begin to sidle away . " if a mark 's want , or if it will improve the business , let the customer take aim at I . they can not spoil my beauty . I be all right . come on ! if they want a man to box at , let them box at I . let them knock I well about the head . I do not mind . if they want a light - weight to be throw for practice , , , or , let them throw I . they will not hurt I . I have be throw , all sort of style , all my life ! " with this unexpected speech , energetically deliver and accompany by action illustrative of the various exercise refer to , shoulders he way round three side of the gallery , and abruptly tacke off at he commander , make a butt at he with he head , intend to express devotion to he service . he then begin to clear away the breakfast . , after laugh cheerfully and clapp he on the shoulder , assist in these arrangement and help to get the gallery into business order . that do , he take a turn at the dumb -bell , and afterwards weighing himself and opin that he be get " too fleshy , " engage with great gravity in solitary broadsword practice . meanwhile have fall to work at he usual table , where he screw and unscrew , and clean , and file , and whistle into small aperture , and blacken himself more and more , and seem to do and undo everything that can be do and undone about a gun . master and man be at length disturb by footstep in the passage , where they make a unusual sound , denote the arrival of unusual company . these step , advance nearer and nearer to the gallery , bring into it a group at first sight scarcely reconcilable with any day in the year but the fifth of . it consist of a limp and ugly figure carry in a chair by two bearer and attend by a lean female with a face like a pinch mask , who might be expect immediately to recite the popular verse commemorative of the time when they do contrive to blow up alive but for she keep she lip tightly and defiantly close as the chair be put down . at which point the figure in it gas , " o ! oh , dear I ! I be shake ! " add , " how de do , my dear friend , how de do ? " then descry , in the procession , the venerable Smallweed out for a airing , attend by he granddaughter as body - guard . " , my dear friend , " say , remove he right arm from the neck of one of he bearer , whom he have nearly throttle come along , " how de do ? you be surprised to see I , my dear friend . " " I should hardly have be more surprised to have see you friend in the city , " return . " I be very seldom out , " pants . " I have not be out for many month . it be inconvenient -- and it come expensive . but I long so much to see you , my dear . how de do , sy ? " " I be well enough , " say . " I hope you be the same . " " you can not be too well , my dear friend . " take he by both hand . " I have bring my granddaughter . I could not keep she away . she long so much to see you . " " Hum ! she bear it calmly ! " mutter . " so we get a hackney - cab , and put a chair in it , and just round the corner they lifte I out of the cab and into the chair , and carry I here that I might see my dear friend in he own establishment ! this , " say , allud to the bearer , who have be in danger of strangulation and who withdraw adjust he windpipe , " be the driver of the cab . he have nothing extra . it be by agreement include in he fare . this person , " the other bearer , " we engage in the street outside for a pint of beer . which be twopence . , give the person twopence . I be not sure you have a workman of you own here , my dear friend , or we need not have employ this person . " refer to Phil with a glance of considerable terror and a half - subdue " o ! oh , dear I ! " in he apprehension , on the surface of thing , without some reason , for , who have never beheld the apparition in the black - velvet cap before , have stop short with a gun in he hand with much of the air of a dead shot intent on picking off as a ugly old bird of the crow species . " , my child , " say , " give the person he twopence . it be a great deal for what he have do . " the person , who be one of those extraordinary
extraordinary specimen of human fungus that spre up spontaneously in the western street of , ready dress in a old red jacket , with a " mission " for holding horse and call coach , receive he twopence with anything but transport , toss the money into the air , catch it over - hand , and retire . " my dear , " say , " would you be so kind as help to carry I to the fire ? I be accustom to a fire , and I be a old man , and I soon chill . oh , dear I ! " he closing exclamation be jerk out of the venerable gentleman by the suddenness with which , like a genies , catch he up , chair and all , and deposit he on the hearth - stone . " o ! " say , panting . " oh , dear I ! oh , my star ! my dear friend , you workman be very strong -- and very prompt . of , he be very prompt ! , dree I back a little . I be be scorch in the leg , " which indeed be testify to the nos of all present by the smell of he worsted stocking . the gentle , have back she grandfather a little way from the fire , and have shake he up as usual , and have release he overshadow eye from its black - velvet extinguisher , again say , " oh , dear I ! of ! " and look about and meeting 's glance , again stretch out both hand . " my dear friend ! so happy in this meeting ! and this be you establishment ? it be a delightful place . it be a picture ! you never find that anything go off here accidentally , do you , my dear friend ? " add , very ill at ease . " no , no . no fear of that . " " and you workman . he -- oh , dear I !-- he never let anything off without mean it , do he , my dear friend ? " " he have never hurt anybody but himself , " say , smile . " but he might , you know . he seem to have hurt himself a good deal , and he might hurt somebody else , " the old gentleman return . " he might not mean it -- or he even might . , will you order he to leave he infernal fire - arm alone and go away ? " Obedient to a nod from the trooper , retire , empty - hand , to the other end of the gallery . , reassure , fall to rub he leg . " and you be do well , ? " he say to the trooper , squarely stand face about towards he with he broadsword in he hand . " you be prosper , please the power ? " answer with a cool nod , add , " go on . you have not come to say that , I know . " " you be so sprightly , , " return the venerable grandfather . " you be such good company . " " ha ha ! go on ! " say . " my dear friend ! but that sword look awful gleaming and sharp . it might cut somebody , by accident . it make I shiver , . curse he ! " say the excellent old gentleman apart to as the trooper take a step or two away to lay it aside . " he owe I money , and might think of pay off old score in this murdering place . I wish you brimstone grandmother be here , and he would shave she head off . " , return , fold he arm , and look down at the old man , slide every moment lower and lower in he chair , say quietly , " now for it ! " " ! " cry , rub he hand with a artful chuckle . " yes . now for it . now for what , my dear friend ? " " for a pipe , " say , who with great composure set he chair in the chimney - corner , take he pipe from the grate , fill it and light it , and fall to smoke peacefully . this tend to the discomfiture of , who find it so difficult to resume he object , whatever it may be , that he become exasperated and secretly claw the air with a impotent vindictiveness expressive of a intense desire to tear and rmend the visage of . as the excellent old gentleman 's nails be long and leaden , and he hand lean and veinous , and he eye green and watery ; and , over and above this , as he continue , while he claw , to slide down in he chair and to collapse into a shapeless bundle , he become such a ghastly spectacle , even in the accustom eye of , that that young virgin pounce at he with something more than the ardour of affection and so shake he up and pat and poke he in diver part of he body , but particularly in that part which the science of self - defence would call he wind , that in he grievous distress he utters enforce sound like a paviour 's rammer . when have by these means set he up again in he chair , with a white face and a frosty nose ( but still claw ) , she stretch out she weazen forefinger and give one poke in the back . the trooper raise he head , she make another poke at she esteem grandfather , and have
have thus bring they together , stare rigidly at the fire . " aye , aye ! Ho , ho ! U--u --u--ugh ! " chatter , swallow he rage . " my dear friend ! " ( still clawing ) . " I tell you what , " say . " if you want to converse with I , you must speak out . I be one of the roug , and I can not go about and about . I have not the art to do it . I be not clever enough . it do not suit I . when you go win round and round I , " say the trooper , put he pipe between he lip again , " damme , if I do not feel as if I be be smothered ! " and he inflate he broad chest to its utmost extent as if to assure himself that he be not smother yet . " if you have come to give I a friendly call , " continue , " I be oblige to you ; how be you ? if you have come to see whether there be any property on the premise , look about you ; you be welcome . if you want to out with something , out with it ! " the blooming , without remove she gaze from the fire , give she grandfather one ghostly poke . " you see ! it be she opinion too . and why the devil that young woman will not sit down like a , " say with he eye musingly fix on , " I can not comprehend . " " she keep at my side to attend to I , sir , " say . " I be a old man , my dear , and I need some attention . I can carry my year ; I be not a brimstone poll -parrot " ( snarl and look unconsciously for the cushion ) , " but I need attention , my dear friend . " " well ! " return the trooper , wheel he chair to face the old man . " now then ? " " my friend in the city , , have do a little business with a pupil of yours . " " have he ? " say . " I be sorry to hear it . " " yes , sir . " rub he leg . " he be a fine young soldier now , , by the name of . Friends come forward and pay it all up , honourable . " " do they ? " return . " do you think you friend in the city would like a piece of advice ? " " I think he would , my dear friend . from you . " " I advise he , then , to do no more business in that quarter . there be no more to be get by it . the young gentleman , to my knowledge , be bring to a dead halt . " " no , no , my dear friend . no , no , . no , no , no , sir , " remonstrate , cunningly rubb he spare leg . " not quite a dead halt , I think . he have good friend , and he be good for he pay , and he be good for the selling price of he commission , and he be good for he chance in a lawsuit , and he be good for he chance in a wife , and -- oh , do you know , , I think my friend would consider the young gentleman good for something yet ? " say , turn up he velvet cap and scratch he ear like a monkey . , who have put aside he pipe and sit with a arm on he chair - back , beat a tattoo on the ground with he right foot as if he be not particularly pleased with the turn the conversation have take . " but to pass from one subject to another , " resume . " 'To promote the conversation , ' as a joker might say . to pass , , from the ensign to the captain . " " what be you up to , now ? " ask , pause with a frown in strok the recollection of he moustache . " what captain ? " " we captain . the captain we know of . . " " oh ! that be it , be it ? " say with a low whistle as he see both grandfather and granddaughter look hard at he . " you be there ! well ? what about it ? come , I will not be smother any more . ! " " my dear friend , " return the old man , " I be apply -- , shake I up a little !-- I be apply to yesterday about the captain , and my opinion still be that the captain be not dead . " " Bosh ! " observe . " what be you remark , my dear friend ? " inquire the old man with he hand to he ear . " Bosh ! " " ! " say . " , of my opinion you can judge for yourself accord to the question ask of I and the reason give for ask th'ey . now , what do you think the lawyer make the inquiry want ? " " a job , " say . " nothing of the kind ! " " can not be a lawyer , then , " say , fold he arm with a air of confirm resolution . " my dear friend , he be a lawyer , and a famous one . he want to see some
some fragment in 's writing . he do not want to keep it . he only want to see it and compare it with a writing in he possession . " " well ? " " well , . happen to remember the advertisement concern and any information that could be give respect he , he look it up and come to I -- just as you do , my dear friend . will you shake hand ? so glad you come that day ! I should have miss form such a friendship if you have not come ! " " well , ? " say again after go through the ceremony with some stiffness . " I have no such thing . I have nothing but he signature . Plague pestilence and famine , battle murder and sudden death upon he , " say the old man , make a curse out of one of he few remembrance of a prayer and squeeze up he velvet cap between he angry hand , " I have half a million of he signature , I think ! but you , " breathlessly recover he mildness of speech as re - adjust the cap on he skittle - ball of a head , " you , my dear , be likely to have some letter or paper that would suit the purpose . anything would suit the purpose , write in the hand . " " some write in that hand , " say the trooper , pondering ; " may be , I have . " " my dearest friend ! " " May be , I have not . " " ! " say , crest -fallen . " but if I have bushel of it , I would not show as much as would make a cartridge without know why . " " Sir , I have tell you why . my dear , I have tell you why . " " not enough , " say the trooper , shak he head . " I must know more , and approve it . " " then , will you come to the lawyer ? my dear friend , will you come and see the gentleman ? " urge , pull out a lean old silver watch with hand like the leg of a skeleton . " I tell he it be probable I might call upon he between ten and eleven this forenoon , and it be now half after ten . will you come and see the gentleman , ? " " ! " say he gravely . " I do not mind that . though why this should concern you so much , I do not know . " " everything concern I that have a chance in it of bring anything to light about he . do not he take we all in ? do not he owe we immense sum , all round ? Concern I ? who can anythe about he concern more than I ? not , my dear friend , " say , lower he tone , " that I want you to betray anything . far from it . be you ready to come , my dear friend ? " " aye ! I will come in a moment . I promise nothing , you know . " " no , my dear ; no . " " and you mean to say you be go to give I a lift to this place , wherever it be , without charge for it ? " inquire , get he hat and thick wash - leather glove . this pleasantry so tickle Smallweed that he laugh , long and low , before the fire . but ever while he laugh , he glance over he paralytic shoulder at and eagerly watch he as he unlock the padlock of a homely cupboard at the distant end of the gallery , look here and there upon the higher shelf , and ultimately take something out with a rustling of paper , fold it , and put it in he breast . then poke once , and poke once . " I be ready , " say the trooper , come back . " Phil , you can carry this old gentleman to he coach , and make nothing of he . " " oh , dear I ! of ! stop a moment ! " say . " he be so very prompt ! be you sure you can do it carefully , my worthy man ? " make no reply , but seize the chair and its load , sidle away , tightly hug by the now speechless , and bolt along the passage as if he have a acceptable commission to carry the old gentleman to the nearest volcano . he shorter trust , however , terminate at the cab , he deposit he there ; and the fair take she place beside he , and the chair embellish the roof , and take the vacant place upon the box . be quite confound by the spectacle he behold from time to time as he peep into the cab through the window behind he , where the grim be always motionless , and the old gentleman with he cap over one eye be always slide off the seat into the straw and look upward at he out of he other eye with a helpless expression of be jolt in the back . than one have not far to ride with fold arm upon the box , for they destination be 's . when the driver stop he horse , alight , and look in at the window , say , " what , 's you man , be he ? " " yes , my dear friend . do you know he , ? " " why , I have hear of
of he -- see he too , I think . but I do not know he , and he do not know I . " there ensue the carrying of upstairs , which be do to perfection with the trooper 's help . he be borne into 's great room and deposite on the rug before the fire . be not within at the present moment but will be back directly . the occupant of the pew in the hall , have say thus much , stir the fire and leave the triumvirate to warm themselves . be mightily curious in respect of the room . he look up at the painted ceiling , look round at the old law - book , contemplate the portrait of the great client , read aloud the name on the box . " ' , , ' " read thoughtfully . " ! ' Manor of . ' Humph ! " stand look at these box a long while -- as if they be picture -- and come back to the fire repeat , " , , and of , hey ? " " worth a mint of money , ! " whisper , rub he leg . " Powerfully rich ! " " who do you mean ? this old gentleman , or the Baronet ? " " this gentleman , this gentleman . " " so I have hear ; and know a thing or two , I will hold a wager . not bad quarter , either , " say , look round again . " see the strong - box yonder ! " this reply be cut short by 's arrival . there be no change in he , of course . Rustily drest , with he spectacle in he hand , and they very case wear threadbare . in manner , close and dry . in voice , husky and low . in face , watchful behind a blind ; habitually not uncensorious and contemptuous perhaps . the peerage may have warmer worshipper and faithfuller believer than , after all , if everything be know . " good morning , , good morning ! " he say as he come in . " you have bring the sergeant , I see . sit down , sergeant . " as take off he glove and put they in he hat , he look with half - close eye across the room to where the trooper stand and say within himself perchance , " you will do , my friend ! " " sit down , sergeant , " he repeat as he come to he table , which be set on one side of the fire , and take he easy - chair . " cold and ree this morning , cold and raw ! " warm before the bar , alternately , the palm and knuckle of he hand and look ( from behind that blind which be always down ) at the trio sit in a little semicircle before he . " now , I can feel what I be about " ( as perhaps he can in two sense ) , " . " the old gentleman be newly shake up by to bear he part in the conversation . " you have bring we good friend the sergeant , I see . " " yes , sir , " return , very servile to the lawyer 's wealth and influence . " and what do the sergeant say about this business ? " " , " say Smallweed with a tremulous wave of he shrivell hand , " this be the gentleman , sir . " salute the gentleman but otherwise sit bolt upright and profoundly silent -- very forward in he chair , as if the full complement of regulation appendage for a field - day hang about he . proceed , " well , -- I believe you name be ? " " it be so , . " " what do you say , ? " " I ask you pardon , sir , " return the trooper , " but I should wish to know what you say ? " " do you mean in point of reward ? " " I mean in point of everything , sir . " this be so very try to 's temper that he suddenly break out with " you be a brimstone beast ! " and as suddenly ask pardon of , excuse himself for this slip of the tongue by say to , " I be think of you grandmother , my dear . " " I suppose , sergeant , " resume as he lean on one side of he chair and cross he leg , " that might have sufficiently explain the matter . it lie in the smallest compass , however . you serve under at one time , and be he attendant in illness , and render he many little service , and be rather in he confidence , I be tell . that be so , be it not ? " " yes , sir , that be so , " say with military brevity . " therefore you may happen to have in you possession something -- anything , no matter what ; account , instruction , order , a letter , anything -- in 's writing . I wish to compare he writing with some that I have . if you can give I the opportunity , you shall be reward for you trouble . , four , five , guinea , you would consider handsome , I dare say . " " , my dear friend ! " cry , screw up he eye . " if not , say how much more , in you conscience as a soldier , you can demand . there be no need for you to part with the
the writing , against you inclination -- though I should prefer to have it . " sit square in exactly the same attitude , look at the painted ceiling , and say never a word . the irascible scratch the air . " the question be , " say in he methodical , subdued , uninterested way , " first , whether you have any of 's writing ? " " first , whether I have any of 's writing , sir , " repeat . " secondly , what will satisfy you for the trouble of produce it ? " " secondly , what will satisfy I for the trouble of produce it , sir , " repeat . " thirdly , you can judge for yourself whether it be at all like that , " say , suddenly hand he some sheet of write paper tie together . " whether it be at all like that , sir . just so , " repeat . all three repetition pronounce in a mechanical manner , look straight at ; nor do he so much as glance at the affidavit in and , that have be give to he for he inspection ( though he still hold it in he hand ) , but continue to look at the lawyer with a air of troubled meditation . " well ? " say . " what do you say ? " " well , sir , " reply , rise erect and look immense , " I would rather , if you will excuse I , have nothing to do with this . " , outwardly quite undisturbed , demand , " why not ? " " why , sir , " return the trooper . " except on military compulsion , I be not a man of business . among civilian I be what they call in a ne'er - do - weel . I have no head for papers , sir . I can stand any fire better than a fire of cross question . I mention to , only a hour or so ago , that when I come into thing of this kind I feel as if I be be smothered . and that be my sensation , " say , look round upon the company , " at the present moment . " with that , he take three stride forward to replace the papers on the lawyer 's table and three stride backward to resume he former station , where he stand perfectly upright , now look at the ground and now at the painted ceiling , with he hand behind he as if to prevent himself from accept any other document whatever . under this provocation , 's favourite adjective of disparagement be so close to he tongue that he begin the word " my dear friend " with the monosyllable " brim , " thus convert the possessive pronoun into brimmy and appear to have a impediment in he speech . once past this difficulty , however , he exhort he dear friend in the tenderest manner not to be rash , but to do what so eminent a gentleman require , and to do it with a good grace , confident that it must be unobjectionable as well as profitable . merely utter a occasional sentence , as , " you be the best judge of you own interest , sergeant . " " take care you do no harm by this . " " please yourself , please yourself . " " if you know what you mean , that be quite enough . " these he utter with a appearance of perfect indifference as he look over the papers on he table and prepare to write a letter . look distrustfully from the painted ceiling to the ground , from the ground to Smallweed , from to , and from to the paint ceiling again , often in he perplexity change the leg on which he rest . " I do assure you , sir , " say , " not to say it offensively , that between you and Smallweed here , I really be be smother fifty time over . I really be , sir . I be not a match for you gentleman . will you allow I to ask why you want to see the captain 's hand , in the case that I could find any specimen of it ? " quietly shake he head . " no . if you be a man of business , sergeant , you would not need to be inform that there be confidential reason , very harmless in themselves , for many such want in the profession to which i belong . but if you be afraid of do any injury to , you may set you mind at rest about that . " " aye ! he be dead , sir . " " be he ? " quietly sit down to write . " well , sir , " say the trooper , look into he hat after another disconcert pause , " I be sorry not to have give you more satisfaction . if it would be any satisfaction to any one that I should be confirm in my judgment that I would rather have nothing to do with this by a friend of mine who have a better head for business than I have , and who be a old soldier , I be willing to consult with he . I -- I really be so completely smother myself at present , " say , pass he hand hopelessly across he brow , " that I do not know but what it might be a satisfaction to I . " , hear that this authority be a old soldier , so strongly inculcate the expediency of the trooper 's take counsel with he , and
and particularly inform he of its be a question of five guinea or more , that engage to go and see he . say nothing either way . " I will consult my friend , then , by you leave , sir , " say the trooper , " and I will take the liberty of look in again with the final answer in the course of the day . , if you wish to be carry downstairs -- " " in a moment , my dear friend , in a moment . will you first let I speak half a word with this gentleman in private ? " " certainly , sir . do not hurry yourself on my account . " the trooper retire to a distant part of the room and resume he curiious inspection of the box , strong and otherwise . " if I be not as weak as a brimstone baby , sir , " whisper , draw the lawyer down to he level by the lapel of he coat and flash some half - quench green fire out of he angry eye , " I would tear the writing away from he . he be get it buttone in he breast . I see he put it there . see he put it there . speak up , you crab image for the sign of a walking - stick shop , and say you see he put it there ! " this vehement conjuration the old gentleman accompany with such a thrust at he granddaughter that it be too much for he strength , and he slip away out of he chair , draw with he , until he be arrest by , and well shake . " violence will not do for I , my friend , " then remark coolly . " no , no , I know , I know , sir . but it be chaf and gall -- it be -- it be worse than you smattering chatter magpie of a grandmother , " to the imperturbable , who only look at the fire , " to know he have get what be want and will not give it up . he , not to give it up ! he ! a vagabond ! but never mind , sir , never mind . at the most , he have only he own way for a little while . I have he periodically in a vice . I will twist he , sir . I will screw he , sir . if he will not do it with a good grace , I will make he do it with a bad one , sir ! now , my dear , " say , wink at the lawyer hideously as he release he , " I be ready for you kind assistance , my excellent friend ! " , with some shadowy sign of amusement manifest itself through he self - possession , stand on the hearth - rug with he back to the fire , watch the disappearance of and acknowledge the trooper 's part salute with one slight nod . it be more difficult to get rid of the old gentleman , find , than to bear a hand in carry he downstairs , for when he be replace in he conveyance , he be so loquacious on the subject of the guinea and retain such a affectionate hold of he button -- have , in truth , a secret long to rip he coat open and rob he -- that some degree of force be necessary on the trooper 's part to effect a separation . it be accomplish at last , and he proceed alone in quest of he adviser . by the cloisterly Temple , and by Whitefriars ( there , not without a glance at - , which would seem to be something in he way ) , and by , and , sedately march to a street of little shops lie somewhere in that ganglion of road from and , and of street from the bridge of , cent in the far - fam elephant who have lose he castle for of a thousand four - horse coach to a stronger iron monster than he , ready to chop he into mince -meat any day he dare . to one of the little shop in this street , which be a musician 's shop , have a few fiddle in the window , and some 's pipe and a tambourine , and a triangle , and certain elongate scrap of music , direct he massive tread . and halt at a few pace from it , as he see a soldierly look woman , with she outer skirt tuck up , come forth with a small wooden tub , and in that tub commence a - whisking and a - splashing on the margin of the pavement , say to himself , " she be as usual , wash greens . I never see she , except upon a baggage - waggon , when she be not wash green ! " the subject of this reflection be at all event so occupy in washing greens at present that she remain unsuspicious of 's approach until , lift up herself and she tub together when she have pour the water off into the gutter , she find he stand near she . she reception of he be not flatter . " , I never see you but I wish you be a hundred mile away ! " the trooper , without remark on this welcome , follow into the musical - instrument shop , where the lady place she tub of green upon the counter , and have shaken hand with he , rest she arm upon it . " I never , " she say , " , consider safe a minute when you
you be near he . you be that restless and that rove -- " " yes ! I know I am , . I know I be . " " you know you be ! " say . " what be the use of that ? why be you ? " " the nature of the animal , I suppose , " return the trooper good - humouredly . " ah ! " cry , something shrilly . " but what satisfaction will the nature of the animal be to I when the animal shall have temp my away from the musical business to or ? " be not at all a ill - look woman . rather large - bone , a little coarse in the grain , and freckle by the sun and wind which have tan she hair upon the forehead , but healthy , wholesome , and bright - eyed . a strong , busy , active , honest - faced woman of from forty - five to fifty . clean , hardy , and so economically dress ( though substantially ) that the only article of ornament of which she stand possess appear 's to be she wedding - ring , around which she finger have grow to be so large since it be put on that it will never come off again until it shall mingle with 's dust . " , " say the trooper , " I be on my parole with you . Mat will get no harm from I . you may trust I so far . " " well , I think I may . but the very look of you be unsettling , " rejoin . " ah , , ! if you have only settle down and marry 's widow when he die in , she would have comb you hair for you . " " it be a chance for I , certainly , " return the trooper half laughingly , half seriously , " but I shall never settle down into a respectable man now . 's widow might have do I good -- there be something in she , and something of she -- but I could not make up my mind to it . if I have have the luck to meet with such a wife as Mat find ! " , who seem in a virtuous way to be under little reserve with a good sort of fellow , but to be another good sort of fellow herself for that matter , receive this compliment by flick in the face with a head of green and take she tub into the little room behind the shop . " why , , my poppet , " say , follow , on invitation , into that department . " and litle , too ! come and kiss you ! " these young lady -- not suppose to have be actually christen by the name apply to they , though always so call in the family from the place of they birth in barrack -- be respectively employ on three - leg stool , the younger ( some five or six year old ) in learn she letter out of a penny primer , the elder ( eight or nine perhaps ) in teach she and sew with great assiduity . both hail with acclamation as a old friend and after some kissing and rom plant they stool beside he . " and how 's young ? " say . " ah ! there now ! " cry , turn about from she saucepan ( for she be cook dinner ) with a bright flush on she face . " would you believe it ? get a engagement at the theayter , with he father , to play the fife in a military piece . " " well do , my godson ! " cry , slapp he thigh . " I believe you ! " say . " he be a . that be what be . a ! " " and blow away at he bassoon , and you be respectable civilian one and all , " say . " family people . child grow up . 's old mother in , and you old father somewhere else , correspond with , and help a little , and -- well , well ! to be sure , I do not know why I should not be wish a hundred mile away , for I have not much to do with all this ! " be become thoughtful , sit before the fire in the whitewashed room , which have a sanded floor and a barrack smell and contain nothing superfluous and have not a visible speck of dirt or dust in it , from the face of and to the bright tin pots and pannikin upon the dresser shelf -- . be become thoughtful , sit here while be busy , when and young opportunely come home . be a ex- artilleryman , tall and upright , with shaggy eyebrow and whisker like the fibre of a coco -nut , not a hair upon he head , and a torrid complexion . he voice , short , deep , and resonant , be not at all unlike the tone of the instrument to which he be devote . indeed there may be generally observe in he a unbending , unyielding , brass - bound air , as if he be himself the bassoon of the human orchestra . young be the type and model of a young drummer . both father and son salute the trooper heartily . he say , in due season , that he have come to advise with , hospitably declare that he will hear of no business until after dinner and that he friend shall not partake of he counsel without first partaking of boiled pork and green .
. the trooper yield to this invitation , he and , not to embarrass the domestic preparation , go forth to take a turn up and down the little street , which they promenade with measure tread and fold arm , as if it be a rampart . " , " say . " you know I . it be my old girl that advise . she have the head . but I never own to it before she . must be maintain . wait till the green be off she mind . then we will consult . whatever the old girl say , do -- do it ! " " I intend to , , " reply the other . " I would sooner take she opinion than that of a college . " " College , " return in short sentence , bassoon - like . " what college could you leave -- in another quarter of the world -- with nothing but a grey cloak and a umbrella -- to make its way home to ? the old girl would do it to - morrow . do it once ! " " you be right , " say . " what college , " pursue , " could you set up in life -- with two penn'orth of white lime -- a penn'orth of fuller 's earth -- a hag porth of sand -- and the rest of the change out of sixpence in money ? that be what the old girl start on . in the present business . " " I be rejoice to hear it be thrive , . " " the old girl , " say , acquiescing , " save . have a stocking somewhere . with money in it . I never see it . but I know she be get it . wait till the green be off she mind . then she will set you up . " " she be a treasure ! " exclaim . " she be more . but I never own to it before she . must be maintain . it be the old girl that brotch out my musical ability . I should have be in the artillery now but for the old girl . six year I hammere at the fiddle . ten at the flute . the old girl say it would not do ; intention good , but want of flexibility ; try the bassoon . the old girl borrow a bassoon from the bandmaster of the . I practise in the trench . get on , get another , get a living by it ! " remark that she look as fresh as a rose and as sound as a apple . " the old girl , " say in reply , " be a thoroughly fine woman . consequently she be like a thoroughly fine day . get finer as she get on . I never see the old girl 's equal . but I never own to it before she . must be maintain ! " proceed to converse on indifferent matter , they walk up and down the little street , keep step and time , until summon by and to do justice to the pork and green , over which , like a military chaplain , say a short grace . in the distribution of these comestible , as in every other household duty , . develope a exact system , sit with every dish before she , allot to every portion of pork its own portion of pot-liquor , green , potatoe , and even mustard , and serve it out complete . have likewise serve out the beer from a can and thus supply the mess with all thing necessary , proceed to satisfy she own hunger , which be in a healthy state . the kit of the mess , if the table furniture may be so denominated , be chiefly composed of utensil of horn and tin that have do duty in several part of the world . yong 's knife , in particular , which be of the oyster kind , with the additional feature of a strong shutting - up movement which frequently balk the appetite of that young musician , be mention as have go in various hand the complete round of foreign service . the dinner do , , assist by the younger branch ( who polish they own cup and platter , knife and fork ) , make all the dinner garniture shine as brightly as before and put it all away , first sweep the hearth , to the end that and the visitor may not be retarde in the smoking of they pipe . these household care involve much pattening and counter - patten in the backyard and considerable use of a pail , which be finally so happy as to assist in the ablution of herself . that old girl reappear by and by , quite fresh , and sit down to she needlework , then and only then -- the green be only then to be consider as entirely off she mind -- request the trooper to state he case . this do with great discretion , appear to address himself to , but have a eye solely on the old girl all the time , as have himself . she , equally discreet , busy herself with she needlework . the case fully state , resorts to he standard artifice for the maintenance of discipline . " that be the whole of it , be it , ? " say he . " that be the whole of it . " " you act accord to my opinion ? " " I shall be guide , " reply , " entirely by it . " " old girl , " say , " give he my opinion . you know it .
. tell he what it be . " it be that he can not have too little to do with people who be too deep for he and can not be too careful of interference with matter he do not understand -- that the plain rule be to do nothing in the dark , to be a party to nothing underhanded or mysterious , and never to put he foot where he can not see the ground . this , in effect , be 's opinion , as deliver through the old girl , and it so relieve 's mind by confirm he own opinion and banish he doubt that he compose himself to smoke another pipe on that exceptional occasion and to have a talk over old time with the whole Bagnet family , accord to they various range of experience . through these means it come to pass that do not again rise to he full height in that parlour until the time be draw on when the bassoon and fife be expect by a british public at the theatre ; and as it take time even then for , in he domestic character of , to take leave of and and insinuate a sponsorial shilling into the pocket of he godson with felicitation on he success in life , it be dark when again turn he face towards 's . " a family home , " he ruminate as he march along , " however small it be , make a man like I look lonely . but it be well I never make that evolution of matrimony . I should not have be fit for it . I be such a vagabond still , even at my present time of life , that I could not hold to the gallery a month together if it be a regular pursuit or if I do not camp there , gipsy fashion . come ! I disgrace nobody and cumber nobody ; that be something . I have not do that for many a long year ! " so he whistle it off and march on . arrive in 's and mount 's stair , he find the outer door close and the chamber shut , but the trooper not know much about outer door , and the staircase be dark besides , he be yet fumbling and grope about , hope to discover a bell - handle or to open the door for himself , when come up the stair ( quietly , of course ) and angrily ask , " who be that ? what be you do there ? " " I ask you pardon , sir . it be . the sergeant . " " and could not , the sergeant , see that my door be lock ? " " why , no , sir , I could not . at any rate , I do not , " say the trooper , rather nettled . " have you change you mind ? or be you in the same mind ? " demand . but he know well enough at a glance . " in the same mind , sir . " " I think so . that be sufficient . you can go . so you be the man , " say , open he door with the key , " in whose hiding - place be find ? " " yes , I be the man , " say the trooper , stop two or three stair down . " what then , sir ? " " what then ? I do not like you associate . you should not have see the inside of my door this morning if I have think of you be that man . ? a threatening , murderous , dangerous fellow . " with these word , speak in a unusually high tone for he , the lawyer go into he room and shut be the door with a thunder noise . take he dismissal in great dudgeon , the greater because a clerk come up the stair have hear the last word of all and evidently apply they to he . " a pretty character to bear , " the trooper growl with a hasty oath as he stride downstairs . " a threatening , murderous , dangerous fellow ! " and look up , he see the clerk look down at he and mark he as he pass a lamp . this so intensify he dudgeon that for five minute he be in a ill humour . but he whistle that off like the rest of it and march home to the shooting gallery . the have get the better , for the time be , of the family gout and be once more , in a literal no less than in a figurative point of view , upon he leg . he be at he place in ; but the water be out again on the low - lie grounds , and the cold and damp steal into , though well defend , and eke into 's bone . the blazing fire of faggot and coal -- Dedlock timber and antediluvian forest -- that blaze upon the broad wide heart and wink in the twilight on the frowning wood , sull to see how tree be sacrifice , do not exclude the enemy . the hot - water pipe that trail themselves all over the house , the cushioned door and window , and the screen and curtain fail to supply the fire 's deficiency and to satisfy 's need . hence the fashionable intelligence proclaim one morning to the listen earth that be expect shortly to return to town for a few week . it be a melancholy truth that even great man have they poor relation . indeed great man have often more than they fair share of poor relation , inasmuch
inasmuch as very red blood of the superior quality , like inferior blood unlawfully shed , while cry aloud and will be hear . 's cousin , in the remotest degree , be so many murder in the respect that they " will out . " among whom there be cousin who be so poor that one might almost dare to think it would have be the happier for they never to have be plate link upon the chain of gold , but to have be make of common iron at first and do base service . service , however ( with a few limited reservation , genteel but not profitable ) , they may not do , be of the Dedlock dignity . so they visit they richer cousin , and get into debt when they can , and live but shabbily when they can not , and find -- the woman no husband , and the man no wife -- and ride in borrowed carriage , and sit at feast that be never of they own make , and so go through high life . the rich family sum have be divide by so many figure , and they be the something over that nobody know what to do with . everybody on 's side of the question and of he way of think would appear to be he cousin more or less . from my , through the of , down to , , like a glorious spider , stretch he threads of relationship . but while he be stately in the cousinship of the everybodys , he be a kind and generous man , accord to he dignified way , in the cousinship of the nobodys ; and at the present time , in despite of the damp , he stay out the visit of several such cousins at with the constancy of a martyr . of these , foremost in the front rank stand , a young lady ( of sixty ) who be doubly highly related , have the honour to be a poor relation , by the mother 's side , to another great family . , display in early life a pretty talent for cut ornament out of coloured paper , and also for singe to the guitar in the spanish tongue , and propound french conundrums in country house , pass the twenty year of she existence between twenty and forty in a sufficiently agreeable manner . Lapse then out of date and be consider to bear mankind by she vocal performance in the spanish language , she retire to , where she live slenderly on a annual present from and whence she make occasional resurrection in the country house of she cousin . she have a extensive acquaintance at Bath among appalling old gentleman with thin leg and nankeen trousers , and be of high standing in that dreary city . but she be a little dread elsewhere in consequence of a indiscreet profusion in the article of rouge and persistency in a obsolete pearl necklace like a rosary of little bird 's - egg . in any country in a wholesome state , would be a clear case for the pension list . efforts have be make to get she on it , and when come in , it be fully expect that she name would be put down for a couple of hundred a year . but somehow discover , contrary to all expectation , that these be not the time when it could be do , and this be the first clear indication have convey to he that the country be go to piece . there be likewise the , who can make warm mash with the skill of a veterinary surgeon and be a better shot than most gamekeeper . he have be for some time particularly desirous to serve he country in a post of good emolument , unaccompanied by any trouble or responsibility . in a well - regulate body polintic this natural desire on the part of a spirited young gentleman so highly connect would be speedily recognize , but somehow find when he come in that these be not time in which he could manage that little matter either , and this be the second indication have convey to he that the country be go to piece . the rest of the cousin be lady and gentleman of various ag and capacitie , the major part amiable and sensible and likely to have do well enough in life if they could have overcome they cousinship ; as it be , they be almost all a little worst by it , and lounge in purposeless and listless path , and seem to be quite as much at a loss how to dispose of themselves as anybody else can be how to dispose of they . in this society , and where not , my reign supreme . beautiful , elegant , accomplish , and powerful in she little world ( for the world of fashion do not stretch all the way from pole to pole ) , she influence in 's house , however haughty and indifferent she manner , be greatly to improve it and refine it . the cousin , even those older cousins who be paralyse when marry she , do she feudal homage ; and the Honourable daily repeat to some chosen person between breakfast and lunch he favourite original remark , that she be the best - groome woman in the whole stud . such the guest in the long drawing - room at Wold this dismal night when the step on the Ghost 's walk ( inaudible here , however ) might be the step of a decease cousin shut out in the cold . it be near bed - time . fire blaze brightly all over the house , raise ghost of grim furniture on wall and
and ceiling . candlestick bristle on the distant table by the door , and cousin yawn on ottoman . cousin at the piano , cousin at the soda - water tray , cousins rise from the card - table , cousins gather round the fire . stand on one side of he own peculiar fire ( for there be two ) , . on the opposite side of the broad hearth , my at she table . , as one of the more privileged cousins , in a luxurious chair between they . glancing , with magnificent displeasure , at the rouge and the pearl necklace . " I occasionally meet on my staircase here , " drawl , whose thought perhaps be already hopp up it to bed , after a long evening of very desultory talk , " one of the prettiest girl , I think , that I ever see in my life . " " a Protegee of my 's , " observe . " I think so . I feel sure that some uncommon eye must have pick that girl out . she really be a marvel . a dolly sort of beauty perhaps , " say , reserve she own sort , " but in its way , perfect ; such bloom I never see ! " , with he magnificent glance of displeasure at the rouge , appear to say so too . " indeed , " remark my languidly , " if there be any uncommon eye in the case , it be 's , and not mine . be she discovery . " " you maid , I suppose ? " " no . my anything ; pet --secretary -- messenger -- I do not know what . " " you like to have she about you , as you would like to have a flower , or a bird , or a picture , or a poodle -- no , not a poodle , though -- or anything else that be equally pretty ? " say , sympathizing . " yes , how charme now ! and how well that delightful old soul be look . she must be a immense age , and yet she be as active and handsome ! she be the dearest friend I have , positively ! " feel it to be right and fit that the housekeeper of should be a remarkable person . apart from that , he have a real regard for and like to hear she praise . so he say , " you be right , , " which be extremely glad to hear . " she have no daughter of she own , have she ? " " . ? no , . she have a son . indeed , she have two . " my lady , whose chronic malady of boredom have be sadly aggravate by this evening , glance wearily towards the candlestick and heave a noiseless sigh . " and it be a remarkable example of the confusion into which the present age have fall ; of the obliteration of landmarks , the opening of floodgate , and the uprooting of distinction , " say with stately gloom , " that I have be inform by Tulkinghorn that 's son have be invite to go into parliament . " utter a little sharp scream . " yes , indeed , " repeat . " . " " I never hear of such a thing ! good gracious , what be the man ? " exclaim . " he be call , I believe -- an-- ironmaster . " say it slowly and with gravity and doubt , as not be sure but that he be call a lead - mistress or that the right word may be some other word expressive of some other relationship to some other metal . utter another little scream . " he have decline the proposal , if my information from be correct , as I have no doubt it be . be always correct and exact ; still that do not , " say , " that do not lessen the anomaly , which be fraught with strange consideration -- start consideration , as it appear to I . " miss rise with a look candlestick - wards , politely perform the grand tour of the drawing - room , bring one , and light it at my 's shaded lamp . " I must beg you , my , " he say while do so , " to remain a few moment , for this individual of whom I speak arrive this evening shortly before dinner and request in a very becoming note " -- , with he habitual regard to truth , dwell upon it -- " I be bound to say , in a very becoming and well - express note , the favour of a short interview with yourself and myself on the subject of this young girl . as it appear that he wish to depart to - night , I reply that we would see he before retire . " with a third little scream take flight , wish she host -- of !-- well ry of the -- what be it ?--ironmaster ! the other cousins soon disperse , to the last cousin there . ring the bell , " make my compliment to , in the housekeeper 's apartment , and say I can receive he now . " my lady , who have hear all this with slight attention outwardly , look towards as he come in . he be a little over fifty perhaps , of a good figure , like he mother , and have a clear voice , a broad forehead from which he dark hair have retire , and a shrewd though open face . he be a responsible - look gentleman dress in black , portly
portly enough , but strong and active . have a perfectly natural and easy air and be not in the least embarrasse by the great presence into which he come . " and , as I have already apologize for intruding on you , I can not do better than be very brief . I thank you , . " the head of the Dedlock have motion towards a sofa between himself and my lady . quietly take he seat there . " in these busy time , when so many great undertaking be in progress , people like myself have so many workman in so many place that we be always on the flight . " be content enough that the ironmaster should feel that there be no hurry there ; there , in that ancient house , root in that quiet park , where the ivy and the moss have have time to mature , and the gnarle and wart elm and the umbrageous oak stand deep in the fern and leave of a hundred year ; and where the sun -dial on the terrace have dumbly record for centurie that time which be as much the property of every Dedlock -- while he last -- as the house and lands . sit down in a easy - chair , oppose he repose and that of to the restless flights of ironmaster . " have be so kind , " proceed with a respectful glance and a bow that way , " as to place near she a young beauty of the name of . now , my son have fall in love with and have ask my consent to he propose marriage to she and to they become engaged if she will take he -- which I suppose she will . I have never see until to - day , but I have some confidence in my son 's good sense -- even in love . I find she what he represent she , to the best of my judgment ; and my mother speak of she with great commendation . " " she in all respects deserve it , " say my . " I be happy , , that you say so , and I need not comment on the value to I of you kind opinion of she . " " that , " observe with unspeakable grandeur , for he think the ironmaster a little too glib , " must be quite unnecessary . " " quite unnecessary , . now , my son be a very young man , and be a very young woman . as i make my way , so my son must make he ; and he be marry at present be out of the question . but suppose I give my consent to he engage himself to this pretty girl , if this pretty girl will engage herself to he , I think it a piece of candour to say at once -- I be sure , and , you will understand and excuse I -- I should make it a condition that she do not remain at . therefore , before communicate further with my son , I take the liberty of say that if she removal would be in any way inconvenient or objectionable , I will hold the matter over with he for any reasonable time and leave it precisely where it be . " not remain at ! make it a condition ! all 's old misgiving relative to and the people in the iron districts who do nothing but turn out by torchlight come in a shower upon he head , the fine grey hair of which , as well as of he whisker , actually stir with indignation . " be I to understand , sir , " say , " and be my Lady to understand " -- he bring she in thus specially , first as a point of gallantry , and next as a point of prudence , have great reliance on she sense -- " be I to understand , , and be my Lady to understand , sir , that you consider this young woman too good for or likely to be injure by remain here ? " " certainly not , , " " I be glad to hear it . " very lofy indeed . " pray , , " say my , warn off with the slightest gesture of she pretty hand , as if he be a fly , " explain to I what you mean . " " willingly , . there be nothing I could desire more . " Addresse she compose face , whose intelligence , however , be too quick and active to be conceal by any study impassiveness , however habitual , to the strong face of the visitor , a picture of resolution and perseverance , my listen with attention , occasionally slightly bend she head . " I be the son of you housekeeper , , and pass my childhood about this house . my mother have live here half a century and will die here I have no doubt . she be one of those example -- perhaps as good a one as there be -- of love , and attachment , and fidelity in such a nation , which may well be proud of , but of which no order can appropriate the whole pride or the whole merit , because such a instance bespeak high worth on two side -- on the great side assuredly , on the small one no less assuredly . " snort a little to hear the law lay down in this way , but in he honour and he love of truth , he freely , though silently , admit the justice of the ironmaster 's proposition . " pardon I for say what be so obvious ,
, but I would not have it hastily suppose , " with the least turn of he eye towards , " that I be asham of my mother 's position here , or wante in all just respect for and the family . I certainly may have desire -- I certainly have desire , -- that my mother should retire after so many year and end she day with I . but as I have find that to sever this strong bond would be to break she heart , I have long abandon that idea . " very magnificent again at the notion of . be spirit off from she natural home to end she day with a ironmaster . " I have be , " proceed the visitor in a modest , clear way , " a apprentice and a workman . I have live on workman 's wage , year and year , and beyond a certain point have have to educate myself . my wife be a foreman 's daughter , and plainly bring up . we have three daughter besides this son of whom I have speak , and be fortunately able to give they greater advantage than we have have ourselves , we have educate they well , very well . it have be one of we great care and pleasure to make they worthy of any station . " a little boastfulness in he fatherly tone here , as if he add in he heart , " even of the station . " not a little more magnificence , therefore , on the part of . " all this be so frequent , , where I live , and among the class to which I belong , that what would be generally call unequal marriage be not of such rare occurrence with we as elsewhere . a son will sometimes make it know to he father that he have fall in love , say , with a young woman in the factory . the father , who once work in a factory himself , will be a little disappointed at first very possibly . it may be that he have other view for he son . however , the chance be that have ascertain the young woman to be of unblemished character , he will say to he son , ' I must be quite sure you be in earnest here . this be a serious matter for both of you . therefore I shall have this girl educate for two year , ' or it may be , ' I shall place this girl at the same school with you sister for such a time , during which you will give I you word and honour to see she only so often . if at the expiration of that time , when she have so far profit by she advantages as that you may be upon a fair equality , you be both in the same mind , I will do my part to make you happy . ' I know of several case such as I describe , my , and I think they indicate to I my own course now . " 's magnificence explode . Calmly , but terribly . " Rouncewell , " say with he right hand in the breast of he blue coat , the attitude of state in which he be pain in the gallery , " do you draw a parallel between and a -- " here he resist a disposition to choke , " a factory ? " " I need not reply , , that the two place be very different ; but for the purpose of this case , I think a parallel may be justly draw between they . " direct he majestic glance down one side of the long drawing - room and up the other before he can believe that he be awake . " be you aware , sir , that this young woman whom my -- my -- have place near she person be bring up at the village school outside the gate ? " " , I be quite aware of it . a very good school it be , and handsomely support by this family . " " then , , " return , " the application of what you have say be , to I , incomprehensible . " " will it be more comprehensible , , if I say , " the ironmaster be redden a little , " that I do not regard the village school as teach everything desirable to be know by my son 's wife ? " from the village school of , intact as it be this minute , to the whole framework of society ; from the whole framework of society , to the aforesaid framework receive tremendous crack in consequence of people ( iron-master , lead- mistress , and what not ) not mind they catechism , and get out of the station unto which they be call -- necessarily and for ever , accord to 's rapid logic , the first station in which they happen to find themselves ; and from that , to they educate other people out of they station , and so obliterate the landmarks , and open the floodgate , and all the rest of it ; this be the swift progress of the mind . " my , I beg you pardon . permit I , for one moment ! " she have give a faint indication of intend to speak . " , we view of duty , and we view of station , and we view of education , and we view of -- in short , all we views -- be so diametrically oppose , that to prolong this discussion must be repellent to you feeling and repellent to my own . this young woman be honoure
honoure with my 's notice and favour . if she wish to withdraw herself from that notice and favour or if she choose to place herself under the influence of any one who may in he peculiar opinion -- you will allow I to say , in he peculiar opinion , though I readily admit that he be not accountable for they to I -- who may , in he peculiar opinion , withdraw she from that notice and favour , she be at any time at liberty to do so . we be oblige to you for the plainness with which you have speak . it will have no effect of itself , one way or other , on the young woman 's position here . beyond this , we can make no term ; and here we beg -- if you will be so good -- to leave the subject . " the visitor pause a moment to give my a opportunity , but she say nothing . he then rise and reply , " and , allow I to thank you for you attention and only to observe that I shall very seriously recommend my son to conquer he present inclination . good night ! " " , " say with all the nature of a gentleman shining in he , " it be late , and the roads be dark . I hope you time be not so precious but that you will allow my and myself to offer you the hospitality of , for to - night at least . " " I hope so , " add my . " I be much oblige to you , but I have to travel all night in order to reach a distant part of the country punctually at a appointed time in the morning . " Therewith the ironmaster take he departure , ring the bell and my rise as he leave the room . when my Lady go to she boudoir , she sit down thoughtfully by the fire , and inattentive to the Ghost 's walk , look at , write in a inner room . presently my call she . " come to I , child . tell I the truth . be you in love ? " " oh ! my lady ! " my lady , look at the downcast and blush face , say smiling , " who be it ? be it 's grandson ? " " yes , if you please , my . but I do not know that I be in love with he - - yet . " " Yet , you silly little thing ! do you know that he love you , yet ? " " I think he like I a little , my lady . " and burst into tear . be this stand beside the village beauty , smooth she dark hair with that motherly touch , and watch she with eye so full of musing interest ? aye , indeed it be ! " listen to I , child . you be young and true , and I believe you be attach to I . " " indeed I be , my . indeed there be nothing in the world I would not do to show how much . " " and I do not think you would wish to leave I just yet , , even for a lover ? " " no , my ! oh , no ! " look up for the first time , quite frightened at the thought . " Confide in I , my child . do not fear I . I wish you to be happy , and will make you so -- if I can make anybody happy on this earth . " , with fresh tear , kneel at she foot and kiss she hand . my take the hand with which she have catch it , and stand with she eye fix on the fire , put it about and about between she own two hand , and gradually let it fall . see she so absorb , softly withdraw ; but still my 's eye be on the fire . in search of what ? of any hand that be no more , of any hand that never be , of any touch that might have magically change she life ? or do she listen to the Ghost 's walk and think what step do it most resemble ? a man 's ? a woman 's ? the pattering of a little child 's foot , ever come on -- on -- on ? some melancholy influence be upon she , or why should so proud a lady close the door and sit alone upon the hearth so desolate ? be away next day , and all the cousin be scatter before dinner . not a cousin of the batch but be amazed to hear from at breakfast - time of the obliteration of landmarks , and opening of floodgate , and cracking of the framework of society , manifest through 's son . not a cousin of the batch but be really indignant , and connect it with the feebleness of when in office , and really do feel deprive of a stake in the country -- or the pension list -- or something -- by fraud and wrong . as to , she be hande down the great staircase by , as eloquent upon the theme as if there be a general rise in the north of to obtain she rouge - pot and pearl necklace . and thus , with a clatter of maid and valet -- for it be one appurtenance of they cousinship that however difficult they may find it to keep themselves , they must keep maid and valets -- the cousin disperse to the four wind of heaven ; and the
the one wintry wind that blow to - day shakes a shower from the tree near the desert house , as if all the cousin have be change into leave . the young man be shut up , carpet be roll into great scrolls in corner of comfortless room , bright damask do penance in brown holland , carve and gild put on mortification , and the Dedlock ancestor retire from the light of day again . and around the house the leave fall thick , but never fast , for they come circle down with a dead lightness that be sombre and slow . let the gardener sweep and sweep the turf as he will , and press the leave into full barrow , and wheel they off , still they lie ankle - deep . Howl the shrill wind round ; the sharp rain beat , the window rattle , and the chimney growl . Mists hide in the avenue , veil the point of view , and move in funeral - wise across the rising grounds . on all the house there be a cold , blank smell like the smell of a little church , though something dryer , suggest that the dead and bury Dedlocks walk there in the long night and leave the flavour of they grave behind they . but the house in town , which be rarely in the same mind as at the same time , seldom rejoice when it rejoice or mourn when it mourn , expect when a Dedlock die -- the house in town shine out awaken . as warm and bright as so much state may be , as delicately redolent of pleasant scent that bear no trace of winter as hothouse flowers can make it , soft and hush so that the ticking of the clock and the crisp burn of the fire alone disturb the stillness in the room , it seem to wrap those chill bone of 's in rainbow - colou wool . and be glad to repose in dignified contentment before the great fire in the library , condescendingly peruse the back of he book or honour the fine art with a glance of approbation . for he have he picture , ancient and modern . some of the in which be occasionally condescend to become a master , which would be best catalogue like the miscellaneous article in a sale . as " high - back chair , a table and cover , long - neck bottle ( contain wine ) , one flask , one spanish female 's costume , three - quarter face portrait of the model , and a suit of armour contain . " or " one stone terrace ( crack ) , one gondola in distance , one 's dress complete , richly embroider white satin costume with profile portrait of the model , one superbly mount in gold with jewell handle , elaborate Moorish dress ( very rare ) , and . " come and go pretty often , there be estate business to do , lease to be renew , and so on . he see my Lady pretty often , too ; and he and she be as compose , and as indifferent , and take as little heed of one another , as ever . yet it may be that my lady fear this and that he know it . it may be that he pursue she doggedly and steadily , with no touch of compunction , remorse , or pity . it may be that she beauty and all the state and brilliancy surround she only give he the greater zest for what he be set upon and make he the more inflexible in it . whether he be cold and cruel , whether immovable in what he have make he duty , whether absorb in love of power , whether determine to have nothing hide from he in ground where he have burrow among secret all he life , whether he in he heart despise the splendour of which he be a distant beam , whether he be always treasur up slights and offence in the affability of he gorgeous client -- whether he be any of this , or all of this , it may be that my have better have five thousand pair of fashionable eye upon she , in distrustful vigilance , than the two eye of this rusty lawyer with he wisp of neckcloth and he dull black breech tie with ribbon at the knee . sit in my 's room -- that room in which read the affidavit in and -- particularly complacent . my lady , as on that day , sit before the fire with she screen in she hand . be particularly complacent because he have find in he newspaper some congenial remark bear directly on the floodgate and the framework of society . they apply so happily to the late case that have come from the library to my 's room expressly to read they aloud . " the man who write this article , " he observe by way of preface , nodd at the fire as if he be nodd down at the man from a mount , " have a well - balanced mind . " the man 's mind be not so well balance but that he bore my , who , after a languid effort to listen , or rather a languid resignation of herself to a show of listening , become distratch and fall into a contemplation of the fire as if it be she fire at , and she have never leave it . , quite unconscious , read on through he double eye - glass , occasionally stop to remove he glass and express approval , as " very true indeed , " " very properly put , " " I have frequently make
make the same remark myself , " invariably lose he place after each observation , and go up and down the column to find it again . be read with infinite gravity and state when the door open , and the mercury in powder make this strange announcement , " the young man , my , of the name of . " pause , stare , repeat in a killing voice , " the young man of the name of ? " look round , he behold the young man of the name of , much discomfited and not present a very impressive letter of introduction in he manner and appearance . " pray , " say to , " what do you mean by announce with this abruptness a young man of the name of ? " " I beg you pardon , , but my say she would see the young man whenever he call . I be not aware that you be here , . " with this apology , direct a scornful and indignant look at the young man of the name of which plainly say , " what do you come call here for and get I into a row ? " " it be quite right . I give he those direction , " say my . " let the young man wait . " " by no means , my . since he have you order to come , I will not interrupt you . " in he gallantry retire , rather decline to accept a bow from the young man as he go out and majestically suppose he to be some shoemaker of intrusive appearance . look imperiously at she visitor when the servant have leave the room , cast she eye over he from head to foot . she suffer he to stand by the door and ask he what he want . " that you ladyship would have the kindness to oblige I with a little conversation , " return , embarrass . " you be , of course , the person who have write I so many letter ? " " , you ladyship . several before you ladyship condescende to favour I with a answer . " " and could you not take the same means of render a conversation unnecessary ? can you not still ? " screw he mouth into a silent " no ! " and shake he head . " you have be strangely importunate . if it should appear , after all , that what you have to say do not concern I -- and I do not know how it can , and do not expect that it will -- you will allow I to cut you short with but little ceremony . say what you have to say , if you please . " my lady , with a careless toss of she screen , turn herself towards the fire again , sit almost with she back to the young man of the name of . " with you ladyship 's permission , then , " say the young man , " I will now enter on my business . ! I be , as I tell you ladyship in my first letter , in the law . be in the law , I have lear not the habit of not commit myself in writing , and therefore I do not mention to you ladyship the name of the firm with which I be connect and in which my stand -- and I may add income -- be tolerably good . I may now state to you ladyship , in confidence , that the name of that firm be and , of 's , which may not be altogether unknown to you ladyship in connexion with the case in of and . " my Lady 's figure begin to be expressive of some attention . she have cease to toss the screen and hold it as if she be listen . " now , I may say to you ladyship at once , " say , a little emboldened , " it be no matter arise out of and that make I so desirous to speak to you ladyship , which conduct I have no doubt do appear , and do appear , obtrusive -- in fact , almost blackguardly . " after wait for a moment to receive some assurance to the contrary , and not receive any , proceed , " if it have be and , I should have go at once to you ladyship 's solicitor , , of the field . I have the pleasure of be acquaint with -- at least we move when we meet one another -- and if it have be any business of that sort , I should have go to he . " my Lady turn a little round and say , " you have better sit down . " " thank you ladyship . " do so . " now , you ladyship " -- refer to a little slip of paper on which he have make small note of he line of argument and which seem to involve he in the densest obscurity whenever he look at it --" I -- oh , yes !-- I place myself entirely in you ladyship 's hand . if you ladyship be to make any complaint to and or to of the present visit , I should be place in a very disagreeable situation . that , I openly admit . consequently , I rely upon you ladyship 's honour . " my lady , with a disdainful gesture of the hand that hold the screen , assure he of he be worth no complaint from she . " thank you ladyship , " say ; " quite satisfactory . now -- I -- dash it !-- the fact be that I
I put down a head or two here of the order of the point I think of touching upon , and they be write short , and I can not quite make out what they mean . if you ladyship will excuse I take it to the window half a moment , I -- " , go to the window , tumble into a pair of love - bird , to whom he say in he confusion , " I beg you pardon , I be sure . " this do not tend to the greater legibility of he note . he murmur , grow warm and red and hold the slip of paper now close to he eye , now a long way off , " C.s. what be for ? oh ! oh , I know ! yes , to be sure ! " and come back enlighten . " I be not aware , " say , stand midway between my and he chair , " whether you ladyship ever happen to hear of , or to see , a young lady of the name of . " my Lady 's eye look at he full . " I see a young lady of that name not long ago . this past autumn . " " now , do it strike you ladyship that she be like anybody ? " ask , cross he arm , hold he head on one side , and scratch the corner of he mouth with he memoranda . my Lady remove she eye from he no more . " no . " " not like you ladyship 's family ? " " no . " " I think you ladyship , " say , " can hardly remember 's face ? " " I remember the young lady very well . what have this to do with I ? " " you ladyship , I do assure you that have 's image imprint on my ' eart -- which I mention in confidence -- I find , when I have the honour of go over you ladyship 's mansion of while on a short out in the county of with a friend , such a resemblance between and you ladyship 's own portrait that it completely knock I over , so much so that I do not at the moment even know what it be that knock I over . and now I have the honour of beholde you ladyship near ( I have often , since that , take the liberty of look at you ladyship in you carriage in the park , when I dare say you be not aware of I , but I never see you ladyship so near ) , it be really more surprising than I think it . " young man of the name of ! there have been time , when lady live in stronghold and have unscrupulous attendants within call , when that poor life of yours would not have be worth a minute 's purchase , with those beautiful eye look at you as they look at this moment . my lady , slowly use she little hand - screen as a fan , ask he again what he suppose that he taste for likeness have to do with she . " you ladyship , " reply , again refer to he paper , " I be come to that . Dash these note ! oh ! ' . ' yes . " draw he chair a little forward and seat himself again . my Lady recline in she chair composedly , though with a trifle less of graceful ease than usual perhaps , and never falter in she steady gaze . " a -- stop a minute , though ! " refer again . " twice ? oh , yes ! yes , I see my way now , right on . " roll up the slip of paper as a instrument to point he speech with , proceed . " you ladyship , there be a mystery about 's birth and bring up . I be inform of that fact because -- which I mention in confidence -- I know it in the way of my profession at and 's . now , as I have already mention to you ladyship , 's image be imprint on my ' eart . if I could clear this mystery for she , or prove she to be well relate , or find that have the honour to be a remote branch of you ladyship 's family she have a right to be make a party in and , why , I might make a sort of a claim upon to look with a eye of more dedicated favour on my proposal than she have exactly do as yet . in fact , as yet she have not favour they at all . " a kind of angry smile just dawn upon my 's face . " now , it be a very singular circumstance , you ladyship , " say , " though one of those circumstance that do fall in the way of we professional man -- which I may call myself , for though not admit , yet I have have a present of my article make to I by and , on my mother 's advancing from the principal of she little income the money for the stamp , which come heavy -- that I have encounter the person who live as servant with the lady who bring up before take charge of she . that lady be a , you ladyship . " be the dead colour on my 's face reflect from the screen which have a green silk ground and which she hold in she raise hand as if she have forget it , or be it a dreadful paleness that have fall on she ?
? " do you ladyship , " say , " ever happen to hear of ? " " I do not know . I think so . yes . " " be at all connect with you ladyship 's family ? " my Lady 's lip move , but they utter nothing . she shake she head . " not connect ? " say . " oh ! not to you ladyship 's knowledge , perhaps ? ah ! but might be ? yes . " after each of these interrogatory , she have inclin she head . " very good ! now , this be extremely close -- seem to have be extraordinarily close for a female , female be generally ( in common life at least ) rather give to conversation -- and my witness never have a idea whether she possess a single relative . on one occasion , and only one , she seem to have be confidential to my witness on a single point , and she then tell she that the little girl 's real name be not , but . " " my ! " stare . lady Dedlock sit before he look he through , with the same dark shade upon she face , in the same attitude even to the holding of the screen , with she lip a little apart , she brow a little contract , but for the moment dead . he see she consciousness return , see a tremor pass across she frame like a ripple over water , see she lip shake , see she compose they by a great effort , see she force herself back to the knowledge of he presence and of what he have say . all this , so quickly , that she exclamation and she dead condition seem to have pass away like the feature of those long -preserve dead body sometimes open up in tomb , which , strike by the air like lightning , vanish in a breath . " you ladyship be acquaint with the name of ? " " I have hear it before . " " name of any collateral or remote branch of you ladyship 's family ? " " no . " " now , you ladyship , " say , " I come to the last point of the case , so far as I have get it up . it be go on , and I shall gather it up closer and closer as it go on . you ladyship must know -- if you ladyship do not happen , by any chance , to know already -- that there be find dead at the house of a person name , near Lane , some time ago , a law - writer in great distress . upon which law - writer there be a inquest , and which law - writer be a anonymous character , he name be unknown . but , you ladyship , I have discover very lately that that law - writer 's name be . " " and what be that to I ? " " aye , you ladyship , that be the question ! now , you ladyship , a queer thing happen after that man 's death . a lady start up , a disguise lady , you ladyship , who go to look at the scene of action and go to look at he grave . she hire a crossing - sweep boy to show it she . if you ladyship would wish to have the boy produce in corroboration of this statement , I can lay my hand upon he at any time . " the wretched boy be nothing to my , and she do not wish to have he produce . " oh , I assure you ladyship it be a very queer start indeed , " say . " if you be to hear he tell about the ring that sparkle on she finger when she take she glove off , you would think it quite romantic . " there be diamonds glitter on the hand that hold the screen . my Lady trifle with the screen and make they glitter more , again with that expression which in other time might have be so dangerous to the young man of the name of . " it be suppose , you ladyship , that he leave no rag or scrap behind he by which he could be possibly identify . but he do . he leave a bundle of old letter . " the screen still go , as before . all this time she eyes never once release he . " they be take and secret . and to - morrow night , you ladyship , they will come into my possession . " " still I ask you , what be this to I ? " " you ladyship , I conclude with that . " rise . " if you think there 's enough in this chain of circumstance put together -- in the undoubted strong likeness of this young lady to you ladyship , which be a positive fact for a jury ; in she have be bring up by ; in state 's real name to be ; in you ladyship 's know both these name very well ; and in 's dying as he do -- to give you ladyship a family interest in go further into the case , I will bring these papers here . I do not know what they be , except that they be old letter : I have never have they in my possession yet . I will bring those papers here as soon as I get they and go over they for the first time with you ladyship . I have tell you ladyship my object . I have tell you ladyship that I should be
be place in a very disagreeable situation if any complaint be make , and all be in strict confidence . " be this the full purpose of the young man of the name of , or have he any other ? do he word disclose the length , breadth , depth , of he object and suspicion in come here ; or if not , what do they hide ? he be a match for my there . she may look at he , but he can look at the table and keep that witness - box face of he from tell anything . " you may bring the letter , " say my , " if you choose . " " you ladyship be not very encouraging , upon my word and honour , " say , a little injured . " you may bring the letter , " she repeat in the same tone , " if you -- please . " " it shall he do . I wish you ladyship good day . " on a table near she be a rich bauble of a casket , bar and clasp like a old strong - chest . she , look at he still , take it to she and unlock it . " oh ! I assure you ladyship I be not actuate by any motives of that sort , " say , " and I could not accept anything of the kind . I wish you ladyship good day , and be much oblige to you all the same . " so the young man make he bow and go downstairs , where the supercilious mercury do not consider himself call upon to leave he by the hall - fire to let the young man out . as bask in he library and doze over he newspaper , be there no influence in the house to startle he , not to say to make the very tree at fl up they knot arm , the very portrait frown , the very armour stir ? no . word , sob , and cry be but air , and air be so shut in and shut out throughout the house in town that sound need be utter trumpet - tongue indeed by my in she chamber to carry any faint vibration to 's ear ; and yet this cry be in the house , go upward from a wild figure on its knee . " of my child , my child ! not dead in the first hour of she life , as my cruel sister tell I , but sternly nurture by she , after she have renounce I and my name ! of my child , of my child ! " 's have be go away some time when a visitor come to pass a few day with we . it be a elderly lady . it be , who , have come from Wales to stay with and have write to my guardian , " by she son 's desire , " to report that she have hear from he and that he be well " and send he kind remembrance to all of we , " have be invite by my guardian to make a visit to . she stay with we nearly three week . she take very kindly to I and be extremely confidential , so much so that sometimes she almost make I uncomfortable . I have no right , I know very well , to be uncomfortable because she confide in I , and I feel it be unreasonable ; still , with all I could do , I could not quite help it . she be such a sharp little lady and use to sit with she hand fold in each other look so very watchful while she talk to I that perhaps I find that rather irksome . or perhaps it be she be so upright and trim , though I do not think it be that , because I think that quaintly pleasant . can it have be the general expression of she face , which be very sparkling and pretty for a old lady . I do not know what it be . or at least if I do now , I think I do not then . or at least -- but it do not matter . of a night when I be go upstairs to bed , she would invite I into she room , where she sit before the fire in a great chair ; and , dear I , she would tell I about ap - Kerrig until I be quite low - spirit ! sometimes she recit a few verse from and the Mewlinnwillinwodd ( if those be the right name , which I dare say they be not ) , and would become quite fiery with the sentiment they express . though I never know what they be ( be in ) , further than that they be highly eulogistic of the lineage of ap - . " so , , " she would say to I with stately triumph , " this , you see , be the fortune inherit by my son . wherever my son go , he can claim kindr with - . he may not have money , but he always have what be much better -- family , my dear . " I have my doubt of they caring so very much for ap - in and , but of course I never express they . I use to say it be a great thing to be so highly connect . " it be , my dear , a great thing , " would reply . " it have its disadvantage ; my son 's choice of a wife , for instance , be limit by it , but the matrimonial choice of the
the royal family be limit in much the same manner . " then she would pat I on the arm and smooth my dress , as much as to assure I that she have a good opinion of I , the distance between we notwithstanding . " poor , my dear , " she would say , and always with some emotion , for with she lofy pedigree she have a very affectionate heart , " be descende from a great family , the of . he serve he king and country as a officer in the , and he die on the field . my son be one of the last representatives of two old family . with the blessing of heaven he will set they up again and unite they with another old family . " it be in vain for I to try to change the subject , as I use to try , only for the sake of novelty or perhaps because -- but I need not be so particular . never would let I change it . " my dear , " she say one night , " you have so much sense and you look at the world in a quiet manner so superior to you time of life that it be a comfort to I to talk to you about these family matter of mine . you do not know much of my son , my dear ; but you know enough of he , I dare say , to recollect he ? " " yes , ma 'am . I recollect he . " " yes , my dear . now , my dear , I think you be a judge of character , and I should like to have you opinion of he . " " oh , , " say I , " that be so difficult ! " " why be it so difficult , my dear ? " she return . " I do not see it myself . " " to give a opinion -- " " on so slight a acquaintance , my dear . that be true . " I do not mean that , because have be at we house a good deal altogether and have become quite intimate with my guardian . I say so , and add that he seem to be very clever in he profession -- we think -- and that he kindness and gentleness to be above all praise . " you do he justice ! " say , press my hand . " you define he exactly . be a dear fellow , and in he profession faultless . I say it , though I be he mother . still , I must confess he be not without fault , love . " " none of we be , " say I . " ah ! but he really be fault that he might correct , and ought to correct , " return the sharp old lady , sharply shak she head . " I be so much attach to you that I may confide in you , my dear , as a third party wholly disinterest , that he be fickleness itself . " I say I should have think it hardly possible that he could have be otherwise than constant to he profession and zealous in the pursuit of it , judge from the reputation he have earn . " you be right again , my dear , " the old lady retort , " but I do not refer to he profession , look you . " " oh ! " say I . " no , " say she . " I refer , my dear , to he social conduct . he be always pay trivial attention to young lady , and always have be , ever since he be eighteen . now , my dear , he have never really care for any one of they and have never mean in do this to do any harm or to express anything but politeness and good nature . , it be not right , you know ; be it ? " " no , " say I , as she seem to wait for I . " and it might lead to mistake notion , you see , my dear . " I suppose it might . " therefore , I have tell he many time that he really should be more careful , both in justice to himself and in justice to other . and he have always say , ' mother , I will be ; but you know I better than anybody else do , and you know I mean no harm -- in short , mean nothing . ' all of which be very true , my dear , but be no justification . however , as he be now gone so far away and for a indefinite time , and as he will have good opportunity and introduction , we may consider this past and gone . and you , my dear , " say the old lady , who be now all nod and smile , " regard you dear self , my love ? " " I , ? " " not to be always selfish , talk of my son , who have go to seek he fortune and to find a wife -- when do you mean to seek you fortune and to find a husband , ? hey , look you ! now you blush ! " I do not think I do blush -- at all event , it be not important if I do -- and I say my present fortune perfectly contente I and I have no wish to change it . " shall I tell you what I always think of you and the fortune yet to come for you
you , my love ? " say . " if you believe you be a good prophet , " say I . " why , then , it be that you will marry some one very rich and very worthy , much older -- five and twenty year , perhaps -- than yourself . and you will be a excellent wife , and much beloved , and very happy . " " that be a good fortune , " say I . " but why be it to be mine ? " " my dear , " she return , " there be suitability in it -- you be so busy , and so neat , and so peculiarly situate altogether that there be suitability in it , and it will come to pass . and nobody , my love , will congratulate you more sincerely on such a marriage than I shall . " it be curious that this should make I uncomfortable , but I think it do . I know it do . it make I for some part of that night uncomfortable . I be so asham of my folly that I do not like to confess it even to , and that make I more uncomfortable still . I would have give anything not to have be so much in the bright old lady 's confidence if I could have possibly decline it . it give I the most inconsistent opinion of she . at one time I think she be a story - teller , and at another time that she be the pink of truth . now I suspect that she be very cunning , next moment I believe she honest Welsh heart to be perfectly innocent and simple . and after all , what do it matter to I , and why do it matter to I ? why could not I , go up to bed with my basket of key , stop to sit down by she fire and accommodate myself for a little while to she , at least as well as to anybody else , and not trouble myself about the harmless thing she say to I ? Impell towards she , as I certainly be , for I be very anxious that she should like I and be very glad indeed that she do , why should I harp afterwards , with actual distress and pain , on every word she say and weigh it over and over again in twenty scale ? why be it so worry to I to have she in we house , and confidential to I every night , when I yet feel that it be better and safer somehow that she should be there than anywhere else ? these be perplexity and contradiction that I could not account for . at least , if I could -- but I shall come to all that by and by , and it be mere idleness to go on about it now . so when . go away , I be sorry to lose she but be relieved too . and then come down , and bring such a packet of domestic news that it give we abundant occupation . first declare ( and would at first declare nothing else ) that I be the best adviser that ever be know . this , my pet say , be no news at all ; and this , I say , of course , be nonsense . then tell we that she be go to be marry in a month and that if and I would be she bridesmaid , she be the happiest girl in the world . to be sure , this be news indeed ; and I think we never should have do talk about it , we have so much to say to , and have so much to say to we . it seem that 's unfortunate papa have get over he bankruptcy --" go through the , " be the expression Caddy use , as if it be a tunnel -- with the general clemency and commiseration of he creditor , and have get rid of he affair in some bless manner without succeed in understand they , and have give up everything he possess ( which be not worth much , I should think , to judge from the state of the furniture ) , and have satisfied every one concern that he could do no more , poor man . so , he have be honourably dismiss to " the office " to begin the world again . what he do at the office , I never know ; say he be a " custom - house and general agent , " and the only thing I ever understand about that business be that when he want money more than usual he go to the dock to look for it , and hardly ever find it . as soon as she papa have tranquillize he mind by become this shorn lamb , and they have remove to a furnished lodging in ( where I find the child , when I afterwards go there , cutte the horse hair out of the seat of the chair and chok themselves with it ) , have bring about a meeting between he and old ; and poor , be very humble and meek , have defer to 's deportment so submissively that they have become excellent friend . by degrees , old , thus familiarize with the idea of he son 's marriage , have work up he parental feeling to the height of contemplate that event as be near at hand and have give he gracious consent to the young couple commencing housekeeping at the academy in when they would . " and you papa , . what do he say ? " " oh ! poor , " say
say , " only cry and say he hope we might get on better than he and have get on . he do not say so before , he only say so to I . and he say , ' my poor girl , you have not be very well teach how to make a home for you husband , but unless you mean with all you heart to strive to do it , you have better murder he than marry he -- if you really love he . ' " " and how do you reassure he , ? " " why , it be very distressing , you know , to see poor so low and hear he say such terrible thing , and I could not help cry myself . but I tell he that I do mean it with all my heart and that I hope we house would be a place for he to come and find some comfort in of a evening and that I hope and think I could be a better daughter to he there than at home . then I mention 's come to stay with I , and then begin to cry again and say the child be . " " , ? " " yes , " say , " wild . and say " -- here she begin to , poor girl , not at all like the happiest girl in the world -- " that he be sensible the best thing that could happen to they be they be all tomahawk together . " suggest that it be comfortable to know that do not mean these destructive sentiment . " no , of course I know would not like he family to be welter in they blood , " say , " but he mean that they be very unfortunate in be ma 's child and that he be very unfortunate in be 's husband ; and I be sure that be true , though it seem unnatural to say so . " I ask if know that she wedding - day be fix . " oh ! you know what ma be , , " she return . " it be impossible to say whether she know it or not . she have be tell it often enough ; and when she be tell it , she only give I a placid look , as if I be I do not know what -- a steeple in the distance , " say with a sudden idea ; " and then she shake she head and say , , , what a tease you be ! ' and go on with the letter . " " and about you wardrobe , ? " say I . for she be under no restraint with we . " well , my dear , " she return , dry she eye , " I must do the best I can and trust to my dear never to have a unkind remembrance of my come so shabbily to he . if the question concern a outfit for , ma would know all about it and would be quite excited . be what it be , she neither know nor car . " be not at all deficient in natural affection for she mother , but mention this with tear as a undeniable fact , which I be afraid it be . we be sorry for the poor dear girl and find so much to admire in the good disposition which have survive under such discouragement that we both at once ( I mean and I ) propose a little scheme that make she perfectly joyful . this be she stay with we for three week , my stay with she for one , and we all three contriving and cut out , and repair , and sew , and save , and do the very best we could think of to make the most of she stock . my guardian be as pleased with the idea as be , we take she home next day to arrange the matter and bring she out again in triumph with she box and all the purchase that could be squeeze out of a ten - pound note , which have find in the dock I suppose , but which he at all event give she . what my guardian would not have give she if we have encourage he , it would be difficult to say , but we think it right to compound for no more than she wedding - dress and bonnet . he agree to this compromise , and if have ever be happy in she life , she be happy when we sit down to work . she be clumsy enough with she needle , poor girl , and prick she finger as much as she have be use to ink they . she could not help redden a little now and then , partly with the smart and partly with vexation at be able to do no better , but she soon get over that and begin to improve rapidly . so day after day she , and my darling , and my little maid , and a milliner out of the town , and I , sit hard at work , as pleasantly as possible . and above this , be very anxious " to learn housekeeping , " as she say . now , mercy upon we ! the idea of she learn housekeeping of a person of my vast experience be such a joke that I laugh , and colour up , and fall into a comical confusion when she propose it . however , I say , " Caddy , I be sure you be very welcome to learn anything that you can learn of I , my dear , " and I show she all
all my book and methods and all my fidgety way . you would have suppose that I be show she some wonderful invention , by she study of they ; and if you have see she , whenever I jingle my housekeeping key , get up and attend I , certainly you might have think that there never be a greater imposter than I with a blinder follower than . so what will work and housekeepe , and lesson to , and backgammon in the evening with my guardian , and duet with , the three week slip fast away . then I go home with to see what could be do there , and and remain behind to take care of my guardian . when I say I go home with , I mean to the furnish lodging in . we go to two or three time , where preparation be in progress too -- a good many , I observe , for enhance the comfort of old , and a few for put the newly marry couple away cheaply at the top of the house -- but we great point be to make the furnished lodging decent for the wedding - breakfast and to imbue beforehand with some faint sense of the occasion . the latter be the more difficult thing of the two because . and a unwholesome boy occupy the front sitting - room ( the back one be a mere closet ) , and it be litter down with waste - paper and Borrioboolan document , as a untidy stable might be litter with straw . sit there all day drink strong coffee , dictat , and hold interview by appointment . the unwholesome boy , who seem to I to be go into a decline , take he meal out of the house . when come home , he usually groan and go down into the kitchen . there he get something to eat if the servant would give he anything , and then , feel that he be in the way , go out and walk about in the wet . the poor child scramble up and tumble down the house as they have always be accustom to do . the production of these devote little sacrifice in any presentable condition be quite out of the question at a week 's notice , I propose to Caddy that we should make they as happy as we could on she marriage morning in the attic where they all sleep , and should confine we greatest effort to she mama and she mama 's room , and a clean breakfast . in truth require a good deal of attention , the lattice - work up she back have widen considerably since I first know she and she hair look like the mane of a dustman 's horse . think that the display of 's wardrobe would be the best means of approach the subject , I invite to come and look at it spread out on 's bed in the evening after the unwholesome boy be gone . " my dear , " say she , rise from she desk with she usual sweetness of temper , " these be really ridiculous preparation , though you assist they be a proof of you kindness . there be something so inexpressibly absurd to I in the idea of Caddy be marry ! oh , Caddy , you silly , silly , silly puss ! " she come upstairs with we notwithstanding and look at the clothes in she customary far - off manner . they suggest one distinct idea to she , for she say with she placid smile , and shake she head , " my good , at half the cost , this weak child might have be equip for ! " on we go downstairs again , . ask I whether this troublesome business be really to take place next . and on my replying yes , she say , " will my room be require , my dear ? for it be quite impossible that I can put my papers away . " I take the liberty of say that the room would certainly be want and that I think we must put the papers away somewhere . " well , my dear , " say , " you know best , I dare say . but by oblige I to employ a boy , have embarrass I to that extent , overwhelm as I be with public business , that I do not know which way to turn . we have a ramification meeting , too , on afternoon , and the inconvenience be very serious . " " it be not likely to occur again , " say I , smile . " Caddy will be marry but once , probably . " " that be true , " reply ; " that be true , my dear . I suppose we must make the best of it ! " the next question be how should be dress on the occasion . I think it very curious to see she look on serenely from she writing - table while and I discuss it , occasionally shak she head at we with a half - reproachful smile like a superior spirit who could just bear with we trifling . the state in which she dress were , and the extraordinary confusion in which she keep they , add not a little to we difficulty ; but at length we devise something not very unlike what a common - place mother might wear on such a occasion . the abstract manner in which would deliver herself up to have this attire try on by the dressmaker , and the sweetness with which she would then observe to I how sorry she be that I have not turn my thought to , be consistent
consistent with the rest of she behaviour . the lodging be rather confin as to space , but I fancie that if 's household have be the only lodger in 's or 's , the sole advantage they would have find in the size of the building would have be its afforde a great deal of room to be dirty in . I believe that nothing belong to the family which it have be possible to break be unbroken at the time of those preparation for 's marriage , that nothing which it have be possible to spoil in any way be unspoilt , and that no domestic object which be capable of collect dirt , from a dear child 's knee to the door - plate , be without as much dirt as could well accumulate upon it . poor , who very seldom spoke and almost always sit when he be at home with he head against the wall , become interested when he see that and I be attempt to establish some order among all this waste and ruin and take off he coat to help . but such wonderful thing come tumbl out of the closet when they be open -- bits of mouldy pie , sour bottle , 's cap , letter , tea , forks , odd boot and shoe of child , firewood , wafer , saucepan - lid , damp sugar in odd and end of paper bag , footstool , blacklead brush , bread , 's bonnet , book with butter stick to the binding , gutter candle ends put out by be turn upside down in broken candlestick , nutshell , head and tail of shrimp , dinner- mat , glove , coffee - grounds , umbrella -- that he look frightened , and leave off again . but he come regularly every evening and sit without he coat , with he head against the wall , as though he would have help we if he have know how . " poor ! " say to I on the night before the great day , when we really have get thing a little to rights . " it seem unkind to leave he , . but what could I do if I stay ! since I first know you , I have tidy and tidy over and over again , but it be useless . ma and , together , upset the whole house directly . we never have a servant who do not drink . ma 's ruinous to everything . " could not hear what she say , but he seem very low indeed and she tear , I think . " my heart ach for he ; that it do ! " sob . " I can not help think to - night , , how dearly I hope to be happy with , and how dearly hope , I dare say , to be happy with ma . what a disappointed life ! " " my dear Caddy ! " say , look slowly round from the wail . it be the first time , I think , I ever hear he say three word together . " yes , ! " cry , go to he and embrace he affectionately . " my dear Caddy , " say . " never have -- " " , ? " falter . " not have ? " " yes , my dear , " say . " have he , certainly . but , never have -- " I mention in my account of we first visit in that describe as frequently open he mouth after dinner without say anything . it be a habit of he . he open he mouth now a great many time and shake he head in a melancholy manner . " what do you wish I not to have ? do not have what , dear ? " ask , coax he , with she arm round he neck . " never have a mission , my dear child . " groane and lay he head against the wall again , and this be the only time I ever hear he make any approach to express he sentiment on the Borrioboolan question . I suppose he have be more talkative and lively once , but he seem to have be completely exhaust long before I know he . I think never would have leave off serenely look over she papers and drink coffee that night . it be twelve o'clock before we could obtain possession of the room , and the clearance it require then be so discourage that , who be almost tired out , sit down in the middle of the dust and cry . but she soon cheer up , and we do wonder with it before we go to bed . in the morning it look , by the aid of a few flower and a quantity of soap and water and a little arrangement , quite gay . the plain breakfast make a cheerful show , and be perfectly charme . but when my darling come , I think -- and I think now -- that I never have see such a dear face as my beautiful pet 's . we make a little feast for the child upstairs , and we put at the head of the table , and we show they in she bridal dress , and they clap they hand and hurrah , and cry to think that she be go away from they and hug they over and over again until we bring up to fetch she away -- when , I be sorry to say , bit he . then there be old downstairs , in a state of deportment not to be express , benignly bless and give my guardian to understand that he son 's happiness be he own
own parental work and that he sacrifice personal consideration to ensure it . " my dear sir , " say , " these young people will live with I ; my house be large enough for they accommodation , and they shall not want the shelter of my roof . I could have wish -- you will understand the allusion , , for you remember my illustrious patron the -- I could have wish that my son have marry into a family where there be more deportment , but they will of heaven be do ! " and be of the party -- , a obstinate - look man with a large waistcoat and stubbly hair , who be always talk in a loud bass voice about he mite , or 's mite , or they five boy ' mite . , with he hair brush back as usual and he knob of temple shining very much , be also there , not in the character of a disappointed lover , but as the accept of a young -- at least , a unmarried -- lady , a , who be also there . 's mission , my guardian say , be to show the world that woman 's mission be man 's mission and that the only genuine mission of both man and woman be to be always move declaratory resolution about thing in general at public meeting . the guest be few , but be , as one might expect at 's , all devote to public object only . besides those I have mention , there be a extremely dirty lady with she bonnet all awry and the ticket price of she dress still stick on it , whose neglect home , tell I , be like a filthy wilderness , but whose church be like a fancy fair . a very contentious gentleman , who say it be he mission to be everybody be brother but who appear to be on term of coolness with the whole of he large family , complete the party . a party , have less in common with such a occasion , could hardly have be get together by any ingenuity . such a mean mission as the domestic mission be the very last thing to be endure among they ; indeed , inform we , with great indignation , before we sit down to breakfast , that the idea of woman 's mission lie chiefly in the narrow sphere of home be a outrageous slander on the part of she tyrant , man . one other singularity be that nobody with a mission -- except , whose mission , as I think I have formerly say , be to be in ecstasy with everybody 's mission -- car at all for anybody 's mission . be as clear that the only one infallible course be she course of pounce upon the poor and apply benevolence to they like a strait- waistcoat ; as be that the only practical thing for the world be the emancipation of woman from the thraldom of she tyrant , man . , all the while , sit smile at the limited vision that could see anything but - . but I be anticipate now the purport of we conversation on the ride home instead of first marry . we all go to church , and give she away . of the air with which old , with he hat under he left arm ( the inside present at the clergyman like a cannon ) and he eye crease themselves up into he wig , stood stiff and high - shouldere behind we bridesmaid during the ceremony , and afterwards salute we , I could never say enough to do it justice . , whom I can not report as prepossesse in appearance , and whose manner be grim , listen to the proceedings , as part of woman 's wrong , with a disdainful face . , with she calm smile and she bright eye , look the least concerned of all the company . we duly come back to breakfast , and . sit at the head of the table and at the foot . Caddy have previously steal upstairs to hug the child again and tell they that she name be . but this piece of information , instead of be a agreeable surprise to , throw he on he back in such transport of kicking grief that I could do nothing on be send for but accede to the proposal that he should be admit to the breakfast table . so he come down and sit in my lap ; and , after say , in reference to the state of he pinafore , " oh , you naughty , what a shock little pig you be ! " be not at all discompose . he be very good except that he bring down with he ( out of a ark I have give he before we go to church ) and would dip he head first into the wine - glass and then put he in he mouth . my guardian , with he sweet temper and he quick perception and he amiable face , make something agreeable even out of the ungenial company . none of they seem able to talk about anything but he , or she , own one subject , and none of they seem able to talk about even that as part of a world in which there be anything else ; but my guardian turn it all to the merry encouragement of and the honour of the occasion , and bring we through the breakfast nobly . what we should have do without he , I be afraid to think , for all the company despise the bride and bridegroom and old -- and old , in virtue of he deportment , consider himself vastly
vastly superior to all the company -- it be a very unpromising case . at last the time come when poor Caddy be to go and when all she property be pack on the hired coach and pair that be to take she and she husband to Gravesend . it affec we to see clinging , then , to she deplorable home and hang on she mother 's neck with the greatest tenderness . " I be very sorry I could not go on writing from dictation , ma , " sob . " I hope you forgive I now . " " oh , , ! " say . " I have tell you over and over again that I have engage a boy , and there be a end of it . " " you be sure you be not the least angry with I , Ma ? say you be sure before I go away , Ma ? " " you foolish , " return , " do I look angry , or have I inclination to be angry , or time to be angry ? how can you ? " " take a little care of while I be gone , Mama ! " positively laugh at the fancy . " you romantic child , " say she , lightly pat 's back . " go along . I be excellent friend with you . now , good - bye , , and be very happy ! " then hang upon she father and nurse he cheek against hers as if he be some poor dull child in pain . all this take place in the hall . she father release she , take out he pocket handkerchief , and sit down on the stair with he head against the wall . I hope he find some consolation in wall . I almost think he do . and then take she arm in he and turn with great emotion and respect to he father , whose deportment at that moment be overwhelm . " thank you over and over again , father ! " say , kiss he hand . " I be very grateful for all you kindness and consideration regard we marriage , and so , I can assure you , be . " " very , " sob . " ve - ry ! " " my dear son , " say , " and dear daughter , I have do my duty . if the spirit of a saint wooman hover above we and look down on the occasion , that , and you constant affection , will be my recompense . you will not fail in you duty , my son and daughter , I believe ? " " dear father , never ! " cry . " never , never , dear ! " say . " this , " return , " be as it should be . my child , my home be yours , my heart be yours , my all be yours . I will never leave you ; nothing but death shall part we . my dear son , you contemplate a absence of a week , I think ? " " a week , dear father . we shall return home this day week . " " my dear child , " say , " let I , even under the present exceptional circumstance , recommend strict punctuality . it be highly important to keep the connexion together ; and school , if at all neglected , be apt to take offence . " " this day week , father , we shall be sure to be home to dinner . " " good ! " say . " you will find fire , my dear , in you own room , and dinner prepare in my apartment . yes , yes , ! " anticipate some self - deny objection on he son 's part with a great air . " you and we Caroline will be strange in the upper part of the premise and will , therefore , dine that day in my apartment . now , bless ye ! " they drive away , and whether I wonder most at or at , I do not know . and my guardian be in the same condition when we come to talk it over . but before we drive away too , I receive a most unexpected and eloquent compliment from . he come up to I in the hall , take both my hand , press they earnestly , and open he mouth twice . I be so sure of he mean that I say , quite flurry , " you be very welcome , sir . pray do not mention it ! " " I hope this marriage be for the best , guardian , " say I when we three be on we road home . " I hope it be , little woman . patience . we shall see . " " be the wind in the to - day ? " I venture to ask he . he laugh heartily and answer , " no . " " but it must have be this morning , I think , " say I . he answer " no " again , and this time my dear girl confidently answer " no " too and shook the lovely head which , with its blooming flower against the golden hair , be like the very spring . " Much you know of east wind , my ugly darling , " say I , kiss she in my admiration -- I could not help it . well ! it be only they love for I , I know very well , and it be a long time ago . I must write it even if I rub it out again ,
, because it give I so much pleasure . they say there could be no east wind where somebody be ; they say that wherever go , there be sunshine and summer air . and I have not be at home again many day when one evening I go upstairs into my own room to take a peep over 's shoulder and see how she be get on with she copy - book . be a try business to , who seem to have no natural power over a pen , but in whose hand every pen appear to become perversely animated , and to go wrong and crook , and to stop , and splash , and sidle into corner like a saddle - donkey . it be very odd to see what old letter 's young hand have make , they so wrinkle , and shrivell , and totter , it so plump and round . yet be uncommonly expert at other thing and have as nimble little finger as I ever watch . " well , , " say I , look over a copy of the letter of in which it be represent as square , triangular , pear-shaped , and collapse in all kind of way , " we be improve . if we only get to make it round , we shall be perfect , . " then I make one , and make one , and the pen would not join 's neatly , but twist it up into a knot . " never mind , . we shall do it in time . " lay down she pen , the copy be finish , open and shut she cramp little hand , look gravely at the page , half in pride and half in doubt , and get up , and drop I a curtsy . " thank you , miss . if you please , miss , do you know a poor person of the name of ? " " a brickmaker 's wife , ? yes . " " she come and speak to I when I be out a little while ago , and say you know she , miss . she ask I if I be not the young lady 's little maid -- mean you for the young lady , miss -- and I say yes , miss . " " I think she have leave this neighbourhood altogether , . " " so she have , miss , but she be come back again to where she use to live -- she and . do you know another poor person of the name of , miss ? " " I think I do , , though not by name . " " that be what she say ! " return . " they have both come back , miss , and have be tramp high and low . " " Tramp high and low , have they , ? " " yes , miss . " if could only have make the letter in she copy as round as the eye with which she look into my face , they would have be excellent . " and this poor person come about the house three or four day , hope to get a glimpse of you , miss -- all she want , she say -- but you be away . that be when she see I . she see I a - go about , miss , " say with a short laugh of the greatest delight and pride , " and she think I look like you maid ! " " do she though , really , ? " " yes , miss ! " say . " really and truly . " and , with another short laugh of the purest glee , make she eye very round again and look as serious as become my maid . I be never tired of see in the full enjoyment of that great dignity , stand before I with she youthful face and figure , and she steady manner , and she childish exultation break through it now and then in the pleasantest way . " and where do you see she , ? " say I . my little maid 's countenance fall as she reply , " by the doctor 's shop , miss . " for wear she black frock yet . I ask if the brickmaker 's wife be ill , but say no . it be some one else . some one in she cottage who have tramp down to and be tramp he do not know where . a poor boy , say . no father , no mother , no any one . " like as might have be , miss , if and I have die after father , " say , she round eye fill with tear . " and she be get medicine for he , ? " " she say , miss , " return , " how that he have once do as much for she . " my little maid 's face be so eager and she quiet hand be fold so closely in one another as she stand look at I that I have no great difficulty in read she thought . " well , , " say I , " it appear to I that you and I can do no better than go round to and see what be the matter . " the alacrity with which bring my bonnet and veil , and have dress I , quaintly pinne herself into she warm shawl and make herself look like a little old woman , sufficiently express she readiness . so and I , without say anything to any one , go out . it be a cold , wild night , and the tree shudder in the wind .
. the rain have be thick and heavy all day , and with little intermission for many day . none be fall just then , however . the sky have partly cleared , but be very gloomy -- even above we , where a few star be shine . in the north and north - west , where the sun have set three hour before , there be a pale dead light both beautiful and awful ; and into it long sull line of cloud wav up like a sea stricken immovable as it be heaive . a lurid glare overhng the whole dark waste , and the contrast between these two lights , and the fancy which the redder light engender of a unearthly fire , gleam on all the unseen building of the city and on all the face of its many thousand of wonder inhabitant , be as solemn as might be . I have no thought that night -- none , I be quite sure -- of what be soon to happen to I . but I have always remember since that when we have stop at the garden - gate to look up at the sky , and when we go upon we way , I have for a moment a undefinable impression of myself as be something different from what I then be . I know it be then and there that I have it . I have ever since connect the feeling with that spot and time and with everything associate with that spot and time , to the distant voice in the town , the barking of a dog , and the sound of wheel come down the miry hill . it be night , and most of the people belong to the place where we be go be drink elsewhere . we find it quieter than I have previously see it , though quite as miserable . the kiln be burn , and a stifling vapou set towards we with a pale - blue glare . we come to the cottage , where there be a feeble candle in the patch window . we tap at the door and go in . the mother of the little child who have die be sit in a chair on one side of the poor fire by the bed ; and opposite to she , a wretched boy , support by the chimney - piece , be cower on the floor . he hold under he arm , like a little bundle , a fragment of a fur cap ; and as he try to warm himself , he shook until the crazy door and window shook . the place be closer than before and have a unhealthy and a very peculiar smell . I have not lift my veil when I first speak to the woman , which be at the moment of we go in . the boy stagger up instantly and star at I with a remarkable expression of surprise and terror . he action be so quick and my be the cause of it be so evident that I stand still instead of advancing nearer . " I will not go no more to the berryin ground , " mutter the boy ; " I be not a - go there , so I tell you ! " I lift my veil and speak to the woman . she say to I in a low voice , " do not mind he , ma 'am . he will soon come back to he head , " and say to he , " , , what be the matter ? " " I know wot she be come for ! " cry the boy . " who ? " " the lady there . she be come to get I to go along with she to the berryin ground . I will not go to the berryin ground . I do not like the name on it . she might go a - berryin Me . " he shivering come on again , and as he lean against the wall , he shook the hovel . " he have be talk off and on about such like all day , ma 'am , " say softly . " why , how you stare ! this be my lady , . " " be it ? " return the boy doubtfully , and survey I with he arm hold out above he burn eye . " she look to I the t'other one . it be not the bonnet , nor yet it be not the gownd , but she look to I the t'other one . " my little , with she premature experience of illness and trouble , have pull off she bonnet and shawl and now go quietly up to he with a chair and sit he down in it like a old sick nurse . except that no such attendent could have show he 's youthful face , which seem to engage he confidence . " I say ! " say the boy . " you tell I . be not the lady the t'other lady ? " shook she head as she methodically draw he rag about he and make he as warm as she could . " oh ! " the boy mutter . " then I s'pose she be not . " " I come to see if I could do you any good , " say I . " what be the matter with you ? " " I be a - be froze , " return the boy hoarsely , with he haggard gaze wander about I , " and then burn up , and then froze , and then burn up , ever so many time in a hour . and my head be all sleepy , and all a - go mad
mad - like -- and I be so dry -- and my bone be not half so much bone as pain . " when do he come here ? " I ask the woman . " this morning , ma 'am , I find he at the corner of the town . I have know he up in . have not I , ? " " tom - all - 's , " the boy reply . whenever he fix he attention or he eye , it be only for a very little while . he soon begin to droop he head again , and roll it heavily , and speak as if he be half awake . " when do he come from ? " I ask . " I come from yes' day , " say the boy himself , now flush and hot . " I be a - go somewhere . " " where be he go ? " I ask . " somewhere , " repeat the boy in a louder tone . " I have be move on , and move on , more nor ever I be afore , since the t'other one give I the sov'ring . , she be always a - watch , and a -driving of I -- what have I do to she ?-- and they be all a - watch and a - driving of I . every one of th'ey be do of it , from the time when I do not get up , to the time when I do not go to bed . and I be a - go somewhere . that be where I be a - go . she tell I , down in - all - 's , as she come from , and so I take the . it be as good as another . " he always conclude by address . " what be to be do with he ? " say I , take the woman aside . " he could not travel in this state even if he have a purpose and know where he be go ! " " I know no more , ma 'am , than the dead , " she reply , glance compassionately at he . " perhaps the dead know better , if they could only tell we . I have keep he here all day for pity 's sake , and I have give he broth and physic , and have go to try if any one will take he in ( here be my pretty in the bed -- she child , but I call it mine ) ; but I can not keep he long , for if my husband be to come home and find he here , he would be rough in put he out and might do he a hurt . ! here come back ! " the other woman come hurriedly in as she speak , and the boy get up with a half - obscured sense that he be expect to be go . when the little child awoke , and when and how get at it , take it out of bed , and begin to walk about hush it , I do not know . there she be , do all this in a quiet motherly manner as if she be live in 's attic with and again . the friend have be here and there , and have be play about from hand to hand , and have come back as she go . at first it be too early for the boy to be receive into the proper refuge , and at last it be too late . one official send she to another , and the other send she back again to the first , and so backward and forward , until it appear to I as if both must have be appoint for they skill in evad they duty instead of perform they . and now , after all , she say , breathe quickly , for she have be run and be frightene too , " , you master 's on the road home , and mine be not far behind , and the help the boy , for we can do no more for he ! " they put a few halfpence together and hurrie they into he hand , and so , in a oblivious , half - thankful , half - insensible way , he shuffle out of the house . " give I the child , my dear , " say its mother to , " and thank you kindly too ! , woman dear , good night ! young lady , if my master do not fall out with I , I will look down by the kiln by and by , where the boy will be most like , and again in the morning ! " she hurry off , and presently we pass she hushing and singe to she child at she own door and look anxiously along the road for she drunken husband . I be afraid of stay then to speak to either woman , lest I should bring she into trouble . but I say to that we must not leave the boy to die . , who know what to do much better than I do , and whose quickness equal she presence of mind , glide on before I , and presently we come up with , just short of the brick - kiln . I think he must have begin he journey with some small bundle under he arm and must have have it steal or lose it . for he still carry he wretch fragment of fur cap like a bundle , though he go bare - head through the rain , which now fall fast . he stop when we call
call to he and again show a dread of I when I come up , stand with he lustrous eye fix upon I , and even arrest in he shivering fit . I ask he to come with we , and we would take care that he have some shelter for the night . " I do not want no shelter , " he say ; " I can lay amongst the warm brick . " " but do not you know that people die there ? " reply . " they die everywhere , " say the boy . " they die in they lodging -- she know where ; I show she -- and they die down in - all - 's in heap . they die more than they live , accord to what I see . " then he hoarsely whisper , " if she be not the t'other one , she be not the forrenner . be there Three of th'ey then ? " look at I a little frightened . I feel half frightened at myself when the boy glar on I so . but he turn and follow when I beckon to he , and find that he acknowledge that influence in I , I lead the way straight home . it be not far , only at the summit of the hill . we pass but one man . I doubt if we should have get home without assistance , the boy 's step be so uncertain and tremulous . he make no complaint , however , and be strangely unconcerned about himself , if I may say so strange a thing . leave he in the hall for a moment , shrink into the corner of the window - seat and stare with a indifference that scarcely could be call wonder at the comfort and brightness about he , I go into the drawing - room to speak to my guardian . there I find , who have come down by the coach , as he frequently do without notice , and never bring any clothes with he , but always borrowe everything he want . they come out with I directly to look at the boy . the servant have gather in the hall too , and he shiver in the window - seat with stand by he , like some wounded animal that have be find in a ditch . " this be a sorrowful case , " say my guardian after ask he a question or two and touch he and examine he eye . " what do you say , ? " " you have better turn he out , " say . " what do you mean ? " inquire my guardian , almost sternly . " my dear , " say , " you know what I be : I be a child . be cross to I if I deserve it . but I have a constitutional objection to this sort of thing . I always have , when I be a medical man . he be not safe , you know . there be a very bad sort of fever about he . " have retreat from the hall to the drawing - room again and say this in he airy way , seat on the music - stool as we stand by . " you will say it be childish , " observe , look gaily at we . " well , I dare say it may be ; but I be a child , and I never pretend to be anything else . if you put he out in the road , you only put he where he be before . he will be no worse off than he be , you know . even make he better off , if you like . give he sixpence , or five shilling , or five pound ten -- you be arithmetician , and I be not -- and get rid of he ! " " and what be he to do then ? " ask my guardian . " upon my life , " say , shrugge he shoulders with he engage smile , " I have not the least idea what he be to do then . but I have no doubt he will do it . " " now , be it not a horrible reflection , " say my guardian , to whom I have hastily explain the unavailing effort of the two woman , " be it not a horrible reflection , " walk up and down and rumpl he hair , " that if this wretch creature be a convict prisoner , he hospital would be wide open to he , and he would be as well take care of as any sick boy in the kingdom ? " " my dear , " return , " you will pardon the simplicity of the question , come as it do from a creature who be perfectly simple in worldly matter , but why be not he a prisoner then ? " my guardian stop and look at he with a whimsical mixture of amusement and indignation in he face . " we young friend be not to be suspect of any delicacy , I should imagine , " say , unabashed and candid . " it seem to I that it would be wiser , as well as in a certain kind of way more respectable , if he show some misdirect energy that get he into prison . there would be more of a adventurous spirit in it , and consequently more of a certain sort of poetry . " " I believe , " return my guardian , resum he uneasy walk , " that there be not such another child on earth as yourself . " " do you really ? " say . "
" I dare say ! but I confess I do not see why we young friend , in he degree , should not seek to invest himself with such poetry as be open to he . he be no doubt bear with a appetite -- probably , when he be in a safer state of health , he have a excellent appetite . very well . at we young friend 's natural dinner hour , most likely about noon , we young friend say in effect to society , 'I be hungry ; will you have the goodness to produce you spoon and feed I ? ' , which have take upon itself the general arrangement of the whole system of spoon and profess to have a spoon for we young friend , do not produce that spoon ; and we young friend , therefore , say ' you really must excuse I if I seize it . ' now , this appear to I a case of misdirected energy , which have a certain amount of reason in it and a certain amount of romance ; and I do not know but what I should be more interested in we young friend , as a illustration of such a case , than merely as a poor vagabond -- which any one can be . " " in the meantime , " I venture to observe , " he be get worse . " " in the meantime , " say cheerfully , " as , with she practical good sense , observe , he be get worse . therefore I recommend you turn he out before he get still worse . " the amiable face with which he say it , I think I shall never forget . " of course , little woman , " observ my guardian , turn to I , " I can ensure he admission into the proper place by merely go there to enforce it , though it be a bad state of thing when , in he condition , that be necessary . but it be grow late , and be a very bad night , and the boy be wear out already . there be a bed in the wholesome loft - room by the stable ; we have better keep he there till morning , when he can be wrap up and remove . we will do that . " " oh ! " say , with he hand upon the key of the piano as we move away . " be you go back to we young friend ? " " yes , " say my guardian . " how I envy you you constitution , ! " return with playful admiration . " you do not mind these thing ; neither do . you be ready at all time to go anywhere , and do anything . be will ! I have no will at all -- and no wo not -- simply can not . " " you can not recommend anything for the boy , I suppose ? " say my guardian , look back over he shoulder half angrily ; only half angrily , for he never seem to consider a accountable being . " my dear Jarndyce , I observ a bottle of cooling medicine in he pocket , and it be impossible for he to do better than take it . you can tell they to sprinkle a little vinegar about the place where he sleep and to keep it moderately cool and he moderately warm . but it be mere impertinence in I to offer any recommendation . have such a knowledge of detail and such a capacity for the administration of detail that she know all about it . " we go back into the hall and explain to what we propose to do , which explain to he again and which he receive with the languid unconcern I have already notice , wearily look on at what be done as if it be for somebody else . the servant compassionat he miserable state and be very anxious to help , we soon get the loft - room ready ; and some of the man about the house carry he across the wet yard , well wrap up . it be pleasant to observe how kind they be to he and how there appear to be a general impression among they that frequently call he " " be likely to revive he spirits . direct the operation and go to and for between the loft - room and the house with such little stimulant and comforts as we think it safe to give he . my guardian himself see he before he be leave for the night and report to I when he return to the growlery to write a letter on the boy 's behalf , which a messenger be charge to deliver at day - light in the morning , that he see easier and inclin to sleep . they have fasten he door on the outside , he say , in case of he be delirious , but have so arrange that he could not make any noise without be hear . be in we room with a cold , be leave alone all this time and entertain himself by play snatch of pathetic air and sometimes singe to they ( as we hear at a distance ) with great expression and feeling . when we rejoin he in the drawing - room he say he would give we a little ballad which have come into he head " apropo of we young friend , " and he sang one about a peasant boy , " throw on the wide world , doom to wander and roam , of he parent , bereft of a home . " quite exquisitely . it be a song that always make he
he cry , he tell we . he be extremely gay all the rest of the evening , for he absolutely chirp -- those be he delighted word -- when he think by what a happy talent for business he be surround . he give we , in he glass of negus , " Better health to we young friend ! " and suppose and gaily pursue the case of he be reserve like to become of . in that event , no doubt , he would establish the and the , and a little annual to . he have no doubt , he say , that we young friend be a excellent boy in he way , but he way be not the way ; what be , have find himself , to he considerable surprise , when he first make he own acquaintance ; he have accept himself with all he failings and have think it sound philosophy to make the best of the bargain ; and he hope we would do the same . 's last report be that the boy be quiet . I could see , from my window , the lantern they have leave he burn quietly ; and I go to be very happy to think that he be shelter . there be more movement and more talk than usual a little before daybreak , and it awoke I . as I be dress , I look out of my window and ask one of we man who have be among the active sympathizer last night whether there be anything wrong about the house . the lantern be still burn in the loft - window . " it be the boy , miss , " say he . " be he worse ? " I inquire . " gone , miss . " dead ! " " dead , miss ? no . go clean off . " at what time of the night he have go , or how , or why , it seem hopeless ever to divine . the door remain as it have be leave , and the lantern stand in the window , it could only be suppose that he have get out by a trap in the floor which communicate with a empty cart - house below . but he have shut it down again , if that be so ; and it look as if it have not be raise . nothing of any kind be missing . on this fact be clearly ascertaine , we all yield to the painful belief that delirium have come upon he in the night and that , allure by some imaginary object or pursue by some imaginary horror , he have stray away in that worse than helpless state ; all of we , that be to say , but , who repeatedly suggest , in he usual easy light style , that it have occur to we young friend that he be not a safe inmate , have a bad kind of fever upon he , and that he have with great natural politeness take himself off . every possible inquiry be make , and every place be search . the brick - kiln be examine , the cottage be visit , the two woman be particularly question , but they know nothing of he , and nobody could doubt that they wonder be genuine . the weather have for some time be too wet and the night itself have be too wet to admit of any tracing by footstep . hedge and ditch , and wall , and rick and stack , be examine by we man for a long distance round , lest the boy should be lie in such a place insensible or dead ; but nothing be see to indicate that he have ever be near . from the time when he be leave in the loft - room , he vanish . the search continue for five day . I do not mean that it cease even then , but that my attention be then divert into a current very memorable to I . as be at she write again in my room in the evening , and as I sit opposite to she at work , I feel the table tremble . look up , I see my little maid shivering from head to foot . " , " say I , " be you so cold ? " " I think I be , miss , " she reply . " I do not know what it be . I can not hold myself still . I feel so yesterday at about this same time , miss . do not be uneasy , I think I be ill . " I hear 's voice outside , and I hurrie to the door of communication between my room and we pretty sitting - room , and lock it . just in time , for she tap at it while my hand be yet upon the key . call to I to let she in , but I say , " not now , my dearest . go away . there be nothing the matter ; I will come to you presently . " ah ! it be a long , long time before my darling girl and I be companion again . fall ill . in twelve hour she be very ill . I move she to my room , and lay she in my bed , and sit down quietly to nurse she . I tell my guardian all about it , and why I feel it be necessary that I should seclude myself , and my reason for not see my darling above all . at first she come very often to the door , and call to I , and even reproach I with sob and tear ; but I
I write she a long letter say that she make I anxious and unhappy and implor she , as she love I and wish my mind to be at peace , to come no nearer than the garden . after that she come beneath the window even oftener than she have come to the door , and if I have learn to love she dear sweet voice before when we be hardly ever apart , how do I learn to love it then , when I stand behind the window - curtain listen and reply , but not so much as look out ! how do I learn to love it afterwards , when the harder time come ! they put a bed for I in we sitting - room ; and by keep the door wide open , I turn the two room into one , now that have vacate that part of the house , and keep they always fresh and airy . there be not a servant in or about the house but be so good that they would all most gladly have come to I at any hour of the day or night without the least fear or unwillingness , but I think it best to choose one worthy woman who be never to see and whom I could trust to come and go with all precaution . through she mean I get out to take the air with my guardian when there be no fear of meet , and wante for nothing in the way of attendance , any more than in any other respect . and thus poor sicken and grow worse , and fall into heavy danger of death , and lay severely ill for many a long round of day and night . so patient she be , so uncomplaining , and inspire by such a gentle fortitude that very often as I sit by hold she head in my arm -- repose would come to she , so , when it would come to she in no other attitude -- I silently pray to we father in heaven that I might not forget the lesson which this little sister teach I . I be very sorrowful to think that 's pretty look would change and be disfigured , even if she recover -- she be such a child with she dimple face -- but that think be , for the greater part , lose in she greater peril . when she be at the worst , and she mind ramble again to the care of she father 's sick bed and the little child , she still know I so far as that she would be quiet in my arm when she could lie quiet nowhere else , and yomurmu out the wandering of she mind less restlessly . at those time I use to think , how should I ever tell the two remain baby that the baby who have learn of she faithful heart to be a mother to they in they need be dead ! there be other time when know I well and talk to I , tell I that she send she love to and and that she be sure would grow up to be a good man . at those time would speak to I of what she have read to she father as well as she could to comfort he , of that young man carry out to be bury who be the only son of he mother and she be a widow , of the ruler 's daughter raise up by the gracious hand upon she bed of death . and tell I that when she father di she have knee down and pray in she first sorrow that he likewise might be raise up and give back to he poor child , and that if she should never get better and should die too , she think it likely that it might come into 's mind to offer the same prayer for she . then would I show Tom how these people of old day have be bring back to life on earth , only that we might know we hope to be restore to heave ! but of all the various time there be in 's illness , there be not one when she lose the gentle quality I have speak of . and there be many , many when I think in the night of the last high belief in the watch angel , and the last higher trust in , on the part of she poor despise father . and do not die . she flutteringly and slowly turn the dangerous point , after long linger there , and then begin to mmend . the hope that never have be give , from the first , of be in outward appearance any more soon begin to be encourage ; and even that prosper , and I see she grow into she old childish likeness again . it be a great morning when I could tell all this as she stand out in the garden ; and it be a great evening when and I at last took tea together in the next room . but on that same evening , I feel that I be stricken cold . happily for both of we , it be not until be safe in bed again and placidly asleep that I begin to think the contagion of she illness be upon I . I have be able easily to hide what I feel at tea - time , but I be past that already now , and I know that I be rapidly follow in 's step . I be well enough , however , to be up early in the morning , and to return my darling 's cheerful blessing from the garden , and to talk with she as long as
as usual . but I be not free from a impression that I have be walk about the two room in the night , a little beside myself , though know where I be ; and I feel confused at time -- with a curiious sense of fullness , as if I be become too large altogether . in the evening I be so much worse that I resolve to prepare , with which view I say , " you be get quite strong , , be you not ? ' " oh , quite ! " say . " strong enough to be tell a secret , I think , ? " " quite strong enough for that , miss ! " cry . but 's face fall in the height of she delight , for she see the secret in my face ; and she come out of the great chair , and fall upon my bosom , and say " oh , miss , it be my do ! it be my do ! " and a great deal more out of the fullness of she grateful heart . " now , , " say I after let she go on for a little while , " if I be to be ill , my great trust , humanly speak , be in you . and unless you be as quiet and compose for I as you always be for yourself , you can never fulfil it , . " " if you will let I cry a little longer , miss , " say . " oh , my dear , my dear ! if you will only let I cry a little longer . oh , my dear ! " -- how affectionately and devotedly she pour this out as she cling to my neck , I never can remember without tear -- " I will be good . " so I let cry a little longer , and it do we both good . " trust in I now , if you please , miss , " say quietly . " I be listen to everything you say . " " it be very little at present , . I shall tell you doctor to - night that I do not think I be well and that you be go to nurse I . " for that the poor child thank I with she whole heart . " and in the morning , when you hear in the garden , if I should not be quite able to go to the window -curtain as usual , do you go , , and say I be asleep -- that I have rather tired myself , and be asleep . at all time keep the room as I have keep it , , and let no one come . " promise , and I lay down , for I be very heavy . I see the doctor that night and ask the favour of he that I wish to ask relative to he say nothing of my illness in the house as yet . I have a very indistinct remembrance of that night melt into day , and of day melt into night again ; but I be just able on the first morning to get to the window and speak to my darling . on the second morning I hear she dear voice -- oh , how dear now !-- outside ; and I ask , with some difficulty ( speech be painful to I ) , to go and say I be asleep . I hear she answer softly , " do not disturb she , , for the world ! " " how do my own pride look , ? " I inquire . " disappointed , miss , " say , pee through the curtain . " but I know she be very beautiful this morning . " " she be indeed , miss , " answer , peepe . " still look up at the window . " with she blue clear eye , bless they , always loveliest when raise like that ! I call to I and give she she last charge . " now , , when she know I be ill , she will try to make she way into the room . keep she out , , if you love I truly , to the last ! , if you let she in but once , only to look upon I for one moment as I lie here , I shall die . " " I never will ! I never will ! " she promise I . " I believe it , my dear . and now come and sit beside I for a little while , and touch I with you hand . for I can not see you , ; I be blind . " the it be night in 's -- perplex and troublous valley of the shadow of the law , where suitor generally find but little day -- and fat candle be snuff out in office , and clerk have rattle down the crazy wooden stair and disperse . the bell that ring at nine o'clock have cease its doleful clangour about nothing ; the gate be shut ; and the night - porter , a solemn warder with a mighty power of sleep , keep guard in he lodge . from tier of staircase window clogge lamps like the eyes of equity , blear with a fathomless pocket for every eye and a eye upon it , dimly blink at the star . in dirty upper casement , here and there , hazy little patch of candlelight reveal where some wise draughtsman and conveyancer yet toil for the entanglement of real estate in meshe of sheep - skin , in the average ratio of about a dozen of sheep to
to a acre of land . over which bee - like industry these benefactor of they species linger yet , though office - hour be past , that they may give , for every day , some good account at last . in the neighbouring court , where the of the rag and bottle shop dwell , there be a general tendency towards beer and supper . and , whose respective son , engage with a circle of acquaintance in the game of hide and seek , have be lie in ambush about the by - way of for some hour and scour the plain of the same thoroughfare to the confusion of passengers -- . and have but now exchange congratulation on the child be a , and they still linger on a door - step over a few parting word . and he lodger , and the fact of 's be " continually in liquor , " and the testamentary prospects of the young man be , as usual , the staple of they conversation . but they have something to say , likewise , of the Harmonic meeting at the 's Arm , where the sound of the piano through the partly open window jingles out into the court , and where , after keep the lover of harmony in a roar like a very Yorick , may now be hear take the gruff line in a concerted piece and sentimentally adjur he friend and patron to " , listen , listen , tow the wa - ter fall ! " and . compare opinion on the subject of the young lady of professional celebrity who assist at the Harmonic meeting and who have a space to herself in the manuscript announcement in the window , Perkins possesse information that she have be marry a year and a half , though announce as , the no siren , and that she baby be clandestinely convey to the 's arm every night to receive its natural nourishment during the entertainment . " than which , myself , " say , " I would get my living by sell lucifer . " , as in duty bound , be of the same opinion , hold that a private station be better than public applause , and thanke heaven for she own ( and , by implication , ' ) respectability . by this time the pot - boy of the 's Arms appear with she supper - pint well froth , . accept that tankard and retire indoors , first give a fair good night to , who have have she own pint in she hand ever since it be fetch from the same hostelry by young Perkin before he be send to bed . now there be a sound of put up shop - shutter in the court and a smell as of the smoking of pipe ; and shoot star be see in upper window , further indicate retirement to rest . now , too , the policeman begin to push at door ; to try fastening ; to be suspicious of bundle ; and to administer he beat , on the hypothesis that every one be either robbing or be rob . it be a close night , though the damp cold be search too , and there be a laggard mist a little way up in the air . it be a fine steaming night to turn the slaughter - house , the unwholesome trade , the sewerage , bad water , and burial - grounds to account , and give the registrar of death some extra business . it may be something in the air -- there be plenty in it -- or it may be something in himself that be in fault ; but , otherwise Jobling , be very ill at ease . he come and go between he own room and the open street door twenty time a hour . he have be do so ever since it fall dark . since the Chancellor shut up he shop , which he do very early to - night , have be down and up , and down and up ( with a cheap tight velvet skull - cap on he head , make he whisker look out of all proportion ) , oftener than before . it be no phenomenon that should be ill at ease too , for he always be so , more or less , under the oppressive influence of the secret that be upon he . Impell by the mystery of which he be a partaker and yet in which he be not a sharer , haunt what seem to be its fountain - head -- the rag and bottle shop in the court . it have a irresistible attraction for he . even now , come round by the 's arm with the intention of pass down the court , and out at the end , and so terminate he unpremeditated after - supper stroll of ten minute ' long from he own door and back again , approaches . " what , Weevle ? " say the stationer , stop to speak . " be you there ? " " aye ! " say , " here I be , . " " Air yourself , as I be do , before you go to bed ? " the stationer inquire . " why , there be not much air to be get here ; and what there be , be not very freshening , " Weevle answer , glance up and down the court . " very true , sir . do not you observe , " say , pause to sniff and taste the air a little , " do not you observe , , that you be -- not to put too fine a point upon it -- that you be rather greasy here
here , sir ? " " why , I have notice myself that there be a queer kind of flavour in the place to - night , " rejoin . " I suppose it be chop at the 's Arms . " " Chops , do you think ? oh ! Chops , eh ? " sniff and taste again . " well , sir , I suppose it be . but I should say they cook at the want a little look after . she have be burn 'em , sir ! and I do not think " -- . Snagsby sniff and taste again and then spit and wipe he mouth -- " I do not think -- not to put too fine a point upon it -- that they be quite fresh when they be show the gridiron . " " that be very likely . it be a tainting sort of weather . " " it be a tainting sort of weather , " say , " and I find it sinke to the spirit . " " by ! I find it give I the horror , " return . " then , you see , you live in a lonesome way , and in a lonesome room , with a black circumstance hang over it , " say , look in past the other 's shoulder along the dark passage and then fall back a step to look up at the house . " I could not live in that room alone , as you do , sir . I should get so fidgety and worried of a evening , sometimes , that I should be drive to come to the door and stand here sooner than sit there . but then it be very true that you do not see , in you room , what I see there . that make a difference . " " I know quite enough about it , " return . " it be not agreeable , be it ? " pursue , cough he cough of mild persuasion behind he hand . " ought to consider it in the rent . I hope he do , I be sure . " " I hope he do , " say . " but I doubt it . " " you find the rent too high , do you , sir ? " return the stationer . " Rent be high about here . I do not know how it be exactly , but the law seem to put thing up in price . not , " add with he apologetic cough , " that I mean to say a word against the profession I get my live by . " again glance up and down the court and then look at the stationer . , blankly catche he eye , look upward for a star or so and cough a cough expressive of not exactly see he way out of this conversation . " it be a curious fact , sir , " he observe , slowly rubb he hand , " that he should have be -- " " who be he ? " interrupt . " the decease , you know , " say , twitch he head and right eyebrow towards the staircase and tap he acquaintance on the button . " ah , to be sure ! " return the other as if he be not over -fond of the subject . " I think we have do with he . " " I be only go to say it be a curiious fact , sir , that he should have come and live here , and be one of my writers , and then that you should come and live here , and be one of my writers too . which there be nothing derogatory , but far from it in the appellation , " say , break off with a mistrust that he may have unpolitely assert a kind of proprietorship in , " because I have know writer that have go into brewer 's house and do really very respectable indeed . Eminently respectable , sir , " add with a misgiving that he have not improve the matter . " it be a curious coincidence , as you say , " answer , once more glance up and down the court . " seem a fate in it , do not there ? " suggest the stationer . " there do . " " just so , " observe the stationer with he confirmatory cough . " quite a fate in it . quite a fate . well , , I be afraid I must bid you good night " -- speak as if it make he desolate to go , though he have be cast about for any means of escape ever since he stop to speak --" my little woman will be look for I else . good night , sir ! " if hasten home to save he little woman the trouble of look for he , he might set he mind at rest on that score . he little woman have have she eye upon he round the 's arm all this time and now glide after he with a pocket handkerchief wrap over she head , honour and he doorway with a search glance as she go past . " you will know I again , ma 'am , at all event , " say Weevle to himself ; " and I can not compliment you on you appearance , whoever you be , with you head tie up in a bundle . be this fellow never come ! " this fellow approach as he speak . softly hold up he finger , and draw he into the passage , and close the street door . then they go upstairs , heavily , and (
( for it be he ) very lightly indeed . when they be shut into the back room , they speak low . " I think you have go to at least instead of come here , " say . " why , I say about ten . " " you say about ten , " Tony repeat . " yes , so you do say about ten . but accord to my count , it be ten time ten -- it be a hundred o'clock . I never have such a night in my life ! " " what have be the matter ? " " that be it ! " say . " nothing have be the matter . but here have I be stew and fume in this jolly old crib till I have have the horror fal on I as thick as hail . there be a bless - look candle ! " say , point to the heavily burn taper on he table with a great cabbage head and a long winding - sheet . " that be easily improve , " observe as he take the snuffer in hand . " be it ? " return he friend . " not so easily as you think . it have be smoulder like that ever since it be light . " " why , what be the matter with you , ? " inquire , look at he , snuffer in hand , as he sit down with he elbow on the table . " , " reply the other , " I be in the down . it be this unbearably dull , suicidal room -- and old downstair , I suppose . " moodily push the snuffer - tray from he with he elbow , lean he head on he hand , put he foot on the fender , and look at the fire . , obserive he , slightly toss he head and sit down on the other side of the table in a easy attitude . " be not that Snagsby talk to you , ? " " yes , and he -- yes , it be , " say , alte the construction of he sentence . " on business ? " " no . no business . he be only saunter by and stop to prise . " " I think it be , " say , " and think it as well that he should not see I , so I wait till he be go . " " there we go again , " cry , look up for a instant . " so mysterious and secret ! by , if we be go to commit a murder , we could not have more mystery about it ! " affect to smile , and with the view of change the conversation , look with a admiration , real or pretend , round the room at the of , terminate he survey with the portrait of over the mantelshelf , in which she be represent on a terrace , with a pedestal upon the terrace , and a vase upon the pedestal , and she shawl upon the vase , and a prodigious piece of fur upon the shawl , and she arm on the prodigious piece of fur , and a bracelet on she arm . " that be very like , " say . " it be a speak likeness . " " I wish it be , " growl Tony , without change he position . " I should have some fashionable conversation , here , then . " find by this time that he friend be not to be wheedle into a more sociable humour , put about upon the ill - use tack and remonstrate with he . " Tony , " say he , " I can make allowances for lowness of spirit , for no man know what it be when it do come upon a man better than I do , and no man perhaps have a better right to know it than a man who have a unrequited image imprint on he ' eart . but there be bounds to these thing when a unoffending party be in question , and I will acknowledge to you , , that I do not think you manner on the present occasion be hospitable or quite gentlemanly . " " this be strong language , , " return . " , it may be , " retort , " but I feel strongly when I use it . " admit that he have be wrong and beg to think no more about it . , however , have get the advantage , can not quite release it without a little more injured remonstrance . " no ! Dash it , , " say that gentleman , " you really ought to be careful how you wound the feeling of a man who have a unrequited image imprint on he ' eart and who be not altogether happy in those chord which vibrate to the tenderest emotion . you , , possess in yourself all that be calculate to charm the eye and allure the taste . it be not -- happily for you , perhaps , and I may wish that I could say the same -- it be not you character to hover around one flower . the ole garden be open to you , and you airy pinion carry you through it . , , far be it from I , I be sure , to wound even you feeling without a cause ! " again entreat that the subject may be no longer pursue , say emphatically , " , drop it ! " Guppy acquiesce , with the reply , " I never should have take it up , , of my own accord . " " and now
now , " say , stirr the fire , " touch this same bundle of letter . be not it a extraordinary thing of to have appoint twelve o'clock to - night to hand 'em over to I ? " " very . what do he do it for ? " " what do he do anything for ? he do not know . say to - day be he birthday and he would hand 'em over to - night at twelve o'clock . he will have drink himself blind by that time . he have be at it all day . " " he have not forget the appointment , I hope ? " " ? trust he for that . he never forget anything . I see he to - night , about eight -- help he to shut up he shop -- and he have get the letter then in he hairy cap . he pull it off and show them I . when the shop be close , he take they out of he cap , hang he cap on the chair - back , and stood turn they over before the fire . I hear he a little while afterwards , through the floor here , hum like the wind , the only song he know -- about , and old , and Bibo be drink when he die , or something or other . he have be as quiet since as a old rat asleep in he hole . " " and you be to go down at twelve ? " " at twelve . and as I tell you , when you come it seem to I a hundr . " " Tony , " say after consider a little with he leg cross , " he can not read yet , can he ? " " read ! he will never read . he can make all the letter separately , and he know most of they separately when he see they ; he have get on that much , under I ; but he can not put they together . he be too old to acquire the knack of it now -- and too drunk . " " Tony , " say , uncrossing and recrosse he leg , " how do you suppose he spelt out that name of ? " " he never spelt it out . you know what a curiious power of eye he have and how he have be use to employ himself in copy thing by eye alone . he imitate it , evidently from the direction of a letter , and ask I what it mean . " " Tony , " say , uncrossing and recrosse he leg again , " should you say that the original be a man 's writing or a woman 's ? " " a woman 's . fifty to one a lady 's -- slope a good deal , and the end of the letter and , ' long and hasty . " have be bite he thumb - nail during this dialogue , generally change the thumb when he have change the cross leg . as he be go to do so again , he happen to look at he coat - sleeve . it take he attention . he stare at it , aghast . " why , , what on earth be go on in this house to - night ? be there a chimney on fire ? " " Chimney on fire ! " " ah ! " return . " see how the soot 's falling . see here , on my arm ! see again , on the table here ! Confound the stuff , it will not blow off -- smear like black fat ! " they look at one another , and go listen to the door , and a little way upstairs , and a little way downstairs . come back and say it be all right and all quiet , and quote the remark he lately make to about they cooking chop at the 's Arms . " and it be then , " resume , still glance with remarkable aversion at the coat - sleeve , as they pursue they conversation before the fire , lean on opposite side of the table , with they head very near together , " that he tell you of he have take the bundle of letter from he lodger 's portmanteau ? " " that be the time , sir , " answer , faintly adjust he whisker . " Whereupon I write a line to my dear boy , the Honourable , inform he of the appointment for to - night and advise he not to call before , be a slyboot . " the light vivacious tone of fashionable life which be usually assume by sit so ill upon he to - night that he abandon that and he whisker together , and after look over he shoulder , appear to yield himself up a prey to the horror again . " you be to bring the letter to you room to read and compare , and to get yourself into a position to tell he all about they . that be the arrangement , be not it , ? " ask , anxiously bite he thumb -nail . " you can not speak too low . yes . that be what he and I agree . " " I tell you what , -- " " you can not speak too low , " say once more . nod he sagacious head , advance it yet closer , and drop into a whisper . " I tell you what . the first thing to be do be to make another packet like the real one so that if he should ask to see the real one while
while it be in my possession , you can show he the dummy . " " and suppose he detect the dummy as soon as he see it , which with he bite screw of a eye be about five hundred time more likely than not , " suggest . " then we will face it out . they do not belong to he , and they never do . you find that , and you place they in my hand -- a legal friend of yours -- for security . if he force we to it , they will be producible , will not they ? " " ye - es , " be 's reluctant admission . " why , , " remonstrate he friend , " how you look ! you do not doubt ? you do not suspect any harm ? " " I do not suspect anything more than I know , , " return the other gravely . " and what do you know ? " urge , raise he voice a little ; but on he friend 's once more warn he , " I tell you , you can not speak too low , " he repeat he question without any sound at all , form with he lip only the word , " what do you know ? " " I know three thing . first , I know that here we be whisper in secrecy , a pair of conspirator . " " well ! " say . " and we have better be that than a pair of noodle , which we should be if we be do anything else , for it be the only way of do what we want to do . secondly ? " " secondly , it be not make out to I how it be likely to be profitable , after all . " cast up he eye at the portrait of over the mantelshelf and reply , " Tony , you be ask to leave that to the honour of you friend . besides it be be calculate to serve that friend in those chord of the human mind which -- which need not be call into agonizing vibration on the present occasion -- you friend be no fool . what be that ? " " it be eleven o'clock striking by the bell of 's . and you will hear all the bell in the city jangling . " both sit silent , listen to the metal voice , near and distant , resoun from towers of various height , in tone more various than they situation . when these at length cease , all seem more mysterious and quiet than before . one disagreeable result of whispering be that it seem to evoke a atmosphere of silence , haunt by the ghost of sound -- strange crack and ticking , the rustling of garment that have no substance in they , and the tread of dreadful foot that would leave no mark on the sea -sand or the winter snow . so sensitive the two friend happen to be that the air be full of these phantoms , and the two look over they shoulders by one consent to see that the door be shut . " yes , ? " say , draw nearer to the fire and bite he unsteady thumb -nail . " you be go to say , thirdly ? " " it be far from a pleasant thing to be plott about a dead man in the room where he die , especially when you happen to live in it . " " but we be plott nothing against he , . " " may be not , still I do not like it . live here by yourself and see how you like it . " " as to dead man , , " proceed , evad this proposal , " there have be dead man in most room . " " I know there have , but in most room you let they alone , and -- and they let you alone , " Tony answer . the two look at each other again . make a hurrie remark to the effect that they may be do the decease a service , that he hope so . there be a oppressive blank until , by stirr the fire suddenly , make start as if he heart have be stir instead . " Fah ! here be more of this hateful soot hang about , " say he . " let we open the window a bit and get a mouthful of air . it be too close . " he raise the sash , and they both rest on the window - sill , half in and half out of the room . the neighbouring house be too near to admit of they see any sky without cran they neck and look up , but light in frowsy window here and there , and the rolling of distant carriage , and the new expression that there be of the stir of man , they find to be comfortable . , noiselessly tap on the window - sill , resum he whisper in quite a light - comedy tone . " by the by , , do not forget old , " mean the younger of that name . " I have not let he into this , you know . that grandfather of he be too keen by half . it run in the family . " " I remember , " say . " I be up to all that . " " and as to , " resume . " now , do you suppose he really have get hold of any other papers of importance , as he have boast to you , since you have be such ally ? "
" shake he head . " I do not know . can not imagine . if we get through this business without rouse he suspicions , I shall be better inform , no doubt . how can I know without see they , when he do not know himself ? he be always spell out word from they , and chalk they over the table and the shop - wall , and ask what this be and what that be ; but he whole stock from begin to end may easily be the waste - paper he buy it as , for anything I can say . it be a monomania with he to think he be possess of document . he have be go to learn to read they this last quarter of a century , I should judge , from what he tell I . " " how do he first come by that idea , though ? that be the question , " suggest with one eye shut , after a little forensic meditation . " he may have find papers in something he buy , where papers be not suppose to be , and may have get it into he shrewd head from the manner and place of they concealment that they be worth something . " " or he may have be take in , in some pretend bargain . or he may have be muddle altogether by long staring at whatever he have get , and by drink , and by hang about the 's and hearing of document for ever , " return . sit on the window - sill , nodd he head and balance all these possibility in he mind , continue thoughtfully to tap it , and clasp it , and measure it with he hand , until he hastily draw he hand away . " what , in the 's name , " he say , " be this ! look at my finger ! " a thick , yellow liquor defile they , which be offensive to the touch and sight and more offensive to the smell . a stagnant , sicken oil with some natural repulsion in it that make they both shudder . " what have you be do here ? what have you be pour out of window ? " " I pour out of window ! nothing , I swear ! never , since I have be here ! " cry the lodger . and yet look here -- and look here ! when he bring the candle here , from the corner of the window - sill , it slowly drip and creep away down the brick , here lie in a little thick nauseous pool . " this be a horrible house , " say , shut down the window . " give I some water or I shall cut my hand off . " he so wash , and rub , and scrub , and smell , and wash , that he have not long restore himself with a glass of brandy and stood silently before the fire when 's bell strike twelve and all those other bell strike twelve from they towers of various height in the dark air , and in they many tone . when all be quiet again , the lodger say , " it be the appointed time at last . shall I go ? " nod and give he a " lucky touch " on the back , but not with the wash hand , though it be he right hand . he go downstairs , and try to compose himself before the fire for wait a long time . but in no more than a minute or two the stair creak and come swiftly back . " have you get they ? " " get they ! no . the old man be not there . " he have be so horribly frightene in the short interval that he terror seize the other , who make a rush at he and ask loudly , " what be the matter ? " " I could not make he hear , and I softly open the door and look in . and the burn smell be there -- and the soot be there , and the oil be there -- and he be not there ! " end this with a groan . take the light . they go down , more dead than alive , and hold one another , push open the door of the back shop . the cat have retreate close to it and stand snarling , not at they , at something on the ground before the fire . there be a very little fire leave in the grate , but there be a smouldering , suffocat vapou in the room and a dark , greasy coating on the wall and ceiling . the chair and table , and the bottle so rarely absent from the table , all stand as usual . on one chair - back hang the old man 's hairy cap and coat . " look ! " whisper the lodger , point he friend 's attention to these object with a trembling finger . " I tell you so . when I see he last , he take he cap off , take out the little bundle of old letter , hang he cap on the back of the chair -- he coat be there already , for he have pull that off before he go to put the shutter up -- and I leave he turn the letter over in he hand , stand just where that crumble black thing be upon the floor . " be he hange somewhere ? they look up . no . " see ! " whisper . " at the foot of the same chair there lie a dirty bit
bit of thin red cord that they tie up pens with . that go round the letter . he undo it slowly , leer and laugh at I , before he begin to turn they over , and throw it there . I see it fall . " " what be the matter with the cat ? " say . " look at she ! " " mad , I think . and no wonder in this evil place . " they advance slowly , look at all these thing . the cat remain where they find she , still snarl at the something on the ground before the fire and between the two chair . what be it ? hold up the light . here be a small bur not patch of flooring ; here be the tinder from a little bundle of burnt paper , but not so light as usual , seem to be steep in something ; and here be -- be it the cinder of a small charred and break log of wood sprinkle with white ash , or be it coal ? oh , horror , he be here ! and this from which we run away , strike out the light and overturn one another into the street , be all that represent he . help , help , help ! come into this house for heaven 's sake ! plenty will come in , but none can help . the of that court , true to he title in he last act , have die the death of all lord chancellor in all court and of all authority in all place under all name soever , where false pretence be make , and where injustice be done . call the death by any name you Highness will , attribute it to whom you will , or say it might have be prevent how you will , it be the same death eternally -- inborn , inbreed , engender in the corrupted humours of the vicious body itself , and that only -- spontaneous combustion , and none other of all the death that can be die . now do those two gentleman not very neat about the cuff and button who attend the last coroner 's inquest at the 's Arms reappear in the precinct with surprising swiftness ( be , in fact , breathlessly fetch by the active and intelligent beadle ) , and institute perquisition through the court , and dive into the 's parlour , and write with ravenous little pens on tissue - paper . now do they note down , in the watch of the night , how the neighbourhood of be yesterday , at about midnight , throw into a state of the most intense agitation and excitement by the follow alarming and horrible discovery . now do they set forth how it will doubtless be remember that some time back a painful sensation be create in the public mind by a case of mysterious death from opium occur in the first floor of the house occupy as a rag , bottle , and general marine store shop , by a eccentric individual of intemperate habit , far advanced in life , name ; and how , by a remarkable coincidence , be examine at the inquest , which it may be recollect be hold on that occasion at the 's Arms , a well - conduct tavern immediately adjoin the premise in question on the west side and license to a highly respectable landlord , . now do they show ( in as many word as possible ) how during some hour of yesterday even a very peculiar smell be observe by the inhabitant of the court , in which the tragical occurrence which form the subject of that present account transpire ; and which odou be at one time so powerful that , a comic vocalist professionally engage by , have himself state to we reporter that he mention to , a lady of some pretension to musical ability , likewise engage by to s at a series of concert call , or meeting , which it would appear be hold at the 's Arms under 's direction pursuant to the of the , that he ( ) find he voice seriously affect by the impure state of the atmosphere , he jocose expression at the time be that he be like a empty post-office , for he have not a single note in he . how this account of be entirely corroborate by two intelligent married female reside in the same court and know respectively by the name of and , both of whom observe the foetid effluvia and regard they as be emit from the premise in the occupation of , the unfortunate decease . all this and a great deal more the two gentleman who have form a amicable partnership in the melancholy catastrophe write down on the spot ; and the boy population of the court ( out of bed in a moment ) swarm up the shutter of the 's Arms parlour , to behold the top of they head while they be about it . the whole court , adult as well as boy , be sleepless for that night , and can do nothing but wrap up its many head , and talk of the ill - fated house , and look at it . have be bravely rescue from she chamber , as if it be in flame , and accommodate with a bed at the 's Arms . the neither turn off its gas nor shut it be door all night , for any kind of public excitement make good for the and cause the court to stand in need of comfort . the house have not do so much in the stomachic article of clove or in brandy - and - water warm since the
the inquest . the moment the pot - boy heard what have happen , he roll up he shirt - sleeve tight to he shoulders and say , " there will be a run upon we ! " in the first outcry , young Piper dash off for the fire - engine and return in triumph at a jolting gallop perch up aloft on the Phoenix and hold on to that fabulous creature with all he might in the midst of helmet and torch . one helmet remain behind after careful investigation of all chink and cranny and slowly pace up and down before the house in company with one of the two policeman who have likewise be leave in charge thereof . to this trio everybody in the court possess of sixpence have a insatiate desire to exhibit hospitality in a liquid form . and he friend be within the bar at the and be worth anything to the that the bar contain if they will only stay there . " this be not a time , " say , " to haggle about money , " though he look something sharply after it , over the counter ; " give you order , you two gentleman , and you be welcome to whatever you put a name to . " thus entreate , the two gentleman ( especially ) put name to so many thing that in course of time they find it difficult to put a name to anything quite distinctly , though they still relate to all new - comer some version of the night they have have of it , and of what they say , and what they think , and what they see . meanwhile , one or other of the policeman often flit about the door , and push it open a little way at the full length of he arm , look in from outer gloom . not that he have any suspicions , but that he may as well know what they be up to in there . thus night pursue its leaden course , find the court still out of bed through the unwonted hour , still treat and be treat , still conduct itself similarly to a court that have have a little money leave it unexpectedly . thus night at length with slow - retreate step depart , and the lamp - lighter go he round , like a executioner to a despotic king , strike off the little head of fire that have aspire to lessen the darkness . thus the day cometh , whether or no . and the day may discern , even with its dim eye , that the court have be up all night . and above the face that have fall drowsily on table and the heel that lie prone on hard floor instead of bed , the brick and mortar physiognomy of the very court itself look worn and jaded . and now the neighbourhood , wake up and begin to hear of what have happen , come stream in , half dress , to ask question ; and the two policeman and the helmet ( who be far less impressible externally than the court ) have enough to do to keep the door . " good gracious , gentleman ! " say , come up . " what be this I hear ! " " why , it be true , " return one of the policeman . " that be what it be . now move on here , come ! " " why , good gracious , gentleman , " say , somewhat promptly back away , " I be at this door last night betwixt ten and eleven o'clock in conversation with the young man who lodge here . " " indeed ? " return the policeman . " you will find the young man next door then . now move on here , some of you , " " not hurt , I hope ? " say . " ? no . what be to hurt he ! " , wholly unable to answer this or any question in he troubled mind , repair to the 's arm and find Weevle languishing over tea and toast with a considerable expression on he of exhausted excitement and exhaust tobacco - smoke . " and likewise ! " quoth . " dear , dear , dear ! what a fate there seem in all this ! and my lit - - " 's power of speech desert he in the formation of the word " my little woman . " for to see that injure female walk into the 's arm at that hour of the morning and stand before the beer - engine , with she eye fix upon he like a accusing spirit , strike he dumb . " my dear , " say when he tongue be loose , " will you take anything ? a little -- not to put too fine a point upon it -- drop of shrub ? " " no , " say . " my love , you know these two gentleman ? " " yes ! " say , and in a rigid manner acknowledge they presence , still fix with she eye . the devoted Snagsby can not bear this treatment . he take . Snagsby by the hand and lead she aside to a adjacent cask . " my little woman , why do you look at I in that way ? pray do not do it . " " I can not help my look , " say , " and if I could I would not . " , with he cough of meekness , rejoin , " would not you really , my dear ? " and meditate . then cough he cough of trouble and say , " this be a dreadful
dreadful mystery , my love ! " still fearfully disconcert by 's eye . " it be , " return , shak she head , " a dreadful mystery . " " my little woman , " urge in a piteous manner , " do not for goodness 's sake speak to I with that bitter expression and look at I in that search way ! I beg and entreat of you not to do it . , you do not suppose that I would go spontaneously combust any person , my dear ? " " I can not say , " return . on a hasty review of he unfortunate position , " can not say " either . he be not prepare positively to deny that he may have have something to do with it . he have have something -- he do not know what -- to do with so much in this connexion that be mysterious that it be possible he may even be implicated , without know it , in the present transaction . he faintly wipe he forehead with he handkerchief and gasp . " my life , " say the unhappy stationer , " would you have any objection to mention why , be in general so delicately circumspect in you conduct , you come into a wine - vault before breakfast ? " " why do you come here ? " inquire . " my dear , merely to know the rights of the fatal accident which have happene to the venerable party who have be -- combust . " have make a pause to suppress a groan . " I should then have relate they to you , my love , over you french roll . " " I dare say you would ! you relate everything to I , . " " every -- my lit --" " I should be glad , " say after contemplate he increase confusion with a severe and sinister smile , " if you would come home with I ; I think you may be safer there , , than anywhere else . " " my love , I do not know but what I may be , I be sure . I be ready to go . " cast he eye forlornly round the bar , give Messr . Weevle and Guppy good morning , assure they of the satisfaction with which he see they uninjured , and accompany from the 's Arms . before night he doubt whether he may not be responsible for some inconceivable part in the catastrophe which be the talk of the whole neighbourhood be almost resolve into certainty by 's pertinacity in that fix gaze . he mental suffering be so great that he entertain wander idea of deliver himself up to justice and require to be clear if innocent and punish with the utmost rigour of the law if guilty . and , have take they breakfast , step into 's to take a little walk about the square and clear as many of the dark cobweb out of they brain as a little walk may . " there can be no more favourable time than the present , , " say after they have broodingly make out the four side of the square , " for a word or two between we upon a point on which we must , with very little delay , come to a understanding . " " now , I tell you what , " return the other , eye he companion with a bloodshot eye . " if it be a point of conspiracy , you need not take the trouble to mention it . I have have enough of that , and I be not go to have any more . we shall have you take fire next or blow up with a bang . " this supposititious phenomenon be so very disagreeable to that he voice quake as he say in a moral way , " , I should have think that what we go through last night would have be a lesson to you never to be personal any more as long as you liv . " to which return , " , I should have think it would have be a lesson to you never to conspire any more as long as you liv . " to which Guppy say , " who be conspir ? " to which reply , " why , you be ! " to which retort , " no , I be not . " to which retort again , " yes , you be ! " to which retort , " who say so ? " to which retort , " I say so ! " to which retort , " oh , indeed ? " to which retort , " yes , indeed ! " and both be now in a heat state , they walk on silently for a while to cool down again . " Tony , " say then , " if you hear you friend out instead of fly at he , you would not fall into mistake . but you temper be hasty and you be not considerate . Possesse in yourself , , all that be calculate to charm the eye -- " " oh ! blow the eye ! " cry , cut he short . " say what you have get to say ! " find he friend in this morose and material condition , only express the finer feeling of he soul through the tone of injury in which he recommence , " , when I say there be a point on which we must come to a understanding pretty soon , I say so quite apart from any kind of conspiring , however innocent . you know it be professionally arrange beforehand in all case that be try what
what fact the witness be to prove . be it or be it not desirable that we should know what fact we be to prove on the inquiry into the death of this unfortunate old mo--gentleman ? " ( be go to say " mogul , " but think " gentleman " better suit to the circumstance . ) " what fact ? the fact . " " the fact bear on that inquiry . those be " -- tell they off on he finger --" what we know of he habits , when you see he last , what he condition be then , the discovery that we make , and how we make it . " " yes , " say . " those be about the facts . " " we make the discovery in consequence of he have , in he eccentric way , a appointment with you at twelve o'clock at night , when you be to explain some writing to he as you have often do before on account of he not be able to read . I , spend the evening with you , be call down -- and so forth . the inquiry be only into the circumstance touch the death of the decease , it be not necessary to go beyond these fact , I suppose you will agree ? " " no ! " return . " I suppose not . " " and this be not a conspiracy , perhaps ? " say the injured Guppy . " no , " return he friend ; " if it be nothing worse than this , I withdraw the observation . " " now , , " say , take he arm again and walk he slowly on , " I should like to know , in a friendly way , whether you have yet think over the many advantage of you continuing to live at that place ? " " what do you mean ? " say , stopping . " whether you have yet think over the many advantage of you continuing to live at that place ? " repeat , walk he on again . " at what place ? that place ? " point in the direction of the rag and bottle shop . nod . " why , I would not pass another night there for any consideration that you could offer I , " say , haggardly sta . " do you mean it though , ? " " mean it ! do I look as if I mean it ? I feel as if I do ; I know that , " say with a very genuine shudder . " then the possibility or probability -- for such it must be consider -- of you never be disturb in possession of those effect lately belong to a lone old man who seem to have no relation in the world , and the certainty of you be able to find out what he really have get store up there , do not weigh with you at all against last night , , if I understand you ? " say , bite he thumb with the appetite of vexation . " certainly not . talk in that cool way of a fellow 's live there ? " cry indignantly . " go and live there yourself . " " oh ! I , ! " say , soothe he . " I have never live there and could not get a lodging there now , whereas you have get one . " " you be welcome to it , " rejoin he friend , " and -- ugh !-- you may make yourself at home in it . " " then you really and truly at this point , " say , " give up the whole thing , if I understand you , ? " " you never , " return with a most convincing steadfastness , " say a truer word in all you life . I do ! " while they be so converse , a hackney - coach drive into the square , on the box of which vehicle a very tall hat make itself manifest to the public . inside the coach , and consequently not so manifest to the multitude , though sufficientely so to the two friend , for the coach stop almost at they foot , be the venerable and , accompany by they granddaughter . a air of haste and excitement pervade the party , and as the tall hat ( surmount Smallweed the younger ) alight , Smallweed the elder poke he head out of window and bawl to , " how de do , sy ! how de do ! " " what do and he family want here at this time of the morning , I wonder ! " say , nodd to he familiar . " my dear sir , " cry , " would you do I a favour ? would you and you friend be so very obleeging as to carry I into the public - house in the court , while and he sister bring they grandmother along ? would you do a old man that good turn , sir ? " look at he friend , repeat inquiringly , " the public - house in the court ? " and they prepare to bear the venerable burden to the 's Arms . " there be you fare ! " say the patriarch to the coachman with a fierce grin and shake he incapable fist at he . " ask I for a penny more , and I will have my lawful revenge upon you . my dear young man , be easy with I , if you please . allow I to catch you round the neck . I will not squeeze you tighter than I can help . oh
oh , ! oh , dear I ! oh , my bone ! " it be well that the be not far off , for present a apoplectic appearance before half the distance be accomplish . with no worse aggravation of he symptom , however , than the utterance of diver croak sound expressive of obstructed respiration , he fulil he share of the porterage and the benevolent old gentleman be deposite by he own desire in the parlour of the 's Arms . " oh , ! " gasp , look about he , breathless , from a arm-chair . " oh , dear I ! oh , my bone and back ! oh , my ach and pain ! sit down , you dance , prance , shambl , scrambl poll -parrot ! sit down ! " this little apostrophe to . be occasion by a propensity on the part of that unlucky old lady whenever she find herself on she foot to amble about and " set " to inanimate object , accompany herself with a chattering noise , as in a witch dance . a nervous affection have probably as much to do with these demonstration as any imbecile intention in the poor old woman , but on the present occasion they be so particularly lively in connexion with the Windsor arm -chair , fellow to that in which be seated , that she only quite desists when she grandchild have hold she down in it , she lord in the meanwhile bestow upon she , with great volubility , the endearing epithet of " a pig - head jackdaw , " repeat a surprising number of time . " my dear sir , " then proceed , address , " there have be a calamity here . have you hear of it , either of you ? " " Heard of it , sir ! why , we discover it . " " you discover it . you two discover it ! , they discover it ! " the two discoverer stare at the , who return the compliment . " my dear friend , " whines , put out both he hand , " I owe you a thousand thanks for discharge the melancholy office of discover the ash of 's brother . " " Eh ? " say . " . 's brother , my dear friend -- she only relation . we be not on term , which be to be deplor now , but he never would be on term . he be not fond of we . he be eccentric -- he be very eccentric . unless he have leave a will ( which be not at all likely ) I shall take out letter of administration . I have come down to look after the property ; it must be seal up , it must be protect . I have come down , " repeat , hook the air towards he with all he ten finger at once , " to look after the property . " " I think , Small , " say the disconsolate , " you might have mention that the old man be you uncle . " " you two be so close about he that I think you would like I to be the same , " return that old bird with a secretly glistening eye . " , I be not proud of he . " " besides which , it be nothing to you , you know , whether he be or not , " say . also with a secretely glistening eye . " he never see I in he life to know I , " observe Small ; " I do not know why I should introduce he , I be sure ! " " no , he never communicate with we , which be to be deplor , " the old gentleman strike in , " but I have come to look after the property -- to look over the papers , and to look after the property . we shall make good we title . it be in the hand of my solicitor . , of 's , over the way there , be so good as to act as my solicitor ; and grass do not grow under this foot , I can tell ye . be . be only brother ; she have no relation but , and have no relation but . I be speak of you brother , you brimsto black - beetle , that be seventy - six year of age . " instantly begin to shake she head and pipe up , " Seventy - six pound seven and sevenpence ! Seventy - six thousand bag of money ! Seventy - six hundred thousand million of parcel of bank - note ! " " will somebody give I a quart pot ? " exclaim she exasperate husband , look helplessly about he and find no missile within he reach . " will somebody obleege I with a spittoon ? will somebody hand I anything hard and bruise to pelt at she ? you hag , you cat , you dog , you brimsto barker ! " here , wrotch up to the highest pitch by he own eloquence , actually throw at she grandmother in default of anything else , by butting that young virgin at the old lady with such force as he can muster and then drop into he chair in a heap . " shake I up , somebody , if you will he so good , " say the voice from within the faintly struggle bundle into which he have collapse . " I have come to look after the property . shake I up , and call in the police on duty at the next house to be explain to about the property . my solicitor will
will be here presently to protect the property . Transportation or the gallow for anybody who shall touch the property ! " as he dutiful grandchild set he up , panting , and put he through the usual restorative process of shaking and punching , he still repeat like a echo , " the -- the property ! the property ! property ! " and look at each other , the former as have relinquish the whole affair , the latter with a discomfited countenance as have entertain some linger expectation yet . but there be nothing to be do in opposition to the Smallweed interest . 's clerk come down from he official pew in the chamber to mention to the police that be answerable for its be all correct about the next of kin and that the papers and effect will be formally take possession of in due time and course . be at once permit so far to assert he supremacy as to be carry on a visit of sentiment into the next house and upstairs into 's desert room , where he look like a hideous bird of prey newly add to she aviary . the arrival of this unexpected heir soon take wind in the court still make good for the and keep the court upon its mettle . and think it hard upon the young man if there really be no will , and consider that a handsome present ought to be make he out of the estate . yong and young Perkins , as member of that restless juvenile circle which be the terror of the foot-passenger in , crumble into ash behind the pump and under the archway all day long , where wild yell and hooting take place over they remains . and enter into affable conversation with they patron , feel that these unusual occurrence level the barrier between professional and non-professional . put up " the popular song of , with chorus by the whole strength of the company , " as the great Harmonic feature of the week and announce in the bill that " . be induced to do so at a considerable extra expense in consequence of a wish which have be very generally express at the bar by a large body of respectable individual and in homage to a late melancholy event which have arouse so much sensation . " there be one point connect with the decease upon which the court be particularly anxious , namely , that the fiction of a full - size coffin should be preserve , though there be so little to put in it . upon the undertaker 's state in the 's bar in the course of the day that he have receive order to construct " a six - footer , " the general solicitude be much relieved , and it be consider that 's conduct do he great honour . out of the court , and a long way out of it , there be considerable excitement too , for man of science and philosophy come to look , and carriage set down doctor at the corner who arrive with the same intent , and there be more learned talk about inflammable gas and phosphuret hydrogen than the court have ever imagine . some of these authority ( of course the wisest ) hold with indignation that the deceased have no business to die in the allege manner ; and be remind by other authority of a certain inquiry into the evidence for such death reprint in the sixth volume of the Philosophical transaction ; and also of a book not quite unknown on English medical jurisprudence ; and likewise of the italian case of the as set forth in detail by one Bianchini , prebendary of , who write a scholarly work or so and be occasionally hear of in he time as have gleam of reason in he ; and also of the testimony of Messrs . and , two pestilent who would investigate the subject ; and further , of the corroborative testimony of cat , a rather celebrate french surgeon once upon a time , who have the unpoliteness to live in a house where such a case occur and even to write a account of it -- still they regard the late 's obstinacy in go out of the world by any such by - way as wholly unjustifiable and personally offensive . the less the court understand of all this , the more the court like it , and the greater enjoyment it have in the stock in trade of the 's arm . then there come the artist of a picture newspaper , with a foreground and figure ready draw for anything from a wreck on the Cornish coast to a review in or a meeting in , and in 's own room , memorable evermore , he then and there throw in upon the block 's house , as large as life ; in fact , considerably larger , make a very temple of it . similarly , be permit to look in at the door of the fatal chamber , he depict that apartment as three - quarter of a mile long by fifty yard high , at which the court be particularly char . all this time the two gentleman before mention pop in and out of every house and assist at the philosophical disputation -- go everywhere and listen to everybody -- and yet be always diive into the 's parlour and write with the ravenous little pens on the tissue - paper . at last come the coroner and he inquiry , like as before , except that the coroner cherish this case as be out of the common way and tell the gentleman of the jury , in he private capacity , that " that would seem to be a unlucky house next door
door , gentlemen , a destin house ; but so we sometimes find it , and these be mystery we can not account for ! " after which the six - footer come into action and be much admired . in all these proceedings have so slight a part , except when he give he evidence , that he be move on like a private individual and can only haunt the secret house on the outside , where he have the mortification of see padlock the door , and of bitterly know himself to be shut out . but before these proceedings draw to a close , that be to say , on the night next after the catastrophe , have a thing to say that must be say to . for which reason , with a sinking heart and with that hang - dog sense of guilt upon he which dread and watch enfold in the 's arm have produce , the young man of the name of Guppy present himself at the town mansion at about seven o'clock in the evening and request to see she ladyship . reply that she be go out to dinner ; do not he see the carriage at the door ? yes , he do see the carriage at the door ; but he want to see my too . be dispose , as he will presently declare to a fellow - gentleman in waiting , " to pitch into the young man " ; but he instruction be positive . therefore he sulkily suppose that the young man must come up into the library . there he leave the young man in a large room , not over -light , while he make report of he . look into the shade in all direction , discover everywhere a certain charred and whiten little heap of coal or wood . presently he hear a rustling . be it -- ? no , it be no ghost , but fair flesh and blood , most brilliantly dress . " I have to beg you ladyship 's pardon , " stammer , very downcast . " this be a inconvenient time -- " " I tell you , you could come at any time . " she take a chair , look straight at he as on the last occasion . " thank you ladyship . you ladyship be very affable . " " you can sit down . " there be not much affability in she tone . " I do not know , you ladyship , that it be worth while my sit down and detain you , for I -- I have not get the letter that I mention when I have the honour of waiting on you ladyship . " " have you come merely to say so ? " " merely to say so , you ladyship . " besides be depresse , disappoint , and uneasy , be put at a further disadvantage by the splendour and beauty of she appearance . she know it be influence perfectly , have study it too well to miss a grain of its effect on any one . as she look at he so steadily and coldly , he not only feel conscious that he have no guide in the least perception of what be really the complexion of she thought , but also that he be be every moment , as it be , remove further and further from she . she will not speak , it be plain . so he must . " in short , you ladyship , " say like a meanly penitent thief , " the person I be to have have the letter of , have come to a sudden end , and -- " he stop . calmly finish the sentence . " and the letter be destroy with the person ? " would say no if he could -- as he be unable to hide . " I believe so , you ladyship . " if he could see the least sparkle of relief in she face now ? no , he could see no such thing , even if that brave outside do not utterly put he away , and he be not look beyond it and about it . he falter a awkward excuse or two for he failure . " be this all you have to say ? " inquire , have hear he out -- or as nearly out as he can stumble . think that be all . " you have better be sure that you wish to say nothing more to I , this be the last time you will have the opportunity . " be quite sure . and indeed he have no such wish at present , by any means . " that be enough . I will dispense with excuse . good evening to you ! " and she ring for to show the young man of the name of out . but in that house , in that same moment , there happen to be a old man of the name of . and that old man , come with he quiet footstep to the library , have he hand at that moment on the handle of the door -- come in -- and come face to face with the young man as he be leave the room . one glance between the old man and the lady , and for a instant the blind that be always down flie up . , eager and sharp , look out . another instant , close again . " I beg you pardon , . I beg you pardon a thousand time . it be so very unusual to find you here at this hour . I suppose the room be empty . I beg you pardon ! " " stay ! " she negligently
negligently call he back . " remain here , I beg . I be go out to dinner . I have nothing more to say to this young man ! " the disconcert young man bow , as he go out , and cringingly hope that of the field be well . " aye , aye ? " say the lawyer , look at he from under he bent brows , though he have no need to look again -- not he . " from and 's , surely ? " " and 's , . name of , . " " to be sure . why , thank you , , I be very well ! " " happy to hear it , sir . you can not be too well , sir , for the credit of the profession . " " thank you , ! " sneak away . , such a foil in he old - fashioned rusty black to 's brightness , hand she down the staircase to she carriage . he return rub he ching , and rub it a good deal in the course of the evening . of the " now , what , " say , " may this be ? be it blank cartridge or ball ? a flash in the pan or a shot ? " a open letter be the subject of the trooper 's speculation , and it seem to perplex he mightily . he look at it at arm 's length , bring it close to he , hold it in he right hand , hold it in he left hand , read it with he head on this side , with he head on that side , contract he eyebrow , elevate they , still can not satisfy himself . he smooth it out upon the table with he heavy palm , and thoughtfully walk up and down the gallery , make a halt before it every now and then to come upon it with a fresh eye . even that will not do . " be it , " still muse , " blank cartridge or ball ? " , with the aid of a brush and paint - pot , be employ in the distance whiten the target , softly whistl in quick - march time and in drum - and - fife manner that he must and will go back again to the girl he leave behind he . " ! " the trooper beckon as he call he . approach in he usual way , sidl off at first as if he be go anywhere else and then bear down upon he commander like a bayonet - charge . certain splashe of white show in high relief upon he dirty face , and he scrape he one eyebrow with the handle of the brush . " attention , ! listen to this . " " steady , commander , steady . " " ' . allow I to remind you ( though there be no legal necessity for my do so , as you be aware ) that the bill at two month ' date draw on yourself by , and by you accept , for the sum of ninety - seven pound four shilling and ninepence , will become due to - morrow , when you will please be prepared to take up the same on presentation . yours , . ' what do you make of that , ? " " mischief , guv'ner . " " why ? " " I think , " reply after pensively trace out a cross -wrinkle in he forehead with the brush - handle , " that mischeevious consequence be always mean when money 's ask for . " " Lookye , , " say the trooper , sit on the table . " first and last , I have pay , I may say , half as much again as this principal in interest and one thing and another . " intimate by sidling back a pace or two , with a very unaccountable wrench of he wry face , that he do not regard the transaction as be make more promising by this incident . " and lookye further , , " say the trooper , stay he premature conclusion with a wave of he hand . " there have always be a understanding that this bill be to be what they call renew . and it have be renew no end of time . what do you say now ? " " I say that I think the time be come to a end at last . " " you do ? Humph ! I be much of the same mind myself . " " be he that be bring here in a chair ? " " the same . " " Guv'ner , " say with exceeding gravity , " he be a leech in he disposition , he be a screw and a wice in he action , a snake in he twisting , and a lobster in he claw . " have thus expressively utter he sentiment , , after wait a little to ascertain if any further remark be expect of he , get 's back by he usual series of movement to the target he have in hand and vigorously signify through he former musical medium that he must and he will return to that ideal young lady . , have fold the letter , walk in that direction . " there be a way , commander , " say , look cunningly at he , " of settle this . " " pay the money , I suppose ? I wish I could . " shake he head . " no , guv'ner , no ; not so bad as that . there be a way , " say with a highly artistic turn
turn of he brush ; " what I be a - do at present . " " . " Phil nod . " a pretty way that would be ! do you know what would become of the in that case ? do you know they would be ruin to pay off my old score ? you be a moral character , " say the trooper , eye he in he large way with no small indignation ; " upon my life you be , ! " , on one knee at the target , be in course of protest earnestly , though not without many allegorical scoop of he brush and smoothing of the white surface round the rim with he thumb , that he have forget the responsibility and would not so much as injure a hair of the head of any member of that worthy family when step be audible in the long passage without , and a cheerful voice be hear to wonder whether be at home . , with a look at he master , hobble up , say , " here be the guv'ner , ! here he be ! " and the old girl herself , accompany by , appear . the old girl never appear in walking trim , in any season of the year , without a grey cloth cloak , coarse and much worn but very clean , which be , undoubtedly , the identical garment render so interesting to by have make its way home to from another quarter of the globe in company with and a umbrella . the latter faithful appendage be also invariably a part of the old girl 's presence out of door . it be of no colour know in this life and have a corrugated wooden crook for a handle , with a metallic object let into its prow , or beak , resembl a little model of a fanlight over a street door or one of the oval glass out of a pair of spectacle , which ornamental object have not that tenacious capacity of sticking to its post that might be desire in a article long associate with the british army . the old girl 's umbrella be of a flabby habit of waist and seem to be in need of stay -- a appearance that be possibly referable to it be have serve through a series of year at home as a cupboard and on journey as a carpet bag . she never put it up , have the greatest reliance on she well - prove cloak with its capacious hood , but generally use the instrument as a wand with which to point out joint of meat or bunch of green in marketing or to arrest the attention of tradesman by a friendly poke . without she market - basket , which be a sort of wicker well with two flapping lid , she never stir abroad . attend by these she trusty companion , therefore , she honest sunbur not face look cheerily out of a rough straw bonnet , Bagnet now arrive , fresh - coloured and bright , in 's . " well , , old fellow , " say she , " and how do you do , this sunshiny morning ? " give he a friendly shake of the hand , draw a long breath after she walk and sit down to enjoy a rest . have a faculty , mature on the top of baggage - waggon and in other such position , of rest easily anywhere , she perch on a rough bench , unty she bonnet - string , push back she bonnet , cross she arm , and look perfectly comfortable . in the meantime have shaken hand with he old comrade and with , on whom likewise bestow a good - humoured nod and smile . " now , , " say briskly , " here we be , and myself " -- she often speak of she husband by this appellation , on account , as it be suppose , of have be he old regimental nickname when they first become acquainted , in compliment to the extreme hardness and toughness of he physiognomy -- " just look in , we have , to make it all correct as usual about that security . give he the new bill to sign , , and he will sign it like a man . " " I be come to you this morning , " observe the trooper reluctantly . " yes , we think you would come to we this morning , but we turn out early and leave , the best of boy , to mind he sister and come to you instead -- as you see ! for , he be tie so close now , and get so little exercise , that a walk do he good . but what be the matter , ? " ask , stop in she cheerful talk . " you do not look yourself . " " I be not quite myself , " return the trooper ; " I have be a little put out , . " she bright quick eye catch the truth directly . " ! " hold up she forefinger . " do not tell I there be anything wrong about that security of 's ! do not do it , , on account of the child ! " the trooper look at she with a troubled visage . " , " say , use both she arm for emphasis and occasionally bring down she open hand upon she knee . " if you have allow anything wrong to come to that security of 's , and if you have let he in for it , and if you have put we in danger of be sell up -- and I see sell up in you
you face , , as plain as print -- you have do a shameful action and have deceive we cruelly . I tell you , cruelly , . there ! " , otherwise as immovable as a pump or a lamp - post , put he large right hand on the top of he bald head as if to defend it from a shower - bath and look with great uneasiness at . " , " say that old girl , " I wonder at you ! , I be asham of you ! , I could not have believe you would have do it ! I always know you to be a rolling stone that gather no moss , but I never think you would have take away what little moss there be for and the child to lie upon . you know what a hard - work , steady - go chap he be . you know what and and be , and I never do think you would , or could , have have the heart to serve we so . oh , ! " gather up she cloak to wipe she eye on in a very genuine manner , " how could you do it ? " ceasing , remove he hand from he head as if the shower - bath be over and look disconsolately at , who have turn quite white and look distressfully at the grey cloak and straw bonnet . " Mat , " say the trooper in a subdued voice , address he but still look at he wife , " I be sorry you take it so much to heart , because I do hope it be not so bad as that come to . I certainly have , this morning , receive this letter " -- which he read aloud --" but I hope it may be set right yet . as to a rolling stone , why , what you say be true . I be a rolling stone , and I never roll in anybody 's way , I fully believe , that I roll the least good to . but it be impossible for a old vagabond comrade to like you wife and family better than I like th'ey , Mat , and I trust you will look upon I as forgivingly as you can . do not think I have keep anything from you . I have not have the letter more than a quarter of a hour . " " old girl , " murmur after a short silence , " will you tell he my opinion ? " " oh ! why do not he marry , " answer , half laugh and half cry , " 's widder in ? then he would not have get himself into these trouble . " " the old girl , " say , " put it correct -- why do not you ? " " well , she have a better husband by this time , I hope , " return the trooper . " anyhow , here I stand , this present day , not marry to 's widder . what shall I do ? you see all I have get about I . it be not mine ; it be yours . give the word , and I will sell off every morsel . if I could have hope it would have bring in nearly the sum want , I would have sell all long ago . do not believe that I will leave you or yours in the lurch , . I would sell myself first . I only wish , " say the trooper , give himself a disparage blow in the chest , " that I know of any one who would buy such a second - hand piece of old store . " " old girl , " murmur , " give he another bit of my mind . " " , " say the old girl , " you be not so much to be blame , on full consideration , except for ever take this business without the means . " " and that be like I ! " observe the penitent trooper , shak he head . " like I , I know . " " Silence ! the old girl , " say , " be correct -- in she way of give my opinion -- hear I out ! " " that be when you never ink to have ask for the security , , and when you never ink to have get it , all thing consider . but what be done can not be undone . you be always a honourable and straightforward fellow , as far as lay in you power , though a little flighty . on the other hand , you can not admit but what it be natural in we to be anxious with such a thing hang over we head . so forget and forgive all round , . come ! forget and forgive all round ! " , give he one of she honest hand and give she husband the other , give each of they one of he and hold they while he speak . " I do assure you both , there be nothing I would not do to discharge this obligation . but whatever I have be able to scrape together have go every two month in keep it up . we have liv plainly enough here , and I . but the gallery do not quite do what be expect of it , and it be not -- in short , it be not the mint . it be wrong in I to take it ? well , so it be . but I be in a manner draw into that step , and I think it might steady I , and set
set I up , and you will try to overlook my have such expectation , and upon my soul , I be very much oblige to you , and very much asham of myself . " with these concluding word , give a shake to each of the hand he hold , and relinquish they , back a pace or two in a broad - chest , upright attitude , as if he have make a final confession and be immediately go to be shoot with all military honour . " , hear I out ! " say , glance at he wife . " old girl , go on ! " , be in this singular manner hear out , have merely to observe that the letter must be attend to without any delay , that it be advisable that and he should immediately wait on Smallweed in person , and that the primary object be to save and hold harmless , who have none of the money . , entirely assent , put on he hat and prepare to march with to the enemy 's camp . " do not you mind a woman 's hasty word , , " say , pat he on the shoulder . " I trust my old to you , and I be sure you will bring he through it . " the trooper return that this be kindly say and that he will bring through it somehow . upon which , with she cloak , basket , and umbrella , go home , bright - eye again , to the rest of she family , and the comrade sally forth on the hopeful errand of mollify . whether there be two people in less likely to come satisfactorily out of any negotiation with than and may be very reasonably question . also , notwithstand they martial appearance , broad square shoulders , and heavy tread , whether there be within the same limit two more simple and unaccustomed child in all the Smallweedy affair of life . as they proceed with great gravity through the street towards the region of , , observe he companion to be thoughtful , consider it a friendly part to refer to 's late sally . " , you know the old girl -- she be as sweet and as mild as milk . but touch she on the child -- or myself -- and she be off like gunpowder . " " it do she credit , ! " " , " say , look straight before he , " the old girl -- can not do anything -- that do not do she credit . more or less . I never say so . Discipline must he maintain . " " she be worth she weight in gold , " say the trooper . " in gold ? " say . " I will tell you what . the old girl 's weight -- be twelve stone six . would I take that weight -- in any metal -- for the old girl ? no . why not ? because the old girl 's metal be far more precious -- than the preciousest metal . and she be all metal ! " " you be right , ! " " when she take I -- and accept of the ring -- she ' list under I and the child -- heart and head , for life . she be that earnest , " say , " and true to she colour -- that , touch we with a finger -- and she turn out -- and stand to she arm . if the old girl fire wide -- once in a way -- at the call of duty -- look over it , . for she be loyal ! " " why , bless she , , " return the trooper , " I think the higher of she for it ! " " you be right ! " say with the warmest enthusiasm , though without relax the rigidity of a single muscle . " think as high of the old girl -- as the rock of -- and still you will be think low -- of such merit . but I never own to it before she . must be maintain . " these encomium bring they to mount and to 's house . the door be open by the perennial , who , have survey they from top to toe with no particular favour , but indeed with a malignant sneer , leave they stand there while she consult the oracle as to they admission . the oracle may be infer to give consent from the circumstance of she return with the word on she honey lip that they can come in if they want to it . thus privileged , they come in and find Smallweed with he foot in the drawer of he chair as if it be a paper foot - bath and . obscure with the cushion like a bird that be not to s . " my dear friend , " say with those two lean affectionate arm of he stretch forth . " how de do ? how de do ? who be we friend , my dear friend ? " " why this , " return , not able to be very conciliatory at first , " be , who have oblige I in that matter of ours , you know . " " oh ! ? surely ! " the old man look at he under he hand . " hope you be well , ? man , ! military air , sir ! " no chair be offer , bring one forward for and one for himself . they sit down , as if he have no power of bending himself , except at the hip , for that purpose . " ,
, " say , " bring the pipe . " " why , I do not know , " interpose , " that the young woman need give herself that trouble , for to tell you the truth , I be not inclin to smoke it to - day . " " be not you ? " return the old man . " , bring the pipe . " " the fact be , , " proceed , " that I find myself in rather a unpleasant state of mind . it appear to I , sir , that you friend in the city have be play trick . " " oh , dear no ! " say . " he never do that ! " " do not he ? well , I be glad to hear it , because I think it might be he do . this , you know , I be speak of . this letter . " smile in a very ugly way in recognition of the letter . " what do it mean ? " ask . " , " say the old man . " have you get the pipe ? give it to I . do you say what do it mean , my good friend ? " " aye ! now , come , come , you know , , " urge the trooper , constrain himself to speak as smoothly and confidentially as he can , hold the open letter in one hand and rest the broad knuckle of the other on he thigh , " a good lot of money have pass between we , and we be face to face at the present moment , and be both well aware of the understanding there have always been . I be prepare to do the usual thing which I have do regularly and to keep this matter go . I never get a letter like this from you before , and I have be a little put about by it this morning , because here be my friend , who , you know , have none of the money -- " " I do not know it , you know , " say the old man quietly . " why , con - find you -- it , I mean -- I tell you so , do not I ? " " oh , yes , you tell I so , " return . " but I do not know it . " " well ! " say the trooper , swallow he fire . " I know it . " reply with excellent temper , " ah ! that be quite another thing ! " and add , " but it do not matter . 's situation be all one , whether or no . " the unfortunate make a great effort to arrange the affair comfortably and to propitiate Smallweed by take he upon he own term . " that be just what I mean . as you say , Smallweed , here be liable to be fix whether or no . now , you see , that make he good lady very uneasy in she mind , and I too , for whereas I be a harum - scarum sort of a good - for - nuy that more kick than halfpence come natural to , why he be a steady family man , do not you see ? now , , " say the trooper , gain confidence as he proceed in he soldierly mode of do business , " although you and I be good friend enough in a certain sort of a way , I be well aware that I can not ask you to let my friend Bagnet off entirely . " " oh , dear , you be too modest . you can ask I anything , . " ( there be a ogreish kind of jocularity in to - day . ) " and you can refuse , you mean , eh ? or not you so much , perhaps , as you friend in the city ? ha ha ha ! " " ha ha ha ! " echoe . in such a very hard manner and with eye so particularly green that 's natural gravity be much deepen by the contemplation of that venerable man . " come ! " say the sanguine . " I be glad to find we can be pleasant , because I want to arrange this pleasantly . here be my friend , and here be I . we will settle the matter on the spot , if you please , , in the usual way . and you will ease my friend 's mind , and he family 's mind , a good deal if you will just mention to he what we understanding be . " here some shrill spectre cry out in a mocking manner , " oh , good gracious ! oh ! " , indeed , it be the sportive , who be find to be silent when the start visitor look round , but whose ching have receive a recent toss , expressive of derision and contempt . 's gravity become yet more profound . " but I think you ask I , " -- old , who all this time have have the pipe in he hand , be the speaker now -- " I think you ask I , what do the letter mean ? " " why , yes , I do , " return the trooper in he off - hand way , " but I do not care to know particularly , if it be all correct and pleasant . " , purposely balk himself in a aim at the trooper 's head , throw the pipe on the ground and break it to piece . " that be what it mean
mean , my dear friend . I will smash you . I will crumble you . I will powder you . go to the devil ! " the two friend rise and look at one another . 's gravity have now attain its profoundest point . " go to the devil ! " repeat the old man . " I will have no more of you pipe- smoking and swaggering . what ? you be a independent dragoon , too ! go to my lawyer ( you remember where ; you have be there before ) and show you independence now , will you ? come , my dear friend , there be a chance for you . open the street door , ; put these blusterer out ! call in help if they do not go . put th'ey out ! " he vociferate this so loudly that , lay he hand on the shoulders of he comrade before the latter can recover from he amazement , get he on the outside of the street door , which be instantly slam by the triumphant . utterly confound , awhile stand look at the knocker . , in a perfect abyss of gravity , walk up and down before the little parlour window like a sentry and look in every time he pass , apparently revolve something in he mind . " come , , " say when he have recover himself , " we must try the lawyer . now , what do you think of this rascal ? " , stop to take a farewell look into the parlour , reply with one shake of he head direct at the interior , " if my old girl have be here -- I would have tell he ! " have so discharge himself of the subject of he cogitation , he fall into step and march off with the trooper , shoulder to shoulder . when they present themselves in 's , be engage and not to be see . he be not at all willing to see they , for when they have wait a full hour , and the clerk , on he bell be ring , take the opportunity of mention as much , he bring forth no more encouraging message than that have nothing to say to they and they have better not wait . they do wait , however , with the perseverance of military tactic , and at last the bell ring again and the client in possession come out of 's room . the client be a handsome old lady , no other than , housekeeper at . she come out of the sanctuary with a fair old - fashioned curtsy and softly shut the door . she be treat with some distinction there , for the clerk step out of he pew to show she through the outer office and to let she out . the old lady be thank he for he attention when she observe the comrade in waiting . " I beg you pardon , sir , but I think those gentleman be military ? " the clerk refer the question to they with he eye , and not turn round from the almanac over the fire - place . take upon himself to reply , " yes , ma 'am . Formerly . " " I think so . I be sure of it . my heart warm , gentlemen , at the sight of you . it always do at the sight of such . bless you , gentlemen ! you will excuse a old woman , but I have a son once who go for a soldier . a fine handsome youth he be , and good in he bold way , though some people do disparage he to he poor mother . I ask you pardon for trouble you , sir . bless you , gentlemen ! " " same to you , ma 'am ! " return with right good will . there be something very touch in the earnestness of the old lady 's voice and in the tremble that go through she quaint old figure . but be so occupied with the almanac over the fire - place ( calculate the come month by it perhaps ) that he do not look round until she have go away and the door be close upon she . " , " gruffly whisper when he do turn from the almanac at last . " do not be cast down ! ' why , soldier , why -- should we be melancholy , boy ? ' Cheer up , my hearty ! " the clerk have now again go in to say that they be still there and be hear to return with some irascibility , " let them come in then ! " they pass into the great room with the painted ceiling and find he stand before the fire . " now , you men , what do you want ? , I tell you the last time I see you that I do not desire you company here . " sergeant reply -- dash within the last few minute as to he usual manner of speech , and even as to he usual carriage -- that he have receive this letter , have be to about it , and have be refer there . " I have nothing to say to you , " rejoin . " if you get into debt , you must pay you debt or take the consequence . you have no occasion to come here to learn that , I suppose ? " be sorry to say that he be not prepare with the money . " very well ! then the other man -- this man , if this be he -- must pay it for you . " be sorry to add that the other
other man be not prepare with the money either . " very well ! then you must pay it between you or you must both be sue for it and both suffer . you have have the money and must refund it . you be not to pocket other people 's pound , shilling , and pence and escape scot - free . " the lawyer sit down in he easy - chair and stir the fire . hope he will have the goodness to -- " I tell you , sergeant , I have nothing to say to you . I do not like you associate and do not want you here . this matter be not at all in my course of practice and be not in my office . be good enough to offer these affair to I , but they be not in my way . you must go to 's in 's . " " I must make a apology to you , sir , " say , " for press myself upon you with so little encouragement -- which be almost as unpleasant to I as it can be to you -- but would you let I say a private word to you ? " rise with he hand in he pocket and walk into one of the window recess . " now ! I have no time to waste . " in the midst of he perfect assumption of indifference , he direct a sharp look at the trooper , take care to stand with he own back to the light and to have the other with he face towards it . " well , sir , " say , " this man with I be the other party implicate in this unfortunate affair -- nominally , only nominally -- and my sole object be to prevent he get into trouble on my account . he be a most respectable man with a wife and family , formerly in the -- " " my friend , I do not care a pinch of snuff for the whole establishment--officer , man , tumbril , waggon , horse , gun , and ammunition . " " 'Tis likely , sir . but I care a good deal for and he wife and family be injure on my account . and if I could bring they through this matter , I should have no help for it but to give up without any other consideration what you want of I the other day . " " have you get it here ? " " I have get it here , sir . " " , " the lawyer proceed in he dry passionless manner , far more hopeless in the deal with than any amount of vehemence , " make up you mind while I speak to you , for this be final . after I have finish speak I have close the subject , and I will not re - open it . understand that . you can leave here , for a few day , what you say you have bring here if you choose ; you can take it away at once if you choose . in case you choose to leave it here , I can do this for you -- I can replace this matter on its old footing , and I can go so far besides as to give you a write undertaking that this man Bagnet shall never be trouble in any way until you have be proceed against to the utmost , that you mean shall be exhaust before the creditor look to he . this be in fact all but free he . have you decide ? " the trooper put he hand into he breast and answer with a long breath , " I must do it , sir . " so , put on he spectacle , sit down and write the undertaking , which he slowly read and explain to , who have all this time be stare at the ceiling and who put he hand on he bald head again , under this new verbal shower - bath , and seem exceedingly in need of the old girl through whom to express he sentiment . the trooper then take from he breast - pocket a fold paper , which he lay with a unwilling hand at the lawyer 's elbow . " 'Tis only a letter of instruction , sir . the last I ever have from he . " look at a millstone , , for some change in its expression , and you will find it quite as soon as in the face of when he open and read the letter ! he refold it and lay it in he desk with a countenance as unperturbable as death . have he anything more to say or do but to nod once in the same frigid and discourteous manner and to say briefly , " you can go . show these man out , there ! " be show out , they repair to 's residence to dine . Boiled beef and green constitute the day 's variety on the former repast of boiled pork and green , and . serve out the meal in the same way and season it with the best of temper , be that rare sort of old girl that she receive good to she arm without a hint that it might be better and catche light from any little spot of darkness near she . the spot on this occasion be the darkened brow of ; he be unusually thoughtful and depressed . at first trust to the combine endearment of and to restore he , but find those young lady sensible that there exist be not the of they usual frolicsome acquaintance , she wink off the light infantry and leave he to deploy at leisure
leisure on the open ground of the domestic hearth . but he do not . he remain in close order , cloude and depresse . during the lengthy clean up and pattening process , when he and be supply with they pipe , he be no better than he be at dinner . he forget to smoke , look at the fire and ponder , let he pipe out , fill the breast of with perturbation and dismay by show that he have no enjoyment of tobacco . therefore when . Bagnet at last appear , rosy from the invigorating pail , and sit down to she work , growl , " old girl ! " and wink monition to she to find out what be the matter . " why , ! " say , quietly thread she needle . " how low you be ! " " be I ? not good company ? well , I be afraid I be not . " " he be not at all like , mother ! " cry little . " because he be not well , I think , mother , " add . " sure that be a bad sign not to be like , too ! " return the trooper , kiss the young damsel . " but it be true , " with a sigh , " true , I be afraid . these little one be always right ! " " , " say , work busily , " if I think you cross enough to think of anything that a shrill old soldier 's wife -- who could have bite she tongue off afterwards and ought to have do it almost -- say this morning , I do not know what I should not say to you now . " " my kind soul of a darling , " return the trooper . " not a morsel of it . " " because really and truly , , what I say and mean to say be that I trust to you and be sure you would bring he through it . and you have bring he through it , noble ! " " Thankee , my dear ! " say . " I be glad of you good opinion . " in give 's hand , with she work in it , a friendly shake -- for she take she seat beside he -- the trooper 's attention be attract to she face . after look at it for a little while as she ply she needle , he look to young Woolwich , sit on he stool in the corner , and beckon that fifer to he . " see there , my boy , " say , very gently smoothe the mother 's hair with he hand , " there be a good loving forehead for you ! all bright with love of you , my boy . a little touch by the sun and the weather through follow you father about and take care of you , but as fresh and wholesome as a ripe apple on a tree . " 's face express , so far as in its wooden material lie , the highest approbation and acquiescence . " the time will come , my boy , " pursue the trooper , " when this hair of you mother 's will be grey , and this forehead all cross and re-cross with wrinkle , and a fine old lady she will be then . take care , while you be young , that you can think in those day , never whiten a hair of she dear head -- I never mark a sorrowful line in she face ! ' for of all the many thing that you can think of when you be a man , you have better have that by you , ! " conclude by rise from he chair , seat the boy beside he mother in it , and say , with something of a hurry about he , that he will smoke he pipe in the street a bit . 's I lay ill through several week , and the usual tenor of my life become like a old remembrance . but this be not the effect of time so much as of the change in all my habits make by the helplessness and inaction of a sick - room . before I have be confine to it many day , everything else seem to have retire into a remote distance where there be little or no separation between the various stage of my life which have be really divide by year . in fall ill , I seem to have cross a dark lake and to have leave all my experience , mingl together by the great distance , on the healthy shore . my housekeeping duty , though at first it cause I great anxiety to think that they be unperformed , were soon as far off as the oldest of the old duty at or the summer afternoons when I go home from school with my portfolio under my arm , and my childish shadow at my side , to my godmother 's house . I have never know before how short life really be and into how small a space the mind could put it . while I be very ill , the way in which these division of time become confused with one another distress my mind exceedingly . at once a child , a elder girl , and the little woman I have be so happy as , I be not only oppress by car and difficulty adapt to each station , but by the great perplexity of endlessly try to reconcile they . I suppose that few who have not be in such a condition can quite understand what I mean or what painful unrest arose from
from this source . for the same reason I be almost afraid to hind at that time in my disorder -- it seem one long night , but I believe there be both night and day in it -- when I laboure up colossal staircase , ever strive to reach the top , and ever turn , as I have see a worm in a garden path , by some obstruction , and labour again . I know perfectly at interval , and I think vaguly at most time , that I be in my bed ; and I talk with , and feel she touch , and know she very well ; yet I would find myself complain , " oh , more of these never - end stair , -- more and more -- pile up to the sky ' , I think ! " and labour on again . I hint at that worse time when , string together somewhere in great black space , there be a flaming necklace , or ring , or starry circle of some kind , of which I be one of the bead ! and when my only prayer be to be take off from the rest and when it be such inexplicable agony and misery to be a part of the dreadful thing ? perhaps the less I say of these sick experience , the less tedious and the more intelligible I shall be . I do not recall they to make other unhappy or because I be now the least unhappy in remember they . it may be that if we know more of such strange affliction we might be the better able to alleviate they intensity . the repose that succeed , the long delicious sleep , the blissful rest , when in my weakness I be too calm to have any care for myself and could have hear ( or so I think now ) that I be die , with no other emotion than with a pitying love for those I leave behind -- this state can be perhaps more widely understood . I be in this state when I first shrink from the light as it twinkle on I once more , and know with a boundless joy for which no word be rapturous enough that I should see again . I have hear my cry at the door , day and night ; I have hear she call to I that I be cruel and do not love she ; I have hear she pray and implor to be let in to nurse and comfort I and to leave my bedside no more ; but I have only say , when I could speak , " never , my sweet girl , never ! " and I have over and over again remind that she be to keep my darling from the room whether I liv or die . have be true to I in that time of need , and with she little hand and she great heart have keep the door fast . but now , my sight strengthening and the glorious light come every day more fully and brightly on I , I could read the letter that my dear write to I every morning and evening and could put they to my lip and lay my cheek upon they with no fear of hurte she . I could see my little maid , so tender and so careful , go about the two room set everything in order and speak cheerfully to from the open window again . I could understand the stillness in the house and the thoughtfulness it express on the part of all those who have always be so good to I . I could weep in the exquisite felicity of my heart and be as happy in my weakness as ever I have be in my strength . by and by my strength begin to be restore . instead of lying , with so strange a calmness , watch what be do for I , as if it be do for some one else whom I be quietly sorry for , I help it a little , and so on to a little more and much more , until I become useful to myself , and interested , and attach to life again . how well I remember the pleasant afternoon when I be raise in bed with pillow for the first time to enjoy a great tea - drink with ! the little creature -- send into the world , surely , to minister to the weak and sick -- be so happy , and so busy , and stop so often in she preparation to lay she head upon my bosom , and fondle I , and cry with joyful tear she be so glad , she be so glad , that I be oblige to say , " , if you go on in this way , I must lie down again , my darling , for I be weaker than I think I be ! " so become as quiet as a mouse and take she bright face here and there across and across the two room , out of the shade into the divine sunshine , and out of the sunshine into the shade , while I watch she peacefully . when all she preparation be conclude and the pretty tea - table with it be little delicacy to tempt I , and its white cloth , and its flower , and everything so lovingly and beautifully arrange for I by downstair , be ready at the bedside , I feel sure I be steady enough to say something to that be not new to my thought . first I compliment on the room , and indeed it be so fresh and airy , so spotless and neat , that I could
could scarce believe I have be lie there so long . this delighte , and she face be brighter than before . " , , " say I , look round , " I miss something , surly , that I be accustom to ? " poor little look round too and pretend to shake she head as if there be nothing absent . " be the picture all as they use to be ? " I ask she . " every one of they , miss , " say . " and the furniture , ? " " except where I have move it about to make more room , miss . " " and yet , " say I , " I miss some familiar object . ah , I know what it be , ! it be the look - glass . " get up from the table , make as if she have forget something , and go into the next room ; and I hear she sob there . I have think of this very often . I be now certain of it . I could thank that it be not a shock to I now . I call back , and when she come -- at first pretending to smile , but as she draw nearer to I , look grieve -- I take she in my arm and say , " it matter very little , . I hope I can do without my old face very well . " I be presently so far advanced as to be able to sit up in a great chair and even giddily to walk into the adjoining room , lean on . the mirror be go from its usual place in that room too , but what I have to bear be none the harder to bear for that . my guardian have throughout be earnest to visit I , and there be now no good reason why I should deny myself that happiness . he come one morning , and when he first come in , could only hold I in he embrace and say , " my dear , dear girl ! " I have long know -- who could know better ?-- what a deep fountain of affection and generosity he heart be ; and be it not worth my trivial suffer and change to fill such a place in it ? " oh , yes ! " I think . " he have see I , and he love I better than he do ; he have see I and be even fonder of I than he be before ; and what have I to mourn for ! " he sit down by I on the sofa , support I with he arm . for a little while he sit with he hand over he face , but when he remove it , fall into he usual manner . there never can have be , there never can be , a pleasanter manner . " my little woman , " say he , " what a sad time this have be . such a inflexible little woman , too , through all ! " " only for the best , guardian , " say I . " for the best ? " he repeat tenderly . " of course , for the best . but here have and I be perfectly forlorn and miserable ; here have you friend be come and go late and early ; here have every one about the house be utterly lose and deject ; here have even poor be write -- to I too -- in he anxiety for you ! " I have read of in 's letter , but not of . I tell he so . " why , no , my dear , " he reply . " I have think it better not to mention it to she . " " and you speak of he write to you , " say I , repeat he emphasis . " as if it be not natural for he to do so , guardian ; as if he could write to a better friend ! " " he think he could , my love , " return my guardian , " and to many a better . the truth be , he write to I under a sort of protest while unable to write to you with any hope of a answer -- write coldly , haughtily , distantly , resentfully . well , dearest little woman , we must look forbearingly on it . he be not to blame . and have warp he out of himself and pervert I in he eye . I have know it do as bad deed , and worse , many a time . if two angel could be concerned in it , I believe it would change they nature . " " it have not change yours , guardian . " " oh , yes , it have , my dear , " he say laughingly . " it have make the south wind easterly , I do not know how often . Rick mistrust and suspect I -- go to lawyer , and be teach to mistrust and suspect I . hear I have conflict interest , claim clashing against he and what not . whereas , heaven know that if I could get out of the mountain of wiglomeration on which my unfortunate name have be so long bestow ( which I can not ) or could level they by the extinction of my own original right ( which I can not either , and no human power ever can , anyhow , I believe , to such a pass have we get ) , I would do it this hour . I would rather restore to poor he proper nature than be
be endow with all the money that dead suitor , break , heart and soul , upon the wheel of , have leave unclaimed with the accountant - General -- and that be money enough , my dear , to be cast into a pyramid , in memory of 's transcendent wickedness . " " be it possible , guardian , " I ask , amaze , " that can be suspicious of you ? " " ah , my love , my love , " he say , " it be in the subtle poison of such abuse to breed such disease . he blood be infect , and lose they natural aspect in he sight . it be not this fault . " " but it be a terrible misfortune , guardian . " " it be a terrible misfortune , little woman , to be ever draw within the influence of and . I know none greater . by little and little he have be induce to trust in that rotten reed , and it communicate some portion of its rottenness to everything around he . but again I say with all my soul , we must be patient with poor and not blame he . what a troop of fine fresh heart like he have I see in my time turn by the same mean ! " I could not help express something of my and regret that he benevolent , disinterest intention have prosper so little . " we must not say so , , " he cheerfully reply ; " be the happier , I hope , and that be much . I do think that I and both these young creature might be friend instead of distrustful foe and that we might so far counter - act the suit and prove too strong for it . but it be too much to expect . and be the curtain of 's cradle . " " but , guardian , may we not hope that a little experience will teach he what a false and wretched thing it be ? " " we will hope so , my , " say , " and that it may not teach he so too late . in any case we must not be hard on he . there be not many grow and mature man live while we speak , good man too , who if they be throw into this same court as suitor would not be vitally change and depreciate within three year -- within two -- within one . how can we stand amaze at poor ? a young man so unfortunate , " here he fall into a lower tone , as if he be think aloud , " can not at first believe ( who could ? ) that Chancery be what it be . he look to it , flush and fitfully , to do something with he interest and bring they to some settlement . it procrastinate , disappoint , try , torture he ; wear out he sanguine hope and patience , thread by thread ; but he still look to it , and hanker after it , and find he whole world treacherous and hollow . well , well , well ! enough of this , my dear ! " he have support I , as at first , all this time , and he tenderness be so precious to I that I lean my head upon he shoulder and love he as if he have be my father . I resolve in my own mind in this little pause , by some means , to see when I grow strong and try to set he right . " there be better subject than these , " say my guardian , " for such a joyful time as the time of we dear girl 's recovery . and I have a commission to broach one of they as soon as I should begin to talk . when shall come to see you , my love ? " I have be think of that too . a little in connexion with the absent mirror , but not much , for I know my loving girl would be change by no change in my look . " dear guardian , " say I , " as I have shut she out so long -- though indeed , indeed , she be like the light to I -- " " I know it well , , well . " he be so good , he touch express such endearing compassion and affection , and the tone of he voice carry such comfort into my heart that I stop for a little while , quite unable to go on . " yes , yes , you be tired , " say he . " rest a little . " " as I have keep out so long , " I begin afresh after a short while , " I think I should like to have my own way a little longer , guardian . it would be best to be away from here before I see she . if and I be to go to some country lod as soon as I can move , and if I have a week there in which to grow stronger and to be revive by the sweet air and to look forward to the happiness of have with I again , I think it would be better for we . " I hope it be not a poor thing in I to wish to be a little more used to my altered self before I meet the eye of the dear girl I long so ardently to see , but it be the truth . I do . he understand I , I be sure ; but I be not afraid of that . if it
it be a poor thing , I know he would pass it over . " we spoild little woman , " say my guardian , " shall have she own way even in she inflexibility , though at the price , I know , of tear downstair . and see here ! here be , heart of chivalry , breathe such ferocious vow as never be breathe on paper before , that if you do not go and occupy he whole house , he have already turn out of it expressly for that purpose , by heaven and by earth he will pull it down and not leave one brick stand on another ! " and my guardian put a letter in my hand , without any ordinary beginning such as " my dear Jarndyce , " but rush at once into the word , " I swear if do not come down and take possession of my house , which I vacate for she this day at one o'clock , p.m. , " and then with the utmost seriousness , and in the most emphatic term , go on to make the extraordinary declaration he have quote . we do not appreciate the writer the less for laugh heartily over it , and we settle that I should send he a letter of thanks on the morrow and accept he offer . it be a most agreeable one to I , for all the place I could have think of , I should have like to go to none so well as . " now , little housewife , " say my guardian , look at he watch , " I be strictly time before I come upstairs , for you must not be tired too soon ; and my time have wane away to the last minute . I have one other petition . Flite , hear a rumour that you be ill , make nothing of walk down here -- twenty mile , poor soul , in a pair of dancing shoe -- to inquire . it be heaven 's mercy we be at home , or she would have walk back again . " the old conspiracy to make I happy ! everybody seem to be in it ! " now , pet , " say my guardian , " if it would not be irksome to you to admit the harmless little creature one afternoon before you save 's otherwise devote house from demolition , I believe you would make she prouder and better pleased with herself than I -- though my eminent name be -- could do in a lifetime . " I have no doubt he know there would be something in the simple image of the poor afflict creature that would fall like a gentle lesson on my mind at that time . I feel it as he speak to I . I could not tell he heartily enough how ready I be to receive she . I have always pitie she , never so much as now . I have always be glad of my little power to soothe she under she calamity , but never , never , half so glad before . we arrange a time for to come out by the coach and share my early dinner . when my guardian leave I , I turn my face away upon my couch and praye to be forgive if I , surround by such blessing , have magnify to myself the little trial that I have to undergo . the childish prayer of that old birthday when I have aspire to be industrious , content , and true - hear and to do good to some one and win some love to myself if I could come back into my mind with a reproachful sense of all the happiness I have since enjoy and all the affectionate heart that have be turn towards I . if I be weak now , what have I profit by those mercy ? I repeat the old childish prayer in its old childish word and find that its old peace have not depart from it . my guardian now come every day . in a week or so more I could walk about we room and hold long talk with from behind the window - curtain . yet I never see she , for I have not as yet the courage to look at the dear face , though I could have do so easily without she see I . on the appointed day arrive . the poor little creature run into my room quite forgetful of she usual dignity , and cry from she very heart of heart , " my dear ! " fall upon my neck and kiss I twenty time . " dear I ! " say she , put she hand into she reticule , " I have nothing here but document , my dear ; I must borrow a pocket handkerchief . " give she one , and the good creature certainly make use of it , for she hold it to she eye with both hand and sit so , shed tear for the next ten minute . " with pleasure , my dear , " she be careful to explain . " not the least pain . pleasure to see you well again . pleasure at have the honour of be admit to see you . I be so much fonder of you , my love , than of the . though I do attend court regularly . by the by , my dear , mention pocket handkerchief -- " here look at , who have be to meet she at the place where the coach stop . glance at I and look unwilling to pursue the suggestion . " ve - ry right ! " say , " ve - ry correct . truly !
! highly indiscreet of I to mention it ; but my dear , I be afraid I be at time ( between ourselves , you would not think it ) a little -- rambl you know , " say , touch she forehead . " nothing more . " " what be you go to tell I ? " say I , smile , for I see she want to go on . " you have rouse my curiosity , and now you must gratify it . " look at for advice in this important crisis , who say , " if you please , ma 'am , you have better tell then , " and therein gratify beyond measure . " so sagacious , we young friend , " say she to I in she mysterious way . " Diminutive . but have -ry sagacious ! well , my dear , it be a pretty anecdote . nothing more . still I think it charme . who should follow we down the road from the coach , my dear , but a poor person in a very ungenteel bonnet -- " " , if you please , miss , " say . " just so ! " acquiesce with the greatest suavity . " . ye -e ! and what do she tell we young friend but that there have be a lady with a veil inquire at she cottage after my dear 's health and take a handkerchief away with she as a little keepake merely because it be my amiable 's ! now , you know , so very prepossessing in the lady with the veil ! " " if you please , miss , " say , to whom I look in some astonishment , " say that when she baby di , you leave a handkerchief there , and that she put it away and keep it with the baby 's little thing . I think , if you please , partly because it be yours , miss , and partly because it have cover the baby . " " Diminutive , " whisper , make a variety of motion about she own forehead to express intellect in . " but ex- ceedingly sagacious ! and so dear ! my love , she be clearer than any counsel I ever hear ! " " yes , , " I return . " I remember it . well ? " " well , miss , " say , " and that be the handkerchief the lady take . and want you to know that she would not have make away with it herself for a heap of money but that the lady take it and leave some money instead . do not know she at all , if you please , miss ! " " why , who can she be ? " say I . " my love , " suggest , advanc she lip to my ear with she most mysterious look , " in my opinion -- do not mention this to we diminutive friend -- she be the 's wife . he be marry , you know . and I understand she lead he a terrible life . throw he lordship 's papers into the fire , my dear , if he will not pay the jeweller ! " I do not think very much about this lady then , for I have a impression that it might be . besides , my attention be divert by my visitor , who be cold after she ride and look hungry and who , we dinner be bring in , require some little assistance in array herself with great satisfaction in a pitiable old scarf and a much - worn and often - mende pair of glove , which she have bring down in a paper parcel . I have to preside , too , over the entertainment , consist of a dish of fish , a roast fowl , a sweetbread , vegetable , pudding , and ; and it be so pleasant to see how she enjoy it , and with what state and ceremony she do honou to it , that I be soon think of nothing else . when we have finish and have we little dessert before we , embellish by the hand of my dear , who would yield the superintendence of everything prepare for I to no one , be so very chatty and happy that I think I would lead she to she own history , as she be always pleased to talk about herself . I begin by say " you have attend on the many year , ? " " oh , many , many , many year , my dear . but I expect a judgment . shortly . " there be a anxiety even in she hopefulness that make I doubtful if I have do right in approach the subject . I think I would say no more about it . " my father expect a judgment , " say . " my brother . my sister . they all expect a judgment . the same that I expect . " " they be all -- " " ye - es . dead of course , my dear , " say she . as I see she would go on , I think it best to try to be serviceable to she by meet the theme rather than avoid it . " would it not be wiser , " say I , " to expect this judgment no more ? " " why , my dear , " she answer promptly , " of course it would ! " " and to attend the court no more ? " " equally of course , " say she . " Very wear to be always in expectation of what never come , my dear
dear ! , I assure you , to the bone ! " she slightly show I she arm , and it be fearfully thin indeed . " but , my dear , " she go on in she mysterious way , " there be a dreadful attraction in the place . Hush ! do not mention it to we diminutive friend when she come in . or it may frighten she . with good reason . there be a cruel attraction in the place . you can not leave it . and you must expect . " I try to assure she that this be not so . she hear I patiently and smilingly , but be ready with she own answer . " aye , aye , aye ! you think so because I be a little rambling . have - ry absurd , to be a little rambling , be it not ? have - ry confusing , too . to the head . I find it so . but , my dear , I have be there many year , and I have notice . it be the mace and seal upon the table . " what could they do , do she think ? I mildly ask she . " draw , " return . " draw people on , my dear . draw peace out of they . sense out of they . good look out of they . good quality out of they . I have feel they even draw my rest away in the night . cold and glitter devils ! " she tap I several time upon the arm and nod good - humouredly as if she be anxious I should understand that I have no cause to fear she , though she speak so gloomily , and confide these awful secret to I . " let I see , " say she . " I will tell you my own case . before they ever draw I -- before I have ever see they -- what be it I use to do ? play ? no . Tambou work . I and my sister work at tambour work . we father and we brother have a builder 's business . we all liv together . have - ry respectably , my dear ! first , we father be draw -- slowly . home be draw with he . in a few year he be a fierce , sour , angry bankrupt without a kind word or a kind look for any one . he have be so different , . he be draw to a debtor ' prison . there he die . then we brother be draw -- swiftly -- to drunkenness . and rag . and death . then my sister be draw . Hush ! never ask to what ! then I be ill and in misery , and hear , as I have often heard before , that this be all the work of . when I get better , I go to look at the monster . and then I find out how it be , and I be draw to stay there . " have get over she own short narrative , in the delivery of which she have speak in a low , strain voice , as if the shock be fresh upon she , she gradually resume she usual air of amiable importance . " you do not quite credit I , my dear ! well , well ! you will , some day . I be a little rambling . but I have notice . I have see many new face come , unsuspicious , within the influence of the mace and seal in these many year . as my father 's come there . as my brother 's . as my sister 's . as my own . I hear and the rest of they say to the new face , ' here be little . oh , you be new here ; and you must come and be present to little ! ' have - ry good . prould I be sure to have the honour ! and we all laugh . but , , I know what will happen . I know , far better than they do , when the attraction have begin . I know the sign , my dear . I see they begin in . and I see they end . , my love , " speak low again , " I see they begin in we friend the ward in . let some one hold he back . or he will be draw to ruin . " she look at I in silence for some moment , with she face gradually soften into a smile . Seeme to fear that she have be too gloomy , and see also to lose the connexion in she mind , she say politely as she sip she glass of wine , " yes , my dear , as I be say , I expect a judgment shortly . then I shall release my bird , you know , and confer estate . " I be much impress by she allusion to and by the sad meaning , so sadly illustrate in she poor pinch form , that make its way through all she incoherence . but happily for she , she be quite complacent again now and beam with nod and smile . " but , my dear , " she say , gaily , reach another hand to put it upon mine . " you have not congratulate I on my physician . Positively not once , yet ! " I be oblige to confess that I do not quite know what she mean . " my physician , , my dear , who be so exceedingly attentive to I . though he service be render quite
quite gratuitously . until the day of . I mean the judgment that will dissolve the spell upon I of the mace and seal . " " be so far away , now , " say I , " that I think the time for such congratulation be past , . " " but , my child , " she return , " be it possible that you do not know what have happen ? " " no , " say I . " not what everybody have be talk of , my belov ! " " no , " say I . " you forget how long I have be here . " " true ! my dear , for the moment -- true . I blame myself . but my memory have be draw out of I , with everything else , by what I mention . have - ry strong influence , be it not ? well , my dear , there have be a terrible shipwreck over in those indian seas . " " shipwreck ! " " do not be agitate , my dear . he be safe . a awful scene . death in all shapes . hundred of dead and die . , storm , and darkness . number of the drowning throw upon a rock . there , and through it all , my dear physician be a hero . and brave through everything . save many life , never complain in hunger and thirst , wrap naked people in he spare clothes , take the lead , show they what to do , govern they , ten the sick , bury the dead , and bring the poor survivor safely off at last ! my dear , the poor emaciate creature all but worship he . they fall down at he foot when they get to the land and bless he . the whole country ring with it . stay ! where be my bag of document ? I have get it there , and you shall read it , you shall read it ! " and I do read all the noble history , though very slowly and imperfectly then , for my eye be so dim that I could not see the word , and I cry so much that I be many time oblige to lay down the long account she have cut out of the newspaper . I feel so triumphant ever to have know the man who have do such generous and gallant deed , I feel such glow exultation in he renown , I so admire and love what he have do , that I envy the storm -worn people who have fall at he foot and bless he as they preserver . I could myself have knee down then , so far away , and bless he in my rapture that he should be so truly good and brave . I feel that no one -- mother , sister , wife -- could honour he more than I . I do , indeed ! my poor little visitor make I a present of the account , and when as the evening begin to close in she rise to take she leave , lest she should miss the coach by which she be to return , she be still full of the shipwreck , which I have not yet sufficiently compose myself to understand in all its detail . " my dear , " say she as she carefully fold up she scarf and glove , " my brave physician ought to have a title bestow upon he . and no doubt he will . you be of that opinion ? " that he well deserve one , yes . that he would ever have one , no . " why not , ? " she ask rather sharply . I say it be not the custom in to confer title on man distinguished by peaceful service , however good and great , unless occasionally when they consiste of the accumulation of some very large amount of money . " why , good gracious , " say , " how can you say that ? surely you know , my dear , that all the greatest ornament of in knowledge , imagination , active humanity , and improvement of every sort be add to its nobility ! look round you , my dear , and consider . you must be rambl a little now , I think , if you do not know that this be the great reason why title will always last in the land ! " I be afraid she believe what she say , for there be moment when she be very mad indeed . and now I must part with the little secret I have thus far try to keep . I have think , sometimes , that love I and that if he have be richer he would perhaps have tell I that he love I before he go away . I have think , sometimes , that if he have do so , I should have be glad of it . but how much better it be now that this have never happen ! what should I have suffer if I have have to write to he and tell he that the poor face he have know as mine be quite go from I and that I freely release he from he bondage to one whom he have never see ! oh , it be so much better as it be ! with a great pang mercifully spa I , I could take back to my heart my childish prayer to be all he have so brightly show himself ; and there be nothing to be undo : no chain for I to break or for he to drag ; and I could go , please , my lowly
lowly way along the path of duty , and he could go he nobler way upon its broader road ; and though we be apart upon the journey , I might aspire to meet he , unselfishly , innocently , better far than he have think I when I find some favour in he eye , at the journey 's end . and I do not set off alone upon we expedition into . my guardian have make up he mind not to lose sight of I until I be safe in 's house , so he accompany we , and we be two day upon the road . I find every breath of air , and every scent , and every flower and leaf and blade of grass , and every pass cloud , and everything in nature , more beautiful and wonderful to I than I have ever find it yet . this be my first gain from my illness . how little I have lose , when the wide world be so full of delight for I . my guardian intend to go back immediately , we appoint , on we way down , a day when my dear girl should come . I write she a letter , of which he take charge , and he leave we within half a hour of we arrival at we destination , on a delightful evening in the early summer - time . if a good fairy have build the house for I with a wave of she wand , and I have be a princess and she favour god - child , I could not have be more consider in it . so many preparation be make for I and such a endearing remembrance be show of all my little taste and liking that I could have sit down , overcome , a dozen time before I have revisit half the room . I do better than that , however , by show they all to instead . 's delight calme mine ; and after we have have a walk in the garden , and have exhaust she whole vocabulary of admiring expression , I be as tranquilly happy as I ought to have been . it be a great comfort to be able to say to myself after tea , " , my dear , I think you be quite sensible enough to sit down now and write a note of thanks to you host . " he have leave a note of welcome for I , as sunny as he own face , and have confide he bird to my care , which I know to be he highest mark of confidence . accordingly I write a little note to he in , tell he how all he favourite plant and tree be look , and how the most astonishing of bird have chirp the honour of the house to I in the most hospitable manner , and how , after singe on my shoulder , to the inconceivable rapture of my little maid , he be then at roost in the usual corner of he cage , but whether dream or no I could not report . my note finish and send off to the post , I make myself very busy in unpacking and arrange ; and I send to be in good time and tell she I should want she no more that night . for I have not yet look in the glass and have never ask to have my own restore to I . I know this to be a weakness which must be overcome , but I have always say to myself that I would begin afresh when I get to where I now be . therefore I have want to be alone , and therefore I say , now alone , in my own room , " , if you be to be happy , if you be to have any right to pray to be true - hear , you must keep you word , my dear . " I be quite resolve to keep it , but I sit down for a little while first to reflect upon all my blessing . and then I say my prayer and think a little more . my hair have not be cut off , though it have be in danger more than once . it be long and thick . I let it down , and shake it out , and go up to the glass upon the dressing - table . there be a little muslin curtain draw across it . I draw it back and stand for a moment look through such a veil of my own hair that I could see nothing else . then I put my hair aside and look at the reflection in the mirror , encourage by see how placidly it look at I . I be very much change -- oh , very , very much . at first my face be so strange to I that I think I should have put my hand before it and start back but for the encouragement I have mention . very soon it become more familiar , and then I know the extent of the alteration in it better than I have do at first . it be not like what I have expect , but I have expect nothing definite , and I dare say anything definite would have surprise I . I have never be a beauty and have never think myself one , but I have be very different from this . it be all go now . be so good to I that I could let it go with a few not bitter tear and could stand there arrange my hair for the night quite thankfully . one thing troublead I , and I consider it for a long time
time before I go to sleep . I have keep 's flower . when they be withered I have dry they and put they in a book that I be fond of . nobody know this , not even . I be doubtful whether I have a right to preserve what he have send to one so different -- whether it be generous towards he to do it . I wish to be generous to he , even in the secret depth of my heart , which he would never know , because I could have love he -- could have be devote to he . at last I come to the conclusion that I might keep they if I treasure they only as a remembrance of what be irrevocably past and gone , never to be look back on any more , in any other light . I hope this may not seem trivial . I be very much in earnest . I take care to be up early in the morning and to be before the glass when come in on tiptoe . " dear , dear , miss ! " cry , start . " be that you ? " " yes , , " say I , quietly put up my hair . " and I be very well indeed , and very happy . " I see it be a weight off 's mind , but it be a greater weight off mine . I know the worst now and be compose to it . I shall not conceal , as I go on , the weakness I could not quite conquer , but they always pass from I soon and the happier frame of mind stay by I faithfully . wish to be fully re-established in my strength and my good spirit before come , I now lay down a little series of plan with for be in the fresh air all day long . we be to be out before breakfast , and be to dine early , and be to be out again before and after dinner , and be to talk in the garden after tea , and be to go to rest betime , and be to climb every hill and explore every road , lane , and field in the neighbourhood . as to restorative and strengthen delicacies , 's good housekeeper be for ever trot about with something to eat or drink in she hand ; I could not even be hear of as rest in the park but she would come trot after I with a basket , she cheerful face shining with a lecture on the importance of frequent nourishment . then there be a pony expressly for my riding , a chubby pony with a short neck and a mane all over he eye who could canter -- when he would -- so easily and quietly that he be a treasure . in a very few day he would come to I in the paddock when I call he , and eat out of my hand , and follow I about . we arrive at such a capital understanding that when he be jogge with I lazily , and rather obstinately , down some shady lane , if I pat he neck and say , " , I be surprise you do not canter when you know how much I like it ; and I think you might oblige I , for you be only get stupid and go to sleep , " he would give he head a comical shake or two and set off directly , while Charley would stand still and laugh with such enjoyment that she laughter be like music . I do not know who have give he name , but it seem to belong to he as naturally as he rough coat . once we put he in a little chaise and drive he triumphantly through the green lane for five mile ; but all at once , as we be extoll he to the sky , he seem to take it ill that he should have be accompany so far by the circle of tantalize little gnat that have be hover round and round he ear the whole way without appear to advance a inch , and stop to think about it . I suppose he come to the decision that it be not to be borne , for he steadily refuse to move until I give the rein to and get out and walk , when he follow I with a sturdy sort of good humour , put he head under my arm and rub he ear against my sleeve . it be in vain for I to say , " now , , I feel quite sure from what I know of you that you will go on if I ride a little while , " for the moment I leave he , he stand stock still again . consequently I be oblige to lead the way , as before ; and in this order we return home , to the great delight of the village . and I have reason to call it the most friendly of villag , I be sure , for in a week 's time the people be so glad to see we go by , though ever so frequently in the course of a day , that there be face of greeting in every cottage . I have know many of the grow people before and almost all the child , but now the very steeple begin to wear a familiar and affectionate look . among my new friend be a old old woman who live in such a little thatched and whitewash dwell that when the outside shutter be turn up on its hinge , it shut up the whole house - front . this old lady have a grandson
grandson who be a sailor , and I write a letter to he for she and draw at the top of it the chimney - corner in which she have bring he up and where he old stool yet occupy its old place . this be consider by the whole village the most wonderful achievement in the world , but when a answer come back all the way from , in which he mention that he be go to take the picture all the way to , and from would write again , I get all the credit that ought to have be give to the post - office and be invest with the merit of the whole system . thus , what with be so much in the air , play with so many child , gossip with so many people , sit on invitation in so many cottage , go on with 's education , and write long letter to every day , I have scarcely any time to think about that little loss of mine and be almost always cheerful . if I do think of it at odd moment now and then , I have only to be busy and forget it . I feel it more than I have hope I should once when a child say , " mother , why be the lady not a pretty lady now like she use to be ? " but when I find the child be not less fond of I , and draw it be soft hand over my face with a kind of pitying protection in its touch , that soon set I up again . there be many little occurrences which suggest to I , with great consolation , how natural it be to gentle heart to be considerate and delicate towards any inferiority . one of these particularly touche I . I happen to stroll into the little church when a marriage be just conclude , and the young couple have to sign the register . the bridegroom , to whom the pen be hand first , make a rude cross for he mark ; the bride , who come next , do the same . now , I have know the bride when I be last there , not only as the prettiest girl in the place , but as have quite distinguished herself in the school , and I could not help look at she with some surprise . she come aside and whisper to I , while tear of honest love and admiration stand in she bright eye , " he be a dear good fellow , miss ; but he can not write yet -- he be go to learn of I -- and I would not shame he for the world ! " why , what have I to fear , I think , when there be this nobility in the soul of a labouring man 's daughter ! the air blow as freshly and revivingly upon I as it have ever blow , and the healthy colour come into my new face as it have come into my old one . be wonderful to see , she be so radiant and so rosy ; and we both enjoy the whole day and sleep soundly the whole night . there be a favourite spot of mine in the park - woods of Wold where a seat have be erect command a lovely view . the wood have be clear and open to improve this point of sight , and the bright sunny landscape beyond be so beautiful that I rest there at least once every day . a picturesque part of the , call the Ghost 's , be see to advantage from this higher ground ; and the startling name , and the old legend in the Dedlock family which I have hear from accounting for it , mingl with the view and give it something of a mysterious interest in addition to its real charms . there be a bank here , too , which be a famous one for violet ; and as it be a daily delight of 's to gather wild flower , she take as much to the spot as I do . it would be idle to inquire now why I never go close to the house or never go inside it . the family be not there , I have hear on my arrival , and be not expect . I be far from be incurious or uninterested about the building ; on the contrary , I often sit in this place wonder how the room range and whether any echo like a footstep really do resound at time , as the story say , upon the lonely Ghost 's . the indefinable feeling with which have impress I may have have some influence in keep I from the house even when she be absent . I be not sure . she face and figure be associate with it , naturally ; but I can not say that they repell I from it , though something do . for whatever reason or no reason , I have never once go near it , down to the day at which my story now arrive . I be rest at my favourite point after a long ramble , and be gather violet at a little distance from I . I have be look at the Ghost 's walk lie in a deep shade of masonry afar off and picture to myself the female shape that be say to haunt it when I become aware of a figure approach through the wood . the perspective be so long and so darken by leave , and the shadow of the branch on the ground make it so much more intricate to the eye , that at first I could not discern what figure it be
be . by little and little it reveal itself to be a woman 's -- a lady 's -- 's . she be alone and come to where I sit with a much quicker step , I observe to my surprise , than be usual with she . I be flutter by she be unexpectedly so near ( she be almost within speaking distance before I know she ) and would have risen to continue my walk . but I could not . I be render motionless . not so much by she hurried gesture of entreaty , not so much by she quick advance and outstretch hand , not so much by the great change in she manner and the absence of she haughty self - restraint , as by a something in she face that I have pin for and dream of when I be a little child , something I have never see in any face , something I have never see in hers before . a dread and faintness fall upon I , and I call to . stop upon the instant and change back almost to what I have know she . " , I be afraid I have start you , " she say , now advanc slowly . " you can scarcely be strong yet . you have be very ill , I know . I have be much concerned to hear it . " I could no more have remove my eye from she pale face than I could have stir from the bench on which I sit . she give I she hand , and it be deadly coldness , so at variance with the enforced composure of she feature , deepen the fascination that overpower I . I can not say what be in my whirling thought . " you be recover again ? " she ask kindly . " I be quite well but a moment ago , . " " be this you young attendent ? " " yes . " " will you send she on before and walk towards you house with I ? " " , " say I , " take you flowers home , and I will follow you directly . " , with she best curtsy , blushingly tie on she bonnet and go she way . when she be gone , sit down on the seat beside I . I can not tell in any word what the state of my mind be when I see in she hand my handkerchief with which i have cover the dead baby . I look at she , but I could not see she , I could not hear she , I could not draw my breath . the beating of my heart be so violent and wild that I feel as if my life be break from I . but when she catch I to she breast , kiss I , weep over I , compassionate I , and call I back to myself ; when she fall down on she knee and cry to I , " oh , my child , my child , I be you wicked and unhappy mother ! oh , try to forgive I ! " -- when I see she at my foot on the bare earth in she great agony of mind , I feel , through all my tumult of emotion , a burst of gratitude to the providence of that I be so change as that I never could disgrase she by any trace of likeness , as that nobody could ever now look at I and look at she and remotely think of any near tie between we . I raise my mother up , pray and beseech she not to stoop before I in such affliction and humiliation . I do so in broken , incoherent word , for besides the trouble I be in , it frightene I to see she at my foot . I tell she -- or I try to tell she -- that if it be for I , she child , under any circumstance to take upon I to forgive she , I do it , and have do it , many , many year . I tell she that my heart overflow with love for she , that it be natural love which nothing in the past have change or could change . that it be not for I , then rest for the first time on my mother 's bosom , to take she to account for have give I life , but that my duty be to bless she and receive she , though the whole world turn from she , and that I only ask she leave to do it . I hold my mother in my embrace , and she hold I in hers , and among the still wood in the silence of the summer day there seem to be nothing but we two troubled mind that be not at peace . " to bless and receive I , " groan my mother , " it be far too late . I must travel my dark road alone , and it will lead I where it will . from day to day , sometimes from hour to hour , I do not see the way before my guilty foot . this be the earthly punishment I have brotch upon myself . I bear it , and I hide it . " even in the thinking of she endurance , she draw she habitual air of proud indifference about she like a veil , though she soon cast it off again . " I must keep this secret , if by any means it can be keep , not wholly for myself . I have a husband , wretch and dishonour creature that I be ! " these word she uttere
uttere with a suppress cry of despair , more terrible in its sound than any shriek . cover she face with she hand , she shrank down in my embrace as if she be unwilling that I should touch she ; nor could I , by my utmost persuasion or by any endearment I could use , prevail upon she to rise . she say , no , no , no , she could only speak to I so ; she must be proud and disdainful everywhere else ; she would be humble and asham there , in the only natural moment of she life . my unhappy mother tell I that in my illness she have be nearly frantic . she have but then know that she child be liive . she could not have suspect I to be that child before . she have follow I down here to speak to I but once in all she life . we never could associate , never could communicate , never probably from that time forth could interchange another word on earth . she put into my hand a letter she have write for my reading only and say when I have read it and destroy it -- but not so much for she sake , since she ask nothing , as for she husband 's and my own -- I must evermore consider she as dead . if I could believe that she love I , in this agony in which I see she , with a mother 's love , she ask I to do that , for then I might think of she with a greater pity , imagine what she suffer . she have put herself beyond all hope and beyond all help . whether she preserve she secret until death or it come to be discover and she bring dishonour and disgrace upon the name she have take , it be she solitary struggle always ; and no affection could come near she , and no human creature could render she any aid . " but be the secret safe so far ? " I ask . " be it safe now , dearest mother ? " " no , " reply my mother . " it have be very near discovery . it be save by a accident . it may be lose by another accident -- to - morrow , any day . " " do you dread a particular person ? " " Hush ! do not tremble and cry so much for I . I be not worthy of these tear , " say my mother , kiss my hand . " I dread one person very much . " " a enemy ? " " not a friend . one who be too passionless to be either . he be 's lawyer , mechanically faithful without attachment , and very jealous of the profit , privilege , and reputation of be master of the mystery of great house . " " have he any suspicion ? " " many . " " not of you ? " I say alarm . " yes ! he be always vigilant and always near I . I may keep he at a standstill , but I can never shake he off . " " have he so little pity or compunction ? " " he have none , and no anger . he be indifferent to everything but he call . he call be the acquisition of secret and the holding possession of such power as they give he , with no sharer or opponent in it . " " could you trust in he ? " " I shall never try . the dark road I have trodden for so many year will end where it will . I follow it alone to the end , whatever the end be . it may be near , it may be distant ; while the road last , nothing turn I . " " dear mother , be you so resolve ? " " I be resolve . I have long outbidden folly with folly , pride with pride , scorn with scorn , insolence with insolence , and have outlive many vanity with many more . I will outlive this danger , and outdie it , if I can . it have close around I almost as awfully as if these wood of have close around the house , but my course through it be the same . I have but one ; I can have but one . " " -- " I be begin when my mother hurriedly inquire , " do he suspect ? " " no , " say I . " no , indeed ! be assure that he do not ! " and I tell she what he have related to I as he knowledge of my story . " but he be so good and sensible , " say I , " that perhaps if he know -- " my mother , who until this time have make no change in she position , raise she hand up to my lip and stop I . " Confide fully in he , " she say after a little while . " you have my free consent -- a small gift from such a mother to she injured child !-- but do not tell I of it . some pride be leave in I even yet . " I explain , as nearly as I could then , or can recall now -- for my agitation and distress throughout be so great that I scarcely understand myself , though every word that be utter in the mother 's voice , so unfamiliar and so melancholy to I , which in my childhood I have never learn to love and recognize , have never be sung to sleep with ,
, have never hear a blessing from , have never have a hope inspire by , make a endure impression on my memory -- I say I explain , or try to do it , how I have only hope that , who have be the best of fathers to I , might be able to afford some counsel and support to she . but my mother answer no , it be impossible ; no one could help she . through the desert that lay before she , she must go alone . " my child , my child ! " she say . " for the last time ! these kiss for the last time ! these arm upon my neck for the last time ! we shall meet no more . to hope to do what I seek to do , I must be what I have be so long . be my reward and doom . if you hear of , brilliant , prosperous , and flatter , think of you wretched mother , conscience - stricken , underneath that mask ! think that the reality be in she suffering , in she useless remorse , in she murdering within she breast the only love and truth of which it be capable ! and then forgive she if you can , and cry to heave to forgive she , which it never can ! " we hold one another for a little space yet , but she be so firm that she take my hand away , and put they back against my breast , and with a last kiss as she hold they there , release they , and go from I into the wood . I be alone , and calm and quiet below I in the sun and shade lay the old house , with its terrace and turret , on which there have seem to I to be such complete repose when I first see it , but which now look like the obdurate and unpitying watcher of my mother 's misery . Stun as I be , as weak and helpless at first as I have ever be in my sick chamber , the necessity of guard against the danger of discovery , or even of the remotest suspicion , do I service . I take such precaution as I could to hide from that I have be cry , and I constrain myself to think of every sacred obligation that there be upon I to be careful and collect . it be not a little while before I could succeed or could even restrain burst of grief , but after a hour or so I be better and feel that I might return . I go home very slowly and tell , whom I find at the gate look for I , that I have be temp to extend my walk after have leave I and that I be over -tired and would lie down . safe in my own room , I read the letter . I clearly derive from it -- and that be much then -- that I have not be abandon by my mother . she elder and only sister , the godmother of my childhood , discover sign of life in I when I have be lay aside as dead , have in she stern sense of duty , with no desire or willingness that I should live , rear I in rigid secrecy and have never again beheld my mother 's face from within a few hour of my birth . so strangely do I hold my place in this world that until within a short time back I have never , to my own mother 's knowledge , breathe -- have be bury -- have never be endow with life -- have never borne a name . when she have first see I in the church she have be start and have think of what would have be like I if it have ever liv , and have live on , but that be all then . what more the letter tell I need not to be repeat here . it have its own time and place in my story . my first care be to burn what my mother have write and to consume even its ash . I hope it may not appear very unnatural or bad in I that I then become heavily sorrowful to think I have ever be rear . that I feel as if I know it would have be better and happier for many people if indeed I have never breathe . that I have a terror of myself as the danger and the possible disgrace of my own mother and of a proud family name . that I be so confused and shaken as to be possess by a belief that it be right and have be intend that I should die in my birth , and that it be wrong and not intend that I should be then alive . these be the real feeling that I have . I fall asleep wear out , and when I awoke I cry afresh to think that I be back in the world with my load of trouble for other . I be more than ever frightene of myself , think anew of she against whom I be a witness , of the owner of , of the new and terrible meaning of the old word now moan in my ear like a surge upon the shore , " you mother , , be you disgrace , and you be hers . the time will come -- and soon enough -- when you will understand this better , and will feel it too , as no one save a woman can . " with they , those other word return , " pray daily that the sins of
of other be not visit upon you head . " I could not disentangle all that be about I , and I feel as if the blame and the shame be all in I , and the visitation have come down . the day wane into a gloomy evening , overcast and sad , and I still contende with the same distress . I go out alone , and after walk a little in the park , watch the dark shade fal on the tree and the fitful flight of the bat , which sometimes almost touch I , be attract to the house for the first time . perhaps I might not have go near it if I have be in a stronger frame of mind . as it be , I take the path that lead close by it . I do not dare to linger or to look up , but I pass before the terrace garden with its fragrant odour , and its broad walk , and its well - keep bed and smooth turf ; and I see how beautiful and grave it be , and how the old stone balustrade and parapet , and wide flights of shallow step , be sea by time and weather ; and how the trained moss and ivy grow about they , and around the old stone pedestal of the sun -dial ; and I hear the fountain fall . then the way go by long line of dark window diversify by turret towers and porche of eccentric shape , where old stone lion and grotesque monster bristle outside den of shadow and snarl at the evening gloom over the escutcheon they hold in they grip . Thence the path wound underneath a gateway , and through a court - yard where the principal entrance be ( I hurry quickly on ) , and by the stable where none but deep voice seem to be , whether in the murmuring of the wind through the strong mass of ivy hold to a high red wall , or in the low complain of the weathercock , or in the barking of the dog , or in the slow striking of a clock . so , encountere presently a sweet smell of lime , whose rust I could hear , I turn with the turning of the path to the south front , and there above I be the balustrade of the Ghost 's walk and one lighted window that might be my mother 's . the way be pave here , like the terrace overhead , and my footstep from be noiseless make a echo sound upon the flag . stop to look at nothing , but see all I do see as I go , I be pass quickly on , and in a few moment should have pass the lighted window , when my echo footstep bring it suddenly into my mind that there be a dreadful truth in the legend of the Ghost 's walk , that it be I who be to bring calamity upon the stately house and that my warning foot be haunt it even then . seize with a augmented terror of myself which turn I cold , I run from myself and everything , retrace the way by which i have come , and never pause until I have gain the lodge - gate , and the park lay sullen and black behind I . not before I be alone in my own room for the night and have again be deject and unhappy there do I begin to know how wrong and thankless this state be . but from my darling who be come on the morrow , I find a joyful letter , full of such loving anticipation that I must have be of marble if it have not move I ; from my guardian , too , I find another letter , ask I to tell , if I should see that little woman anywhere , that they have mo most pitiably without she , that the housekeeping be go to rack and ruin , that nobody else could manage the key , and that everybody in and about the house declare it be not the same house and be become rebellious for she return . two such letter together make I think how far beyond my desert I be beloved and how happy I ought to be . that make I think of all my past life ; and that bring I , as it ought to have do before , into a better condition . for I see very well that I could not have be intend to die , or I should never have liv ; not to say should never have be reserve for such a happy life . I see very well how many thing have work together for my welfare , and that if the sins of the father be sometimes visit upon the child , the phrase do not mean what I have in the morning fear it mean . I know I be as innocent of my birth as a queen of hers and that before my I should not be punish for birth nor a queen reward for it . I have have experience , in the shock of that very day , that I could , even thus soon , find comforting reconcilement to the change that have fall on I . I renew my resolution and praye to be strengthen in they , pour out my heart for myself and for my unhappy mother and feel that the darkness of the morning be pass away . it be not upon my sleep ; and when the next day 's light awoke I , it be gone . my dear girl be to arrive at five o'clock in the afternoon . how to help myself through the intermediate time
time better than by take a long walk along the road by which she be to come , I do not know ; so and and -- saddle , for we never drive he after the one great occasion -- make a long expedition along that road and back . on we return , we hold a great review of the house and garden and see that everything be in its prettiest condition , and have the bird out ready as a important part of the establishment . there be more than two full hour yet to elapse before she could come , and in that interval , which seem a long one , I must confess I be nervously anxious about my altered look . I love my darling so well that I be more concerned for they effect on she than on any one . I be not in this slight distress because I at all repin -- I be quite certain I do not , that day -- but , I think , would she be wholly prepare ? when she first see I , might she not be a little shocked and disappoint ? might it not prove a little worse than she expect ? might she not look for she old Esther and not find she ? might she not have to grow use to I and to begin all over again ? I know the various expression of my sweet girl 's face so well , and it be such a honest face in its loveliness , that I be sure beforehand she could not hide that first look from I . and I consider whether , if it should signify any one of these meaning , which be so very likely , could I quite answer for myself ? well , I think I could . after last night , I think I could . but to wait and wait , and expect and expect , and think and think , be such bad preparation that I resolve to go along the road again and meet she . so I say to , " Charley , I will go by myself and walk along the road until she come . " highly approve of anything that pleas I , I go and leave she at home . but before I get to the second milestone , I have be in so many palpitation from see dust in the distance ( though I know it be not , and could not , be the coach yet ) that I resolve to turn back and go home again . and when I have turn , I be in such fear of the coach come up behind I ( though I still know that it neither would , nor could , do any such thing ) that I run the greater part of the way to avoid be overtaken . then , I consider , when I have get safe back again , this be a nice thing to have do ! now I be hot and have make the worst of it instead of the best . at last , when I believe there be at least a quarter of a hour more yet , Charley all at once cry out to I as I be trembl in the garden , " here she come , miss ! here she be ! " I do not mean to do it , but I run upstairs into my room and hide myself behind the door . there I stand trembl , even when I hear my darling call as she come upstairs , " , my dear , my love , where be you ? little woman , dear ! " she run in , and be run out again when she see I . ah , my angel girl ! the old dear look , all love , all fondness , all affection . nothing else in it -- no , nothing , nothing ! oh , how happy I be , down upon the floor , with my sweet beautiful girl down upon the floor too , hold my scarred face to she lovely cheek , bath it with tear and kiss , rock I to and for like a child , call I by every tender name that she could think of , and press I to she faithful heart . and if the secret I have to keep have be mine , I must have confide it to before we have be long together . but it be not mine , and I do not feel that I have a right to tell it , even to my guardian , unless some great emergency arise . it be a weight to bear alone ; still my present duty appear to be plain , and blest in the attachment of my dear , I do not want a impulse and encouragement to do it . though often when she be asleep and all be quiet , the remembrance of my mother keep I wake and make the night sorrowful , I do not yield to it at another time ; and find I what I use to be -- except , of course , in that particular of which I have say enough and which I have no intention of mention any more just now , if I can help it . the difficulty that I feel in be quite compose that first evening when ask I , over we work , if the family be at the house , and when I be oblige to answer yes , I believe so , for have speak to I in the wood the day before yesterday , be great . greater still when ask I what she have say , and when I reply that she have be kind and interested , and when ,
, while admit she beauty and elegance , remark upon she proud manner and she imperious chilling air . but help I through , unconsciously , by tell we that have only stay at the house two night on she way from to visit at some other great house in the next county and that she have leave early on the morning after we have see she at we view , as we call it . verifie the adage about little pitcher , I be sure , for she hear of more saying and doings in a day than would have come to my ear in a month . we be to stay a month at 's . my pet have scarcely be there a bright week , as I recollect the time , when one evening after we have finish help the gardener in water he flower , and just as the candle be light , , appear with a very important air behind 's chair , beckon I mysteriously out of the room . " oh ! if you please , miss , " say in a whisper , with she eye at they roundest and largest . " you be want at the Dedlock Arm . " " why , , " say I , " who can possibly want I at the public - house ? " " I do not know , miss , " return , put she head forward and fold she hand tight upon the band of she little apron , which she always do in the enjoyment of anything mysterious or confidential , " but it be a gentleman , miss , and he compliment , and will you please to come without say anything about it . " " whose compliment , ? " " he 'n , miss , " return , whose grammatical education be advancing , but not very rapidly . " and how do you come to be the messenger , ? " " I be not the messenger , if you please , miss , " return my little maid . " it be , miss . " " and who be , ? " " , miss , " return . " do not you know , miss ? the Dedlock Arms , by , " which deliver as if she be slowly spell out the sign . " aye ? the landlord , ? " " yes , miss . if you please , miss , he wife be a beautiful woman , but she break she ankle , and it never join . and she brother be the sawyer that be put in the cage , miss , and they expect he will drink himself to death entirely on beer , " say . not know what might be the matter , and be easily apprehensive now , I think it best to go to this place by myself . I bay be quick with my bonnet and veil and my shawl , and have put they on , go away down the little hilly street , where I be as much at home as in 's . be stand in he shirt - sleeve at the door of he very clean little tavern wait for I . he lift off he hat with both hand when he see I come , and carry it so , as if it be a iron vessel ( it look as heavy ) , proceed I along the sand passage to he best parlour , a neat carpet room with more plant in it than be quite convenient , a coloured print of , several shell , a good many tea - tray , two stuff and dry fish in glass case , and either a curiious egg or a curiious pumpkin ( but I do not know which , and I doubt if many people do ) hang from he ceiling . I know very well by sight , from he often stand at he door . a pleasant - look , stoutish , middle - aged man who never seem to consider himself cozily dress for he own fire - side without he hat and top - boot , but who never wear a coat except at church . he snuff the candle , and back away a little to see how it look , back out of the room --unexpectedly to I , for I be go to ask he by whom he have be send . the door of the opposite parlour be then open , I hear some voice , familiar in my ear I think , which stop . a quick light step approach the room in which I be , and who should stand before I but ! " my dear Esther ! " he say . " my best friend ! " and he really be so warm - hear and earnest that in the first surprise and pleasure of he brotherly greet I could scarcely find breath to tell he that be well . " answer my very thought -- always the same dear girl ! " say , lead I to a chair and seat himself beside I . I put my veil up , but not quite . " always the same dear girl ! " say just as heartily as before . I put up my veil altogether , and lay my hand on 's sleeve and look in he face , tell he how much I thanke he for he kind welcome and how greatly I rejoice to see he , the more so because of the determination I have make in my illness , which I now convey to he . " my love , " say , " there be no one with whom I have a greater wish to talk than you , for I want you to understand I
I . " " and I want you , , " say I , shak my head , " to understand some one else . " " since you refer so immediately to , " say , " -- I suppose you mean he ? " " of course I do . " " then I may say at once that I be glad of it , because it be on that subject that I be anxious to be understand . by you , mind -- you , my dear ! I be not accountable to or . " I be pain to find he take this tone , and he observe it . " well , well , my dear , " say , " we will not go into that now . I want to appear quietly in you country - house here , with you under my arm , and give my charming cousin a surprise . I suppose you loyalty to will allow that ? " " my dear , " I return , " you know you would be heartily welcome at he house -- you home , if you will but consider it so ; and you be as heartily welcome here ! " " speak like the best of little woman ! " cry gaily . I ask he how he like he profession . " oh , I like it well enough ! " say . " it be all right . it do as well as anything else , for a time . I do not know that I shall care about it when I come to be settle , but I can sell out then and -- however , never mind all that botheration at present . " so young and handsome , and in all respects so perfectly the opposite of ! and yet , in the clouded , eager , seek look that pass over he , so dreadfully like she ! " I be in town on leave just now , " say . " indeed ? " " yes . I have run over to look after my -- my Chancery interest before the long vacation , " say , force a careless laugh . " we be begin to spin along with that old suit at last , I promise you . " no wonder that I shook my head ! " as you say , it be not a pleasant subject . " speak with the same shade cross he face as before . " let it go to the four wind for to - night . puff ! gone ! who do you suppose be with I ? " " be it 's voice I hear ? " " that be the man ! he do I more good than anybody . what a fascinating child it be ! " I ask if any one knew of they come down together . he answer , no , nobody . he have be to call upon the dear old infant -- so he call -- and the dear old infant have tell he where we be , and he have tell the dear old infant he be bend on come to see we , and the dear old infant have directly want to come too ; and so he have bring he . " and he be worth -- not to say he sordo expense -- but thrice he weight in gold , " say . " he be such a cheery fellow . no worldliness about he . and green - hear ! " I certainly do not see the proof of 's worldliness in he have he expense pay by , but I make no remark about that . indeed , he come in and turn we conversation . he be charme to see I , say he have be shed delicious tear of joy and sympathy at interval for six week on my account , have never be so happy as in hearing of my progress , begin to understand the mixture of good and evil in the world now , feel that he appreciate health the more when somebody else be ill , do not know but what it might be in the scheme of thing that should squint to make happier in look straight or that care should carry a wooden leg to make d better satisfied with he flesh and blood in a silk stocking . " my dear , here be we friend , " say , " full of the brightest vision of the future , which he evoke out of the darkness of . now that be delightful , that be inspirit , that be full of poetry ! in old time the woods and solitude be make joyous to the shepherd by the imaginary piping and dancing of and the nymph . this present shepherd , we pastoral , brightend the dull Inns of court by make and she train sport through they to the melodious note of a judgment from the bench . that be very pleasant , you know ! some ill - condition growling fellow may say to I , ' what be the use of these legal and equitable abuse ? how do you defend they ? ' I reply , ' my grow friend , I do not defend they , but they be very agreeable to I . there be a shepherd -- youth , a friend of mine , who transmute they into something highly fascinate to my simplicity . I do not say it be for this that they exist -- for I be a child among you worldly grumbler , and not call upon to account to you or myself for anything -- but it may be so . ' " I begin seriously to think that could scarcely have find a worse friend than this
this . it make I uneasy that at such a time when he must require some right principle and purpose he should have this captivating looseness and put - off of everything , this airy dispense with all principle and purpose , at he elbow . I think I could understand how such a nature as my guardian 's , experience in the world and force to contemplate the miserable evasion and contention of the family misfortune , find a immense relief in 's avowal of he weakness and display of guileless candour ; but I could not satisfy myself that it be as artless as it see or that it do not serve 's idle turn quite as well as any other part , and with less trouble . they both walk back with I , and Skimpole leave we at the gate , I walk softly in with and say , " ada , my love , I have bring a gentleman to visit you . " it be not difficult to read the blushing , start face . she love he dearly , and he know it , and I know it . it be a very transparent business , that meet as cousin only . I almost mistrust myself as grow quite wicked in my suspicion , but I be not so sure that love she dearly . he admire she very much -- any one must have do that -- and I dare say would have renew they youthful engagement with great pride and ardour but that he know how she would respect she promise to my guardian . still I have a tormenting idea that the influence upon he extend even here , that he be postpone he best truth and earnestness in this a in all thing until and should be off he mind . ah I ! what would have be without that blight , I never shall know now ! he tell , in he most ingenuous way , that he have not come to make any secret inroad on the term she have accept ( rather too implicitly and confidingly , he think ) from , that he have come openly to see she and to see I and to justify himself for the present term on which he stand with . as the dear old infant would be with we directly , he beg that I would make a appointment for the morning , when he might set himself right through the means of a unreserved conversation with I . I propose to walk with he in the park at seven o'clock , and this be arrange . soon afterwards appear and make we merry for a hour . he particularly request to see little Coavinse ( mean ) and tell she , with a patriarchal air , that he have give she late father all the business in he power and that if one of she little brothers would make haste to get set up in the same profession , he hope he should still be able to put a good deal of employment in he way . " for I be constantly be take in these net , " say , look beamingly at we over a glass of wine - and - water , " and be constantly be bail out -- like a boat . or pay off -- like a ship 's company . somebody always do it for I . I can not do it , you know , for I never have any money . but somebody do it . I get out by somebody be mean ; I be not like the starling ; I get out . if you be to ask I who somebody be , upon my word I could not tell you . let we drink to somebody . bless he ! " be a little late in the morning , but I have not to wait for he long , and we turn into the park . the air be bright and dewy and the sky without a cloud . the bird sang delightfully ; the sparkle in the fern , the grass , and tree , be exquisite to see ; the richness of the wood seem to have increase twenty - fold since yesterday , as if , in the still night when they have look so massively hush in sleep , , through all the minute detail of every wonderful leaf , have be more wakeful than usual for the glory of that day . " this be a lovely place , " say , look round . " none of the jar and discord of law - suit here ! " but there be other trouble . " I tell you what , my dear girl , " say , " when I get affairs in general settle , I shall come down here , I think , and rest . " " would it not be better to rest now ? " I ask . " oh , as to rest now , " say , " or as to do anything very definite now , that be not easy . in short , it can not be do ; I can not do it at least . " " why not ? " say I . " you know why not , . if you be live in a unfinished house , liable to have the roof put on or take off -- to be from top to bottom pull down or build up -- to -morrow , next day , next week , next month , next year -- you would find it hard to rest or setle . so do I . now ? there be no now for we suitor . " I could almost have believe in the attraction on which my poor little wander friend have
have expatiate when I see again the darkened look of last night . terrible to think it have in it also a shade of that unfortunate man who have die . " my dear , " say I , " this be a bad beginning of we conversation . " " I know you would tell I so , . " " and not I alone , dear . it be not I who caution you once never to find a hope or expectation on the family curse . " " there you come back to ! " say impatiently . " well ! we must approach he sooner or later , for he be the staple of what I have to say , and it be as well at once . my dear , how can you be so blind ? do not you see that he be a interested party and that it may be very well for he to wish I to know nothing of the suit , and care nothing about it , but that it may not be quite so well for I ? " " oh , , " I remonstrate , " be it possible that you can ever have see he and hear he , that you can ever have live under he roof and know he , and can yet breathe , even to I in this solitary place where there be no one to hear we , such unworthy suspicion ? " he redden deeply , as if he natural generosity feel a pang of reproach . he be silent for a little while before he reply in a subdued voice , " , I be sure you know that I be not a mean fellow and that I have some sense of suspicion and distrust be poor quality in one of my year . " " I know it very well , " say I . " I be not more sure of anything . " " that be a dear girl , " retort , " and like you , because it give I comfort . I have need to get some scrap of comfort out of all this business , for it be a bad one at the best , as I have no occasion to tell you . " " I know perfectly , " say I . " I know as well , -- what shall I say ? as well as you do -- that such misconstruction be foreign to you nature . and I know , as well as you know , what so change it . " " come , sister , come , " say a little more gaily , " you will be fair with I at all event . if I have the misfortune to be under that influence , so have he . if it have a little twist I , it may have a little twist he too . I do not say that he be not a honourable man , out of all this complication and uncertainty ; I be sure he be . but it taint everybody . you know it taint everybody . you have hear he say so fifty time . then why should he escape ? " " because , " say I , " he be a uncommon character , and he have resolutely keep himself outside the circle , . " " oh , because and because ! " reply in he vivacious way . " I be not sure , my dear girl , but that it may be wise and specious to preserve that outward indifference . it may cause other party interested to become lax about they interest ; and people may die off , and point may drag themselves out of memory , and many thing may smoothly happen that be convenient enough . " I be so touch with pity for that I could not reproach he any more , even by a look . I remembe my guardian 's gentleness towards he error and with what perfect freedom from resentment he have speak of they . " , " resume , " you be not to suppose that I have come here to make underhand charge against . I have only come to justify myself . what I say be , it be all very well and we get on very well while I be a boy , utterly regardless of this same suit ; but as soon as I begin to take a interest in it and to look into it , then it be quite another thing . then discover that and I must break off and that if I do not amend that very objectionable course , I be not fit for she . now , Esther , I do not mean to amend that very objectionable course : I will not hold 's favour on those unfair term of compromise , which he have no right to dictate . whether it please he or displease he , I must maintain my right and 's . I have be think about it a good deal , and this be the conclusion I have come to . " poor dear ! he have indeed be think about it a good deal . he face , he voice , he manner , all show that too plainly . " so I tell he honourably ( you be to know I have write to he about all this ) that we be at issue and that we have better be at issue openly than covertly . I thank he for he goodwill and he protection , and he go he road , and I go mine . the fact be , we roads be not the same . under one of the wills in dispute , I should take much more than he . I
I do not mean to say that it be the one to be establish , but there it be , and it have its chance . " " I have not to learn from you , my dear , " say I , " of you letter . I have hear of it already without a offended or angry word . " " indeed ? " reply , softening . " I be glad I say he be a honourable man , out of all this wretch affair . but I always say that and have never doubt it . now , my dear Esther , I know these view of mine appear extremely harsh to you , and will to when you tell she what have pass between we . but if you have go into the case as I have , if you have only apply yourself to the papers as I do when I be at 's , if you only know what a accumulation of charge and counter -charge , and suspicion and cross-suspicion , they involve , you would think I moderate in comparison . " " perhaps so , " say I . " but do you think that , among those many papers , there be much truth and justice , ? " " there be truth and justice somewhere in the case , -- " " or be once , long ago , " say I . " I -- be -- must be somewhere , " pursue impetuously , " and must be bring out . to allow to be make a bribe and hush - money of be not the way to bring it out . you say the suit be change I ; say it change , have change , and will change everybody who have any share in it . then the greater right I have on my side when I resolve to do all I can to bring it to a end . " " all you can , ! do you think that in these many year no other have do all they could ? have the difficulty grow easier because of so many failure ? " " it can not last for ever , " return with a fierceness kindling in he which again present to I that last sad reminder . " I be young and earnest , and energy and determination have do wonder many a time . other have only half throw themselves into it . I devote myself to it . I make it the object of my life . " " oh , , my dear , so much the worse , so much the worse ! " " no , no , no , do not you be afraid for I , " he return affectionately . " you be a dear , good , wise , quiet , bless girl ; but you have you prepossession . so I come round to . I tell you , my good Esther , when he and I be on those term which he find so convenient , we be not on natural term . " " be division and animosity you natural term , ? " " no , I do not say that . I mean that all this business put we on unnatural term , with which natural relation be incompatible . see another reason for urge it on ! I may find out when it be over that I have be mistaken in . my head may be clearer when I be free of it , and I may then agree with what you say to - day . very well . then I shall acknowledge it and make he reparation . " everything postpone to that imaginary time ! everything hold in confusion and indecision until then ! " now , my best of confidante , " say , " I want my cousin to understand that I be not captious , fickle , and wilful about , but that I have this purpose and reason at my back . I wish to represent myself to she through you , because she have a great esteem and respect for she cousin ; and I know you will soften the course I take , even though you disapprove of it ; and -- and in short , " say , who have be hesitat through these word , " I -- I do not like to represent myself in this litigious , contentious , doubt character to a confid girl like , " I tell he that he be more like himself in those latter word than in anything he have say yet . " why , " acknowledge , " that may be true enough , my love . I rather feel it to be so . but I shall be able to give myself fair - play by and by . I shall come all right again , then , do not you be afraid . " I ask he if this be all he wish I to tell . " not quite , " say . " I be bound not to withhold from she that answer my letter in he usual manner , address I as ' my dear , ' try to argue I out of my opinion , and tell I that they should make no difference in he . ( all very well of course , but not alter the case . ) I also want to know that if I see she seldom just now , I be look after she interest as well as my own -- we two be in the same boat exactly -- and that I hope she will not suppose from any fly rumour she may hear that I be at all light - headed or imprudent ; on the contrary , I be always
always look forward to the termination of the suit , and always planning in that direction . be of age now and have take the step I have take , I consider myself free from any accountability to ; but be still a ward of the court , I do not yet ask she to renew we engagement . when she be free to act for herself , I shall be myself once more and we shall both be in very different worldly circumstance , I believe . if you tell she all this with the advantage of you considerate way , you will do I a very great and a very kind service , my dear Esther ; and I shall knock and on the head with greater vigour . of course I ask for no secrecy at . " " , " say I , " you place great confidence in I , but I fear you will not take advice from I ? " " it be impossible that I can on this subject , my dear girl . on any other , readily . " as if there be any other in he life ! as if he whole career and character be not be dye one colour ! " but I may ask you a question , ? " " I think so , " say he , laugh . " I do not know who may not , if you may not . " " you say , yourself , you be not lead a very settled life . " " how can I , my dear , with nothing settle ! " " be you in debt again ? " " why , of course I be , " say , astonished at my simplicity . " be it of course ? " " my dear child , certainly . I can not throw myself into a object so completely without expense . you forget , or perhaps you do not know , that under either of the wills and I take something . it be only a question between the larger sum and the smaller . I shall be within the mark any way . bless you heart , my excellent girl , " say , quite amuse with I , " I shall be all right ! I shall pull through , my dear ! " I feel so deeply sensible of the danger in which he stand that I try , in 's name , in my guardian 's , in my own , by every fervent mean that I could think of , to warn he of it and to show he some of he mistake . he receive everything I say with patience and gentleness , but it all rebound from he without take the least effect . I could not wonder at this after the reception he preoccupy mind have give to my guardian 's letter , but I determine to try 's influence yet . so when we walk bring we round to the village again , and I go home to breakfast , I prepare for the account I be go to give she and tell she exactly what reason we have to dread that be lose himself and scatter he whole life to the wind . it make she very unhappy , of course , though she have a far , far greater reliance on he correcte he error than I could have -- which be so natural and love in my dear !-- and she presently write he this little letter : my dearest cousin , have tell I all you say to she this morning . I write this to repeat most earnestly for myself all that she say to you and to let you know how sure I be that you will sooner or later find we cousin a pattern of truth , sincerity , and goodness , when you will deeply , deeply grieve to have do he ( without intend it ) so much wrong . I do not quite know how to write what I wish to say next , but I trust you will understand it as I mean it . I have some fear , my dearest cousin , that it may be partly for my sake you be now lay up so much unhappiness for yourself -- and if for yourself , for I . in case this should be so , or in case you should entertain much thought of I in what you be do , I most earnestly entreat and beg you to desist . you can do nothing for my sake that will make I half so happy as for ever turn you back upon the shadow in which we both be bear . do not be angry with I for say this . pray , pray , dear , for my sake , and for you own , and in a natural repugnance for that source of trouble which have its share in make we both orphan when we be very young , pray , pray , let it go for ever . we have reason to know by this time that there be no good in it and no hope , that there be nothing to be get from it but sorrow . my dearest cousin , it be needless for I to say that you be quite free and that it be very likely you may find some one whom you will love much better than you first fancy . I be quite sure , if you will let I say so , that the object of you choice would greatly prefer to follow you fortune far and wide , however moderate or poor , and see you happy , do you duty and pursue you chosen way , than to have the hope of being , or even
even to be , very rich with you ( if such a thing be possible ) at the cost of dragging years of procrastination and anxiety and of you indifference to other aim . you may wonder at my say this so confidently with so little knowledge or experience , but I know it for a certainty from my own heart . ever , my dearest cousin , you most affectionate this note bring to we very soon , but it make little change in he if any . we would fairly try , he say , who be right and who be wrong -- he would show we -- we should see ! he be animate and glow , as if 's tenderness have gratify he ; but I could only hope , with a sigh , that the letter might have some stronger effect upon he mind on re-perusal than it assuredly have then . as they be to remain with we that day and have take they place to return by the coach next morning , I seek a opportunity of speak to . we out - of - door life easily throw one in my way , and I delicately say that there be a responsibility in encourage . " responsibility , my dear ? " he repeat , catch at the word with the pleasantest smile . " I be the last man in the world for such a thing . I never be responsible in my life -- I can not be . " " I be afraid everybody be oblige to be , " say I timidly enough , he be so much older and more clever than I . " no , really ? " say , receive this new light with a most agreeable jocularity of surprise . " but every man be not oblige to be solvent ? I be not . I never be . see , my dear , " he take a handful of loose silver and halfpence from he pocket , " there be so much money . I have not a idea how much . I have not the power of counting . call it four and ninepence -- call it four pound nine . they tell I I owe more than that . I dare say I do . I dare say I owe as much as good - natured people will let I owe . if they do not stop , why should I ? there you have in little . if that be responsibility , I be responsible . " the perfect ease of manner with which he put the money up again and look at I with a smile on he refin face , as if he have be mention a curiious little fact about somebody else , almost make I feel as if he really have nothing to do with it . " now , when you mention responsibility , " he resume , " I be dispose to say that I never have the happiness of know any one whom I should consider so refreshingly responsible as yourself . you appear to I to be the very touchstone of responsibility . when I see you , my dear , intend upon the perfect work of the whole little orderly system of which you be the centre , I feel inclined to say to myself -- in fact I do say to myself very often -- that be responsibility ! " it be difficult , after this , to explain what I mean ; but I persist so far as to say that we all hope he would check and not confirm in the sanguine views he entertain just then . " most willingly , " he retort , " if I could . but , my dear , I have no art , no disguise . if he take I by the hand and lead I through in a airy procession after fortune , I must go . if he say , ' Skimpole , join the dance ! ' I must join it . common sense would not , I know , but I have no common sense . " it be very unfortunate for , I say . " do you think so ! " return . " do not say that , do not say that . let we suppose he keep company with -- a excellent man -- a good deal wrinkl -- dreadfully practical -- change for a ten - pound note in every pocket -- rule account - book in he hand -- say , upon the whole , resembl a tax - gatherer . we dear , sanguine , ardent , overleap obstacle , burst with poetry like a young bud , say to this highly respectable companion , 'I see a golden prospect before I ; it be very bright , it be very beautiful , it be very joyous ; here I go , bounde over the landscape to come at it ! ' the respectable companion instantly knock he down with the rule account - book ; tell he in a literal , prosaic way that he see no such thing ; show he it be nothing but fee , fraud , horsehair wig , and black gown . now you know that be a painful change -- sensible in the last degree , I have no doubt , but disagreeable . I can not do it . I have not get the ruled account - book , I have none of the tax - gather element in my composition , I be not at all respectable , and I do not want to be . odd perhaps , but so it be ! " it be idle to say more , so I propose that we should join and , who be a little in advance , and I
I give up in despair . he have be over the hall in the course of the morning and whimsically describe the family picture as we walk . there be such portentous shepherdess among the Lady Dedlock dead and gone , he tell we , that peaceful crook become weapon of assault in they hand . they tend they flock severely in buckram and powder and put they sticking - plaster patch on to terrify commoner as the chiefs of some other tribe put on they war - paint . there be a , with a battle , a spring - mine , volume of smoke , flash of lightning , a town on fire , and a storm fort , all in full action between he horse 's two hind leg , show , he suppose , how little a Dedlock make of such trifle . the whole race he represent as have evidently be , in life , what he call " stuff people " -- a large collection , glassy eye , set up in the most approve manner on they various twig and perch , very correct , perfectly free from animation , and always in glass case . I be not so easy now during any reference to the name but that I feel it a relief when , with a exclamation of surprise , hurrie away to meet a stranger whom he first descry come slowly towards we . " dear I ! " say . " Vhole ! " we ask if that be a friend of 's . " friend and legal adviser , " say . " now , my dear , if you want common sense , responsibility , and respectability , all united -- if you want a exemplary man -- Vhole be the man . " we have not know , we say , that be assist by any gentleman of that name . " when he emerge from legal infancy , " return , " he part from we conversational friend Kenge and take up , I believe , with Vholes . indeed , I know he do , because I introduce he to Vholes . " " have you know he long ? " ask . " Vhole ? my dear , I have have that kind of acquaintance with he which I have have with several gentleman of he profession . he have do something or other in a very agreeable , civil manner -- take proceedings , I think , be the expression -- which end in the proceeding of he take somebody be so good as to step in and pay the money -- something and fourpence be the amount ; I forget the pound and shilling , but I know it end with fourpence , because it strike I at the time as be so odd that I could owe anybody fourpence -- and after that I bring they together . Vholes ask I for the introduction , and I give it . now I come to think of it , " he look inquiringly at we with he frankest smile as he make the discovery , " Vholes bribe I , perhaps ? he give I something and call it commission . be it a five - pound note ? do you know , I think it must have be a five - pound note ! " he further consideration of the point be prevent by 's come back to we in a excited state and hastily represent -- a sallow man with pinched lip that look as if they be cold , a red eruption here and there upon he face , tall and thin , about fifty year of age , high - shouldered , and stooping . dress in black , black - glove , and buttone to the ching , there be nothing so remarkable in he as a lifeless manner and a slow , fix way he have of look at . " I hope I do not disturb you , lady , " say , and now I observe that he be further remarkable for a inward manner of speaking . " I arrange with that he should always know when he cause be in the 's paper , and be inform by one of my clerks last night after post time that it stand , rather unexpectedly , in the paper for to - morrow , I put myself into the coach early this morning and come down to confer with he . " " yes , " say , flush , and look triumphantly at and I , " we do not do these thing in the old slow way now . we spin along now ! , we must hire something to get over to the post town in , and catch the mail to - night , and go up by it ! " " anything you please , sir , " return . " I be quite at you service . " " let I see , " say , look at he watch . " if I run down to the Dedlock , and get my portmanteau fasten up , and order a gig , or a chaise , or whatever be to be get , we shall have a hour then before start . I will come back to tea . , will you and take care of when I be go ? " he be away directly , in he heat and hurry , and be soon lose in the dusk of evening . we who be leave walk on towards the house . " be 's presence necessary to - morrow , ? " say I . " can it do any good ? " " no , miss , " Vholes reply . " I be not aware that it can . " both and I
I express we regret that he should go , then , only to be disappoint . " have lay down the principle of watch he own interest , " say , " and when a client lay down he own principle , and it be not immoral , it devolve upon I to carry it out . I wish in business to be exact and open . I be a widower with three daughter -- , , and -- and my desire be so to discharge the duty of life as to leave they a good name . this appear to be a pleasant spot , miss . " the remark be make to I in consequence of my be next he as we walk , I assent and enumerate its chief attraction . " indeed ? " say . " I have the privilege of support a aged father in the of -- he native place -- and I admire that country very much . I have no idea there be anything so attractive here . " to keep up the conversation , I ask if he would like to live altogether in the country . " there , miss , " say he , " you touch I on a tender string . my health be not good ( my digestion be much impaired ) , and if I have only myself to consider , I should take refuge in rural habit , especially as the care of business have prevent I from ever come much into contact with general society , and particularly with lady ' society , which I have most wish to mix in . but with my three daughter , , , and -- and my aged father -- I can not afford to be selfish . it be true I have no longer to maintain a dear grandmother who die in she hundred and second year , but enough remain to render it indispensable that the mill should be always go . " it require some attention to hear he on account of he inward speak and he lifeless manner . " you will excuse my have mention my daughter , " he say . " they be my weak point . I wish to leave the poor girl some little independence , as well as a good name . " we now arrive at 's house , where the tea - table , all prepare , be await we . come in restless and hurrie shortly afterwards , and lean over 's chair , whisper something in he ear . Vholes reply aloud -- or as nearly aloud I suppose as he have ever reply to anything -- " you will drive I , will you , sir ? it be all the same to I , sir . anything you please . I be quite at you service . " we understand from what follow that be to be leave until the morning to occupy the two place which have be already pay for . as and I be both in low spirit concern and very sorry so to part with he , we make it as plain as we politely could that we should leave to the Arms and retire when the night - traveller be gone . 's high spirit carry everything before they , we all go out together to the top of the hill above the village , where he have order a gig to wait and where we find a man with a lantern stand at the head of the gaunt pale horse that have be harness to it . I never shall forget those two seate side by side in the lantern 's light , all flush and fire and laughter , with the rein in he hand ; quite still , black - gloved , and buttone up , look at he as if he be look at he prey and charme it . I have before I the whole picture of the warm dark night , the summer lightning , the dusty track of road close in by hedgerow and high tree , the gaunt pale horse with he ear prick up , and the drive away at speed to and . my dear girl tell I that night how 's be thereafter prosperous or ruin , befriend or desert , could only make this difference to she , that the more he need love from one unchanging heart , the more love that unchanging heart would have to give he ; how he think of she through he present error , and she would think of he at all time -- never of herself if she could devote herself to he , never of she own delight if she could minister to he . and she keep she word ? I look along the road before I , where the distance already shorten and the journey 's end be grow visible ; and true and good above the dead sea of the suit and all the ashy fruit it cast ashore , I think I see my darling . when we time come for return to again , we be punctual to the day and be receive with a overpowering welcome . I be perfectly restore to health and strength , and find my housekeeping key laid ready for I in my room , ring myself in as if I have be a new year , with a merry little peal . " once more , duty , duty , , " say I ; " and if you be not overjoy to do it , more than cheerfully and contentedly , through anything and everything , you ought to be . that be all I have to say to you , my dear ! " the first few morning be morning of so much bustle and business , devote to such settlement
settlement of account , such repeat journey to and for between the growlery and all other part of the house , so many rearrangement of drawer and press , and such a general new begin altogether , that I have not a moment 's leisure . but when these arrangement be complete and everything be in order , I pay a visit of a few hour to , which something in the letter I have destroy at have induce I to decide upon in my own mind . I make -- she maiden name be so natural to I that I always call she by it -- the pretext for this visit and write she a note previously ask the favour of she company on a little business expedition . leave home very early in the morning , I get to by stage - coach in such good time that I get to with the day before I . Caddy , who have not see I since she wedding - day , be so glad and so affectionate that I be half inclin to fear I should make she husband jealous . but he be , in he way , just as bad -- I mean as good ; and in short it be the old story , and nobody would leave I any possibility of do anything meritorious . the elder be in bed , I find , and be mil he chocolate , which a melancholy little boy who be a apprentice -- it seem such a curiious thing to be apprentice to the trade of dancing -- be wait to carry upstairs . she father - in - law be extremely kind and considerate , tell I , and they liv most happily together . ( when she speak of they living together , she mean that the old gentleman have all the good thing and all the good lodging , while she and she husband have what they could get , and be pok into two corner room over the . ) " and how be you mama , ? " say I . " why , I hear of she , , " reply , " through , but I see very little of she . we be good friend , I be glad to say , but ma think there be something absurd in my have marry a dancing - master , and she be rather afraid of its extending to she . " it struck I that if . have discharge she own natural duty and obligation before she sweep the horizon with a telescope in search of other , she would have take the best precaution against become absurd , but I need scarcely observe that I keep this to myself . " and you papa , ? " " he come here every evening , " return , " and be so fond of sitting in the corner there that it be a treat to see he . " look at the corner , I plainly perceive the mark of 's head against the wall . it be consolatory to know that he have find such a resting - place for it . " and you , , " say I , " you be always busy , I will be bound ? " " well , my dear , " return , " I be indeed , for to tell you a grand secret , I be qualifye myself to give lesson . 's health be not strong , and I want to be able to assist he . what with school , and class here , and private pupil , and the apprentice , he really have too much to do , poor fellow ! " the notion of the apprentice be still so odd to I that I ask if there be many of they . " Four , " say . " one in - door , and three out . they be very good child ; only when they get together they will play -- child - like -- instead of attend to they work . so the little boy you see just now waltze by himself in the empty kitchen , and we distribute the other over the house as well as we can . " " that be only for they step , of course ? " say I . " only for they step , " say . " in that way they practise , so many hour at a time , whatever step they happen to be upon . they dance in the academy , and at this time of year we do figure at five every morning . " " why , what a laborious life ! " I exclaim . " I assure you , my dear , " return , smile , " when the out - door apprentice ring we up in the morning ( the bell ring into we room , not to disturb old ) , and when I put up the window and see they stand on the door -step with they little pump under they arm , I be actually remind of the Sweep . " all this present the art to I in a singular light , to be sure . enjoy the effect of she communication and cheerfully recount the particular of she own study . " you see , my dear , to save expense I ought to know something of the piano , and I ought to know something of the kit too , and consequently I have to practise those two instrument as well as the detail of we profession . if ma have be like anybody else , I might have have some little musical knowledge to begin upon . however , I have not any ; and that part of the work be , at first , a
a little discouraging , I must allow . but I have a very good ear , and I be use to drudgery -- I have to thank ma for that , at all event -- and where there be a will there be a way , you know , , the world over . " say these word , laughingly sit down at a little jingling square piano and really rattle off a quadrille with great spirit . then she good - humouredly and blushingly get up again , and while she still laugh herself , say , " do not laugh at I , please ; that be a dear girl ! " I would sooner have cry , but I do neither . I encourage she and praise she with all my heart . for I conscientiously believe , dancing - master 's wife though she be , and dance -mistress though in she limited ambition she aspire to be , she have strike out a natural , wholesome , loving course of industry and perseverance that be quite as good as a mission . " my dear , " say , delight , " you can not think how you cheer I . I shall owe you , you do not know how much . what change , , even in my small world ! you recollect that first night , when I be so unpolite and inky ? who would have think , then , of my ever teach people to dance , of all other possibility and impossibility ! " she husband , who have leave we while we have this chat , now come back , preparatory to exercise the apprentice in the ball - room , inform I she be quite at my disposal . but it be not my time yet , I be glad to tell she , for I should have be vex to take she away then . therefore we three adjourn to the apprentice together , and I make one in the dance . the apprentice be the queerest little people . besides the melancholy boy , who , I hope , have not be make so by waltze alone in the empty kitchen , there be two other boy and one dirty little limp girl in a gauzy dress . such a precocious little girl , with such a dowdy bonnet on ( that , too , of a gauzy texture ) , who bring she sandall shoe in a old threadbare velvet reticule . mean little boy , when they be not dance , with string , and marble , and cramp - bone in they pocket , and the most untidy leg and foot -- and heel particularly . I ask what have make they parent choose this profession for they . say she do not know ; perhaps they be design for teacher , perhaps for the stage . they be all people in humble circumstance , and the melancholy boy 's mother keep a ginger - beer shop . we dance for a hour with great gravity , the melancholy child do wonder with he lower extremity , in which there appear to be some sense of enjoyment though it never rise above he waist . Caddy , while she be observant of she husband and be evidently founde upon he , have acquire a grace and self - possession of she own , which , unit to she pretty face and figure , be uncommonly agreeable . she already relieve he of much of the instruction of these young people , and he seldom interfere except to walk he part in the figure if he have anything to do in it . he always play the tune . the affectation of the gauzy child , and she condescension to the boy , be a sight . and thus we dance a hour by the clock . when the practice be conclude , 's husband make himself ready to go out of town to a school , and run away to get ready to go out with I . I sit in the ball - room in the interval , contemplate the apprentice . the two out - door boy go upon the staircase to put on they half - boot and pull the in - door boy 's hair , as I judge from the nature of he objection . return with they jacket button and they pump stuck in they , they then produce packet of cold bread and meat and bivouack under a pain lyre on the wall . the little gauzy child , have whisk she sandal into the reticule and put on a trodden - down pair of shoe , shook she head into the dowdy bonnet at one shake , and answer my inquiry whether she like dancing by reply , " not with boy , " tie it across she ching , and go home contemptuous . " be so sorry , " say , " that he have not finish dress yet and can not have the pleasure of see you before you go . you be such a favourite of he , . " I express myself much oblige to he , but do not think it necessary to add that I readily dispense with this attention . " it take he a long time to dress , " say , " because he be very much look up to in such thing , you know , and have a reputation to support . you can not think how kind he be to . he talk to of a evening about the , and I never see so interested . " there be something in the picture of bestow he deportment on that quite take my fancy . I ask if he bring she papa out much . " no , " say , "
" I do not know that he do that , but he talk to , and greatly admire he , and listen , and like it . of course I be aware that have hardly any claim to deportment , but they get on together delightfully . you can not think what good companion they make . I never see take snuff before in my life , but he take one pinch out of 's box regularly and keep put it to he nose and take it away again all the evening . " that old Turveydrop should ever , in the chance and change of life , have come to the rescue of from - appear to I to be one of the pleasantest of oddity . " as to , " say with a little hesitation , " whom I be most afraid of -- next to have any family of my own , -- as a inconvenience to , the kindness of the old gentleman to that child be beyond everything . he ask to see he , my dear ! he let he take the newspaper up to he in bed ; he give he the crust of he toast to eat ; he send he on little errand about the house ; he tell he to come to I for sixpence . in short , " say cheerily , " and not to prise , I be a very fortunate girl and ought to be very grateful . where be we go , ? " " to the , " say I , " where I have a few word to say to the solicitor 's clerk who be send to meet I at the coach - office on the very day when I come to and first see you , my dear . now I think of it , the gentleman who bring we to you house . " " then , indeed , I seem to be naturally the person to go with you , " return . to the we go and there inquire at 's residence for . , occupy the parlour and have indeed be visibly in danger of crack herself like a nut in the front - parlour door by pee out before she be ask for , immediately present herself and request we to walk in . she be a old lady in a large cap , with rather a red nose and rather a unsteady eye , but smile all over . she close little sitting - room be prepare for a visit , and there be a portrait of she son in it which , I have almost write here , be more like than life : it insist upon he with such obstinacy , and be so determined not to let he off . not only be the portrait there , but we find the original there too . he be dress in a great many colour and be discover at a table read law - papers with he forefinger to he forehead . " , " say , rise , " this be indeed a oasis . mother , will you be so good as to put a chair for the other lady and get out of the gangway . " , whose incessant smile give she quite a waggish appearance , do as she son request and then sit down in a corner , hold she pocket handkerchief to she chest , like a fomentation , with both hand . I present , and say that any friend of mine be more than welcome . I then proceed to the object of my visit . " I take the liberty of send you a note , sir , " say I . acknowledge the receipt by take it out of he breast - pocket , put it to he lip , and return it to he pocket with a bow . 's mother be so divert that she roll she head as she smile and make a silent appeal to Caddy with she elbow . " could I speak to you alone for a moment ? " say I . anything like the jocoseness of 's mother just now , I think I never see . she make no sound of laughter , but she roll she head , and shake it , and put she handkerchief to she mouth , and appeal to Caddy with she elbow , and she hand , and she shoulder , and be so unspeakably entertaine altogether that it be with some difficulty she could marshal through the little folding - door into she bedroom adjoin . " , " say , " you will excuse the waywardness of a parent ever mindful of a son 's appiness . my mother , though highly exasperat to the feeling , be actuate by maternal dictate . " I could hardly have believe that anybody could in a moment have turn so red or change so much as do when I now put up my veil . " I ask the favour of see you for a few moment here , " say I , " in preference to call at 's because , remember what you say on a occasion when you speak to I in confidence , I fear I might otherwise cause you some embarrassment , . " I cause he embarrassment enough as it be , I be sure . I never see such faltering , such confusion , such amazement and apprehension . " , " stammer , " I -- I -- beg you pardon , but in we profession -- we -- we -- find it necessary to be explicit . you have refer to a occasion , miss , when I -- when I do myself the honour of make a declaration which -- " something seem to rise in he throat
throat that he could not possibly swallow . he put he hand there , coughe , make face , try again to swallow it , coughe again , make face again , look all round the room , and flutter he papers . " a kind of giddy sensation have come upon I , miss , " he explain , " which rather knock I over . I -- er -- a little subject to this sort of thing -- er -- by ! " I give he a little time to recover . he consume it in put he hand to he forehead and take it away again , and in backing he chair into the corner behind he . " my intention be to remark , miss , " say , " dear I -- something bronchial , I think -- hey ! -- to remark that you be so good on that occasion as to repel and repudiate that declaration . you -- you would not perhaps object to admit that ? though no witness be present , it might be a satisfaction to -- to you mind -- if you be to put in that admission . " " there can be no doubt , " say I , " that I decline you proposal without any reservation or qualification whatever , . " " thank you , miss , " he return , measure the table with he troubled hand . " so far that be satisfactory , and it do you credit . Er--this be certainly bronchial !--must be in the tube -- er-- you would not perhaps be offend if I be to mention -- not that it be necessary , for you own good sense or any person 's sense must show 'em that -- if I be to mention that such declaration on my part be final , and there terminate ? " " I quite understand that , " say I . " perhaps -- er -- it may not be worth the form , but it might be a satisfaction to you mind --perhaps you would not object to admit that , miss ? " say . " I admit it most fully and freely , " say I . " thank you , " return . " very honourable , I be sure . I regret that my arrangement in life , combine with circumstance over which I have no control , will put it out of my power ever to fall back upon that offer or to renew it in any shape or form whatever , but it will ever be a retrospect entwin -- er -- with friendship 's bower . " 's bronchitis come to he relief and stop he measurement of the table . " I may now perhaps mention what I wish to say to you ? " I begin . " I shall be honoure , I be sure , " say Guppy . " I be so persuade that you own good sense and right feeling , miss , will -- will keep you as square as possible -- that I can have nothing but pleasure , I be sure , in hear any observation you may wish to offer . " " you be so good as to imply , on that occasion -- " " excuse I , miss , " say , " but we have better not travel out of the record into implication . I can not admit that I imply anything . " " you say on that occasion , " I recommence , " that you might possibly have the means of advancing my interest and promote my fortune by make discoveries of which I should be the subject . I presume that you foun that belief upon you general knowledge of my be a orphan girl , indebt for everything to the benevolence of . now , the beginning and the end of what I have come to beg of you be , , that you will have the kindness to relinquish all idea of so serve I . I have think of this sometimes , and I have think of it most lately -- since I have be ill . at length I have decide , in case you should at any time recall that purpose and act upon it in any way , to come to you and assure you that you be altogether mistaken . you could make no discovery in reference to I that would do I the least service or give I the least pleasure . I be acquaint with my personal history , and I have it in my power to assure you that you never can advance my welfare by such means . you may , perhaps , have abandon this project a long time . if so , excuse my give you unnecessary trouble . if not , I entreat you , on the assurance I have give you , henceforth to lay it aside . I beg you to do this , for my peace . " " I be bound to confess , " say , " that you express yourself , miss , with that good sense and right feeling for which I give you credit . nothing can be more satisfactory than such right feeling , and if I mistake any intentions on you part just now , I be prepare to tender a full apology . I should wish to be understand , miss , as hereby offer that apology -- limit it , as you own good sense and right feeling will point out the necessity of , to the present proceedings . " I must say for that the snuffling manner he have have upon he improve very much . he seem truly glad to be able to do something I ask , and he look asham . "
" if you will allow I to finish what I have to say at once so that I may have no occasion to resume , " I go on , see he about to speak , " you will do I a kindness , sir . I come to you as privately as possible because you announce this impression of yours to I in a confidence which I have really wish to respect -- and which I always have respect , as you remember . I have mention my illness . there really be no reason why I should hesitate to say that I know very well that any little delicacy I might have have in make a request to you be quite remove . therefore I make the entreaty I have now prefer , and I hope you will have sufficient consideration for I to accede to it . " I must do the further justice of say that he have look more and more asham and that he look most ashamed and very earnest when he now reply with a burn face , " upon my word and honour , upon my life , upon my soul , , as I be a living man , I will act accord to you wish ! I will never go another step in opposition to it . I will take my oath to it if it will be any satisfaction to you . in what I promise at this present time touch the matters now in question , " continue rapidly , as if he be repeat a familiar form of word , " I speak the truth , the whole truth , and nothing but the truth , so -- " " I be quite satisfied , " say I , rise at this point , " and I thank you very much . Caddy , my dear , I be ready ! " 's mother return with ( now make I the recipient of she silent laughter and she nudge ) , and we take we leave . see we to the door with the air of one who be either imperfectly awake or walk in he sleep ; and we leave he there , stare . but in a minute he come after we down the street without any hat , and with he long hair all blow about , and stop we , say fervently , " , upon my honour and soul , you may depend upon I ! " " I do , " say I , " quite confidently . " " I beg you pardon , miss , " say , go with one leg and stay with the other , " but this lady be present -- you own witness -- it might be a satisfaction to you mind ( which I should wish to set at rest ) if you be to repeat those admission . " " well , , " say I , turn to she , " perhaps you will not be surprised when I tell you , my dear , that there never have be any engagement -- " " no proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever , " suggest . " no proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever , " say I , " between this gentleman -- " " , of , , in the county of , " he murmure . " between this gentleman , , of , , in the county of , and myself . " " thank you , miss , " say . " very full -- er -- excuse I -- lady 's name , and surname both ? " I give they . " marry woman , I believe ? " say . " marry woman . thank you . Formerly , spinster , then of , within the city of , but extra-parochial ; now of , . much oblige . " he run home and come run back again . " touch that matter , you know , I really and truly be very sorry that my arrangement in life , combine with circumstance over which I have no control , should prevent a renewal of what be wholly terminate some time back , " say to I forlornly and despondently , " but it could not be . now could it , you know ! I only put it to you . " I reply it certainly could not . the subject do not admit of a doubt . he thank I and run to he mother 's again -- and back again . " it be very honourable of you , miss , I be sure , " say . " if a altar could be erect in the bower of friendship -- but , upon my soul , you may rely upon I in every respect save and except the tender passion only ! " the struggle in 's breast and the numerous oscillation it occasion he between he mother 's door and we be sufficiently conspicuous in the windy street ( particularly as he hair want cutting ) to make we hurry away . I do so with a lightened heart ; but when we last look back , be still oscillat in the same trouble state of mind . and client the name of , proceed by the legend Ground - floor , be inscribe upon a door - post in 's , -- a little , pale , wall - ey , woebegone inn like a large dust - binn of two compartment and a sifter . it look as if be a sparing man in he way and construct he inn of old building material which take kindly to the dry rot and to dirt and all thing decaying and dismal , and perpetuate 's memory with congenial shabbiness . quarter in this dingy hatchment commemorative of be
be the legal bearing of . 's office , in disposition retire and in situation retire , be squeeze up in a corner and blink at a dead wall . three foot of knotty - floor dark passage bring the client to 's jet - black door , in a angle profoundly dark on the brightest midsummer morning and encumber by a black bulk - head of cellarage staircase against which belate civilian generally strike they brows . 's chamber be on so small a scale that one clerk can open the door without get off he stool , while the other who elbow he at the same desk have equal facility for pok the fire . a smell as of unwholesome sheep blend with the smell of must and dust be referable to the nightly ( and often daily ) consumption of mutton fat in candle and to the fretting of parchment form and skins in greasy drawer . the atmosphere be otherwise stale and close . the place be last paint or whitewash beyond the memory of man , and the two chimney smoke , and there be a loose outer surface of soot everywhere , and the dull crack window in they heavy frame have but one piece of character in they , which be a determination to be always dirty and always shut unless coerce . this account for the phenomenon of the weaker of the two usually have a bundle of firewood thrust between its jaw in hot weather . be a very respectable man . he have not a large business , but he be a very respectable man . he be allow by the greater attorney who have make good fortune or be make they to be a most respectable man . he never miss a chance in he practice , which be a mark of respectability . he never take any pleasure , which be another mark of respectability . he be reserve and serious , which be another mark of respectability . he digestion be impaire , which be highly respectable . and he be make hay of the grass which be flesh , for he three daughter . and he father be dependent on he in the of . the one great principle of the english law be to make business for itself . there be no other principle distinctly , certainly , and consistently maintain through all its narrow turnings . View by this light it become a coherent scheme and not the monstrous maze the laity be apt to think it . let they but once clearly perceive that it be grand principle be to make business for itself at they expense , and surely they will cease to grumble . but not perceive this quite plainly -- only see it by halve in a confused way -- the laity sometimes suffer in peace and pocket , with a bad grace , and do grumble very much . then this respectability of be brotch into powerful play against they . " repeal this statute , my good sir ? " say to a smarting client . " repeal it , my dear sir ? never , with my consent . alter this law , sir , and what will be the effect of you rash proceed on a class of practitioner very worthily represent , allow I to say to you , by the opposite attorney in the case , ? , that class of practitioner would be sweep from the face of the earth . now you can not afford -- I will say , the social system can not afford -- to lose a order of man like . diligent , persever , steady , acute in business . my dear sir , I understand you present feeling against the exist state of thing , which I grant to be a little hard in you case ; but I can never raise my voice for the demolition of a class of man like . " the respectability of have even be cite with crushing effect before committee , as in the follow blue minute of a distinguished attorney 's evidence . " question ( number five hundred and seventeen thousand eight hundred and sixty - nine ) : if I understand you , these form of practice indisputably occasion delay ? answer : yes , some delay . question : and great expense ? answer : most assuredly they can not be go through for nothing . question : and unspeakable vexation ? answer : I be not prepared to say that . they have never give I any vexation ; quite the contrary . question : but you think that they abolition would damage a class of practitioner ? answer : I have no doubt of it . question : can you instance any type of that class ? answer : yes . I would unhesitatingly mention . he would be ruin . question : be consider , in the profession , a respectable man ? answer :" --which prove fatal to the inquiry for ten year -- " be consider , in the profession , a most respectable man . " so in familiar conversation , private authority no less disinterested will remark that they do not know what this age be come to , that we be plunge down precipice , that now here be something else gone , that these change be death to people like -- a man of undoubted respectability , with a father in the of , and three daughters at home . take a few step more in this direction , say they , and what be to become of Vholes 's father ? be he to perish ? and of 's daughter ? be they to be shirt -maker , or governess ? as though , and he relation be minor cannibal chiefs and it be propose to
to abolish cannibalism , indignant champion be to put the case thus : make man - eat unlawful , and you starve the Vholeses ! in a word , , with he three daughter and he father in the of , be continually do duty , like a piece of timber , to shore up some decay foundation that have become a pitfall and a nuisance . and with a great many people in a great many instance , the question be never one of a change from wrong to right ( which be quite a extraneous consideration ) , but be always one of injury or advantage to that eminently respectable legion , Vholes . the Chancellor be , within these ten minute , " up " for the long vacation . , and he young client , and several blue bag hastily stuff out of all regularity of form , as the larger sort of serpent be in they first gorge state , have return to the official den . , quiet and unmoved , as a man of so much respectability ought to be , take off he close black glove as if he be skin he hand , lifts off he tight hat as if he be scalp himself , and sit down at he desk . the client throw he hat and glove upon the ground -- toss they anywhere , without look after they or car where they go ; fling himself into a chair , half sighing and half groan ; rest he aching head upon he hand and look the portrait of young despair . " again nothing do ! " say . " nothing , nothing do ! " " do not say nothing do , sir , " return the placid Vhole . " that be scarcely fair , sir , scarcely fair ! " " why , what be do ? " say , turn gloomily upon he . " that may not be the whole question , " return Vhole , " the question may branch off into what be do , what be do ? " " and what be do ? " ask the moody client . Vholes , sit with he arm on the desk , quietly bring the tip of he five right finger to meet the tip of he five left finger , and quietly separa they again , and fixedly and slowly look at he client , reply , " a good deal be do , sir . we have put we shoulders to the wheel , , and the wheel be go round . " " yes , with on it . how be I to get through the next four or five accursed month ? " exclaim the young man , rise from he chair and walk about the room . " , " return Vhole , follow he close with he eye wherever he go , " you spirit be hasty , and I be sorry for it on you account . excuse I if I recommend you not to chafe so much , not to be so impetuous , not to wear yourself out so . you should have more patience . you should sustain yourself better . " " I ink to imitate you , in fact , ? " say , sit down again with a impatient laugh and beat the 's tattoo with he boot on the patternless carpet . " , " return Vhole , always look at the client as if he be make a linger meal of he with he eye as well as with he professional appetite . " , " return Vholes with he inward manner of speech and he bloodless quietude , " I should not have have the presumption to propose myself as a model for you imitation or any man 's . let I but leave the good name to my three daughter , and that be enough for I ; I be not a self - seeker . but since you mention I so pointedly , I will acknowledge that I should like to impart to you a little of my -- come , sir , you be dispose to call it insensibility , and I be sure I have no objection -- say insensibility -- a little of my insensibility . " " , " explain the client , somewhat abash , " I have no intention to accuse you of insensibility . " " I think you have , sir , without know it , " return the equable Vhole . " very naturally . it be my duty to attend to you interests with a cool head , and I can quite understand that to you excited feeling I may appear , at such time as the present , insensible . my daughter may know I better ; my a father may know I better . but they have know I much longer than you have , and the confiding eye of affection be not the distrustful eye of business . not that I complain , sir , of the eye of business be distrustful ; quite the contrary . in attend to you interest , I wish to have all possible check upon I ; it be right that I should have they ; I court inquiry . but you interests demand that I should be cool and methodical , ; and I can not be otherwise -- no , sir , not even to please you . " , after glance at the official cat who be patiently watch a mouse 's hole , fix he charme gaze again on he young client and proceed in he buttoned - up , half - audible voice as if there be a unclean spirit in he that will neither come out nor speak out , " what be you to do , sir ,
, you inquire , during the vacation . I should hope you gentleman of the army may find many means of amusing yourselves if you give you mind to it . if you have ask I what I be to do during the vacation , I could have answer you more readily . I be to attend to you interest . I be to be find here , day by day , attend to you interest . that be my duty , , and term - time or vacation make no difference to I . if you wish to consult I as to you interest , you will find I here at all time alike . other professional man go out of town . I do not . not that I blame they for go ; I merely say I do not go . this desk be you rock , sir ! " give it a rap , and it sound as hollow as a coffin . not to , though . there be encouragement in the sound to he . perhaps know there be . " I be perfectly aware , , " say , more familiarly and good - humouredly , " that you be the most reliable fellow in the world and that to have to do with you be to have to do with a man of business who be not to be hoodwink . but put yourself in my case , drag on this dislocated life , sink deeper and deeper into difficulty every day , continually hope and continually disappointed , conscious of change upon change for the worse in myself , and of no change for the better in anything else , and you will find it a dark - look case sometimes , as I do . " " you know , " say , " that I never give hope , sir . I tell you from the first , , that I never give hope . particularly in a case like this , where the greater part of the cost come out of the estate , I should not be considerate of my good name if I give hope . it might seem as if cost be my object . still , when you say there be no change for the better , I must , as a bare matter of fact , deny that . " " aye ? " return , brighten . " but how do you make it out ? " " , you be represent by -- " " you say just now -- a rock . " " yes , sir , " say , gently shak he head and rapp the hollow desk , with a sound as if ash be fall on ash , and dust on dust , " a rock . that be something . you be separately represent , and no longer hide and lose in the interest of other . that be something . the suit do not sleep ; we wake it up , we air it , we walk it about . that be something . it be not all , in fact as well as in name . that be something . nobody have it all he own way now , sir . and that be something , surely . " , he face flush suddenly , strike the desk with he clenched hand . " ! if any man have tell I when I first go to 's house that he be anything but the disinterested friend he seem -- that he be what he have gradually turn out to be -- I could have find no word strong enough to repel the slander ; I could not have defend he too ardently . so little do I know of the world ! whereas now I do declare to you that he become to I the embodiment of the suit ; that in place of its be a abstraction , it be ; that the more I suffer , the more indignant I be with he ; that every new delay and every new disappointment be only a new injury from 's hand . " " no , no , " say Vholes . " do not say so . we ought to have patience , all of we . besides , I never disparage , sir . I never disparage . " " , " return the angry client . " you know as well as I that he would have strangle the suit if he could . " " he be not active in it , " admit with a appearance of reluctance . " he certainly be not active in it . but however , but however , he might have have amiable intentions . who can read the heart , " " you can , " return . " I , c.? " " well enough to know what he intention were . be or be not we interest conflict ? tell -- I -- that ! " say , accompany he last three word with three rap on he rock of trust . " , " return Vhole , immovable in attitude and never wink he hungry eye , " I should be want in my duty as you professional adviser , I should be depart from my fidelity to you interest , if I represent those interest as identical with the interest of . they be no such thing , sir . I never impute motive ; I both have and be a father , and I never impute motive . but I must not shrink from a professional duty , even if it sow dissension in family . I understand you to be now consult I professionally as to you interest ? you be so ? I reply , then , they be not identical with those of
of . " " of course they be not ! " cry . " you find that out long ago . " " , " return Vhole , " I wish to say no more of any third party than be necessary . I wish to leave my good name unsullied , together with any little property of which I may become possess through industry and perseverance , to my daughter , , and . I also desire to live in amity with my professional breth . when do I the honour , sir -- I will not say the very high honour , for I never stoop to flattery -- of bring we together in this room , I mention to you that I could offer no opinion or advice as to you interest while those interest be entrust to another member of the profession . and I speak in such term as I be bound to speak of and 's office , which stand high . you , sir , think fit to withdraw you interests from that keep nevertheless and to offer they to I . you bring they with clean hand , sir , and I accept they with clean hand . those interest be now paramount in this office . my digestive functions , as you may have hear I mention , be not in a good state , and rest might improve they ; but I shall not rest , sir , while I be you representative . whenever you want I , you will find I here . Summon I anywhere , and I will come . during the long vacation , sir , I shall devote my leisure to study you interest more and more closely and to make arrangement for move heaven and earth ( include , of course , the ) after term ; and when I ultimately congratulate you , sir , " say with the severity of a determined man , " when I ultimately congratulate you , sir , with all my heart , on you accession to fortune -- which , but that I never give hope , I might say something further about -- you will owe I nothing beyond whatever little balance may be then outstanding of the cost as between solicitor and client not include in the taxed cost allow out of the estate . I pretend to no claim upon you , , but for the zealous and active discharge -- not the languid and routine discharge , sir : that much credit I stipulate for -- of my professional duty . my duty prosperously end , all between we be end . " Vhole finally add , by way of rider to this declaration of he principle , that as be about to rejoin he regiment , perhaps will favour he with a order on he agent for twenty pound on account . " for there have be many little consultation and attendance of late , sir , " observe Vhole , turn over the leaf of he diary , " and these thing mount up , and I do not profess to be a man of capital . when we first enter on we present relation I state to you openly -- it be a principle of mine that there never can be too much openness between solicitor and client -- that I be not a man of capital and that if capital be you object you have better leave you papers in 's office . no , , you will find none of the advantages or disadvantage of capital here , sir . this , " Vholes give the desk one hollow blow again , " be you rock ; it pretend to be nothing more . " the client , with he dejection insensibly relieve and he vague hope rekindle , take pen and ink and write the draft , not without perplex consideration and calculation of the date it may bear , imply scant effect in the agent 's hand . all the while , Vholes , buttone up in body and mind , look at he attentively . all the while , 's official cat watch the mouse 's hole . Lastly , the client , shak hand , beseech , for heaven 's sake and earth 's sake , to do he utmost to " pull he through " the court of . , who never give hope , lay he palm upon the client 's shoulder and answer with a smile , " always here , sir . personally , or by letter , you will always find I here , sir , with my shoulder to the wheel . " thus they part , and , leave alone , employ himself in carry sundry little matter out of he diary into he draft bill book for the ultimate behoof of he three daughter . so might a industrious fox or bear make up he account of chicken or stray traveller with a eye to he cub , not to disparage by that word the three raw-visaged , lank , and button - up maiden who dwell with the parent Vhole in a earthy cottage situate in a damp garden at . , emerge from the heavy shade of 's into the sunshine of -- for there happen to be sunshine there to - day -- walk thoughtfully on , and turn into 's , and pass under the shadow of the 's tree . on many such lounger have the speckled shadow of those tree often fall ; on the like bent head , the bitten nail , the lowering eye , the lingering step , the purposeless and dreamy air , the good consuming and consum , the life turn sour . this lounger be not shabby yet , but that may come . , which know no wisdom but in precedent ,
, be very rich in such precedent ; and why should one be different from ten thousand ? yet the time be so short since he depreciation begin that as he saunter away , reluctant to leave the spot for some long month together , though he hate it , himself may feel he own case as if it be a start one . while he heart be heavy with corroding care , suspense , distrust , and doubt , it may have room for some sorrowful wonder when he recall how different he first visit there , how different he , how different all the colour of he mind . but injustice breed injustice ; the fighting with shadows and be defeat by they necessitate the setting up of substance to combat ; from the impalpable suit which no man alive can understand , the time for that be long go by , it have become a gloomy relief to turn to the palpable figure of the friend who would have save he from this ruin and make he he enemy . have tell Vholes the truth . be he in a harden or a soften mood , he still lay he injury equally at that door ; he be thwart , in that quarter , of a set purpose , and that purpose could only originate in the one subject that be resolve he existence into itself ; besides , it be a justification to he in he own eye to have a embodied antagonist and oppressor . be a monster in all this , or would be find rich in such precedent too if they could be get for citation from the ? two pair of eyes not unuse to such people look after he , as , bite he nail and brooding , he cross the square and be swallow up by the shadow of the southern gateway . and be the possessor of those eyes , and they have be lean in conversation against the low stone parapet under the tree . he pass close by they , see nothing but the ground . " , " say , adjust he whisker , " there be combustion go on there ! it be not a case of spontaneous , but it be smoulder combustion it be . " " ah ! " say . " he would not keep out of , and I suppose he be over head and ear in debt . I never know much of he . he be as high as the monument when he be on trial at we place . a good riddance to I , whether as clerk or client ! well , , that as I be mention be what they be up to . " , refold he arm , resettle himself against the parapet , as resume a conversation of interest . " they be still up to it , sir , " say , " still take stock , still examine papers , still go over the heap and heap of rubbish . at this rate they will be at it these seven year . " " and be help ? " " small leave we at a week 's notice . he grandfather 's business be too much for the old gentleman and he could better himself by undertake it . there have be a coolness between myself and Small on account of he be so close . but he say you and I begin it , and as he have I there -- for we do -- I put we acquaintance on the old footing . that be how I come to know what they be up to . " " you have not look in at all ? " " Tony , " say , a little disconcerted , " to be unreserved with you , I do not greatly relish the house , except in you company , and therefore I have not ; and therefore I propose this little appointment for we fetching away you thing . there go the hour by the clock ! " -- become mysteriously and tenderly eloquent --" it be necessary that I should impress upon you mind once more that circumstance over which I have no control have make a melancholy alteration in my most cherish plan and in that unrequited image which I formerly mention to you as a friend . that image be shatte , and that idol be laid low . my only wish now in connexion with the object which I have a idea of carry out in the court with you aid as a friend be to let them alone and bury th'ey in . do you think it possible , do you think it at all likely ( I put it to you , , as a friend ) , from you knowledge of that capricious and deep old character who fall a prey to the -- spontaneous element , do you , , think it at all likely that on second thought he put those letter away anywhere , after you see he alive , and that they be not destroy that night ? " reflect for some time . Shake he head . Decidedly think not . " Tony , " say as they walk towards the court , " once again understand I , as a friend . without enter into further explanation , I may repeat that the idol be down . I have no purpose to serve now but burial in . to that I have pledge myself . I owe it to myself , and I owe it to the shatte image , as also to the circumstance over which I have no control . if you be to express to I by a gesture , by a wink , that you see lie anywhere in you late lodging any papers
papers that so much as look like the papers in question , I would pitch they into the fire , sir , on my own responsibility . " nod . , much elevate in he own opinion by have deliver these observation , with a air in part forensic and in part romantic -- this gentleman have a passion for conduct anything in the form of a examination , or deliver anything in the form of a sum up or a speech -- accompany he friend with dignity to the court . never since it have be a court have it have such a Fortunatus ' purse of gossip as in the proceeding at the rag and bottle shop . regularly , every morning at eight , be the elder bring down to the corner and carry in , accompany by , , and ; and regularly , all day , do they all remain there until nine at night , solace by gipsy dinner , not abundant in quantity , from the cook 's shop , rummage and search , digge , delve , and diive among the treasure of the late lament . what those treasure be they keep so secret that the court be madden . in its delirium it imagine guineas pour out of tea - pots , crown - piece overflow punch - bowl , old chair and mattress stuff with of note . it possess itself of the sixpenny history ( with highly coloured folding frontispiece ) of and he sister , and also of , of , and transfer all the fact from those authentic narrative to . twice when the dustman be call in to carry off a cartload of old paper , ash , and break bottle , the whole court assemble and pry into the basket as they come forth . many time the two gentleman who write with the ravenous little pens on the tissue - paper be see prowl in the neighbourhood -- shy of each other , they late partnership be dissolve . the skilfully carry a vein of the prevailing interest through the Harmonic night . , in what be professionally know as " patter " allusion to the subject , be receive with loud applause ; and the same vocalist " gag " in the regular business like a man inspire . even , in the revive Caledonian melody of " we be a - Nodding , " point the sentiment that " the dog love bro " ( whatever the nature of that refreshment may be ) with such archness and such a turn of the head towards next door that she be immediately understood to mean love to find money , and be nightly honoured with a double encore . for all this , the court discover nothing ; and as and . Perkins now communicate to the late lodger whose appearance be the signal for a general rally , it be in one continual ferment to discover everything , and more . and , with every eye in the court 's head upon they , knock at the close door of the late lamented 's house , in a high state of popularity . but be contrary to the court 's expectation admit , they immediately become unpopular and be consider to mean no good . the shutter be more or less close all over the house , and the ground - floor be sufficiently dark to require candle . introduce into the back shop by Smallweed the younger , they , fresh from the sunlight , can at first see nothing save darkness and shadows ; but they gradually discern the elder seat in he chair upon the brink of a well or grave of waste - paper , the virtuous grope therein like a female sexton , and . Smallweed on the level ground in the vicinity snowed up in a heap of paper fragment , print , and manuscript which would appear to be the accumulated compliment that have be send fly at she in the course of the day . the whole party , small include , be blacken with dust and dirt and present a fiendish appearance not relieve by the general aspect of the room . there be more litter and lumber in it than of old , and it be dirtier if possible ; likewise , it be ghostly with trace of its dead inhabitant and even with he chalk write on the wall . on the entrance of visitor , and simultaneously fold they arm and stop in they research . " ! " croak the old gentleman . " how de do , gentlemen , how de do ! come to fetch you property , ? that be well , that be well . ! ! we should have be force to sell you up , sir , to pay you warehouse room if you have leave it here much longer . you feel quite at home here again , I dare say ? glad to see you , glad to see you ! " , thank he , cast a eye about . Guppy's eye follow 's eye . 's eye come back without any new intelligence in it . Guppy's eye come back and meet 's eye . that engage old gentleman be still murmur , like some wound - up instrument run down , " how de do , sir -- how de -- how --" and then have run down , he lapse into grinning silence , as start at see stand in the darkness opposite with he hand behind he . " so kind as to act as my solicitor , " say . " I be not the sort of client for a gentleman of such note , but he be so good ! " , slightly nudg he friend to take another look , make a shuffling
shuffling bow to , who return it with a easy nod . be look on as if he have nothing else to do and be rather amuse by the novelty . " a good deal of property here , sir , I should say , " observe to . " principally rag and rubbish , my dear friend ! Rag and rubbish ! I and and my granddaughter be endeavour to make out a inventory of what be worth anything to sell . but we have not come to much as yet ; we --have not -- come -- to -- hah ! " have run down again , while 's eye , attend by 's eye , have again go round the room and come back . " well , sir , " say . " we will not intrude any longer if you will allow we to go upstairs . " " anywhere , my dear sir , anywhere ! you be at home . make yourself so , pray ! " as they go upstairs , lift he eyebrow inquiringly and look at . shake he head . they find the old room very dull and dismal , with the ash of the fire that be burn on that memorable night yet in the discoloured grate . they have a great disinclination to touch any object , and carefully blow the dust from it first . be they desirous to prolong they visit , pack the few movable with all possible speed and never speak above a whisper . " look here , " say , recoiling . " here be that horrible cat come in ! " retreat behind a chair . " small tell I of she . she go leape and bounde and tear about that night like a dragon , and get out on the house - top , and roam about up there for a fortnight , and then come tumbl down the chimney very thin . do you ever see such a brute ? look as if she know all about it , do not she ? almost look as if she be . Shoohoo ! get out , you goblin ! " , in the doorway , with she tiger snarl from ear to ear and she club of a tail , show no intention of obey ; but stumbl over she , she spit at he rusty leg , and swear wrathfully , take she arch back upstairs . possibly to roam the house - top again and return by the chimney . " , " say , " could I have a word with you ? " be engage in collect the of from the wall and deposite those work of art in they old ignoble band - box . " , " he return , redden , " I wish to act with courtesy towards every member of the profession , and especially , I be sure , towards a member of it so well know as yourself -- I will truly add , sir , so distinguished as yourself . , , sir , I must stipulate that if you have any word with I , that word be speak in the presence of my friend . " " oh , indeed ? " say . " yes , sir . my reason be not of a personal nature at all , but they be amply sufficient for myself . " " no doubt , no doubt . " be as imperturbable as the hearthstone to which he have quietly walk . " the matter be not of that consequence that I need put you to the trouble of make any condition , . " he pause here to smile , and he smile be as dull and rusty as he pantaloon . " you be to be congratulate , ; you be a fortunate young man , sir . " " pretty well so , ; I do not complain . " " ? high friend , free admission to great house , and access to elegant lady ! why , , there be people in who would give they ear to be you . " , look as if he would give he own reddening and still redden ear to be one of those people at present instead of himself , reply , " Sir , if I attend to my profession and do what be right by and , my friend and acquaintance be of no consequence to they nor to any member of the profession , not except of the field . I be not under any obligation to explain myself further ; and with all respect for you , sir , and without offence -- I repeat , without offence -- " " oh , certainly ! " " -- I do not intend to do it . " " quite so , " say with a calm nod . " very good ; I see by these portrait that you take a strong interest in the fashionable great , sir ? " he address this to the astounde , who admit the soft impeachment . " a virtue in which few be deficient , " observe . he have be stand on the hearthstone with he back to the smoke chimney - piece , and now turn round with he glass to he eye . " who be this ? ' . ' ! a very good likeness in its way , but it want force of character . good day to you , gentleman ; good day ! " when he have walk out , , in a great perspiration , nerve himself to the hasty completion of the take down of the , conclude with . " Tony , " he say hurriedly to he astonished companion , " let we be quick in put the thing together and
and in get out of this place . it be in vain longer to conceal from you , , that between myself and one of the member of a swan - like aristocracy whom I now hold in my hand , there have be undivulged communication and association . the time might have be when I might have reveal it to you . it never will be more . it be due alike to the oath I have take , alike to the shatte idol , and alike to circumstance over which I have no control , that the whole should be bury in . I charge you as a friend , by the interest you have ever testify in the fashionable intelligence , and by any little advance with which I may have be able to accommodate you , so to bury it without a word of inquiry ! " this charge deliver in a state little short of forensic lunacy , while he friend show a dazed mind in he whole head of hair and even in he cultivate whisker . and have be in a dreadful state for some week . would go out , would not come in , and there be nobody in Great ( to speak of ) except and , there have be no government . it be a mercy that the hostile meeting between those two great man , which at one time seem inevitable , do not come off , because if both pistol have take effect , and and have kill each other , it be to be presume that must have wait to be govern until young Coodle and young Doodle , now in frock and long stocking , be grow up . this stupendous national calamity , however , be avert by 's make the timely discovery that if in the heat of debate he have say that he scorn and despise the whole ignoble career of , he have merely meant to say that party difference should never induce he to withhold from it the tribute of he warmest admiration ; while it as opportunely turn out , on the other hand , that have in he own bosom expressly book to go down to posterity as the mirror of virtue and honour . have be some weenks in the dismal strait of have no pilot ( as be well observe by ) to weather the storm ; and the marvellous part of the matter be that have not appear to care very much about it , but have go on eating and drink and marry and give in marriage as the old world do in the day before the flood . but know the danger , and know the danger , and all they follower and hanger - on have the clearest possible perception of the danger . at last have not only condescende to come in , but have do it handsomely , bring in with he all he nephew , all he male cousin , and all he brother - in - law . so there be hope for the old ship yet . have find that he must throw himself upon the country , chiefly in the form of sovereign and beer . in this metamorphose state he be available in a good many place simultaneously and can throw himself upon a considerable portion of the country at one time . be much occupy in pocketing in the form of sovereign , and swallow Doodle in the form of beer , and in swear herself black in the face that she do neither -- plainly to the advancement of she glory and morality -- the season come to a sudden end , through all the Doodleites and Coodleites disperse to assist in those religious exercis . , housekeeper at , foresee , though no instruction have yet come down , that the family may shortly be expect , together with a pretty large accession of cousin and other who can in any way assist the great constitutional work . and hence the stately old dame , take Time by the forelock , lead he up and down the staircase , and along the galleries and passage , and through the room , to witness before he grow any older that everything be ready , that floor be rub bright , carpet spread , curtain shake out , bed puffe and pat , still - room and kitchen clear for action -- all thing prepare as beseem the Dedlock dignity . this present summer evening , as the sun go down , the preparation be complete . and solemn the old house look , with so many appliance of habitation and with no inhabitant except the pictured form upon the wall . so do these come and go , a Dedlock in possession might have ruminate pass along ; so do they see this gallery hush and quiet , as I see it now ; so think , as I think , of the gap that they would make in this domain when they be go ; so find it , as I find it , difficult to believe that it could be without they ; so pass from my world , as I pass from theirs , now close the reverberat door ; so leave no blank to miss they , and so die . through some of the fiery window beautiful from without , and set , at this sunset hour , not in dull - grey stone but in a glorious house of gold , the light exclude at other window pour in rich , lavish , overflow like the summer plenty in the land . then do the freeze Dedlock thaw . strange movement come upon they feature as the shadows of leave play there . a dense justice in a corner be beguil into a wink . a staring baronet
baronet , with a truncheon , get s a dimple in he ching . down into the bosom of a stony shepherdess there steal a fleck of light and warmth that would have do it good a hundred year ago . one ancestress of , in high - heel shoe , very like she -- cast the shadow of that virgin event before she full two century -- shoot out into a halo and become a saint . a maid of honour of the court of the , with large round eye ( and other charms to correspond ) , seem to bathe in glow water , and it ripple as it glow . but the fire of the sun be die . even now the floor be dusky , and shadow slowly mount the wall , bring the Dedlocks down like age and death . and now , upon my 's picture over the great chimney - piece , a weird shade fall from some old tree , that turn it pale , and flutter it , and look as if a great arm hold a veil or hood , watch a opportunity to draw it over she . Higher and darker rise shadow on the wall -- now a red gloom on the ceiling -- now the fire be out . all that prospect , which from the terrace look so near , have move solemnly away and change -- not the first nor the last of beautiful thing that look so near and will so change -- into a distant phantom . light mist arise , and the dew fall , and all the sweet scent in the garden be heavy in the air . now the woods settle into great mass as if they be each one profound tree . and now the moon rise to separate they , and to glimmer here and there in horizontal line behind they stem , and to make the avenue a pavement of light among high cathedral arch fantastically break . now the moon be high ; and the great house , need habitation more than ever , be like a body without life . now it be even awful , steal through it , to think of the live people who have sleep in the solitary bedrooms , to say nothing of the dead . now be the time for shadow , when every corner be a cavern and every downward step a pit , when the stained glass be reflect in pale and fad hue upon the floor , when anything and everything can be make of the heavy staircase beam except they own proper shape , when the armour have dull light upon it not easily to be distinguished from stealthy movement , and when barred helmet be frightfully suggestive of head inside . but of all the shadow in , the shadow in the long drawing - room upon my 's picture be the first to come , the last to be disturb . at this hour and by this light it change into threatening hand raise up and menace the handsome face with every breath that stir . " she be not well , ma 'am , " say a groom in 's audience - chamber . " my not well ! what be the matter ? " " why , my have be but poorly , ma 'am , since she be last here -- I do not mean with the family , ma 'am , but when she be here as a bird of passage like . my Lady have not be out much , for she , and have keep she room a good deal . " " , , " rejoin the housekeeper with proud complacency , " will set my lady up ! there be no finer air and no healthier soil in the world ! " may have he own personal opinion on this subject , probably hint they in he manner of smoothing he sleek head from the nape of he neck to he temple , but he forbear to express they further and retire to the servants 's hall to regale on cold meat - pie and ale . this groom be the pilot - fish before the nobler shark . next evening , down come and my lady with they largest retinue , and down come the cousin and other from all the point of the compass . Thenceforth for some week backward and forward rush mysterious man with no name , who fly about all those particular part of the country on which be at present throw himself in a auriferous and malty shower , but who be merely person of a restless disposition and never do anything anywhere . on these national occasion find the cousin useful . a better man than the to meet the hunt at dinner , there could not possibly be . better get up gentleman than the other cousins to ride over to poll - boot and husting here and there , and show themselves on the side of , it would be hard to find . be a little dim , but she be of the true descent ; and there be many who appreciate she sprightly conversation , she french conundrums so old as to have become in the cycle of time almost new again , the honour of take the fair Dedlock in to dinner , or even the privilege of she hand in the dance . on these national occasion dancing may be a patriotic service , and be constantly see hoppe about for the good of a ungrateful and unpensioning country . my Lady take no great pain to entertain the numerous guest , and be still unwell , rarely appear until late in the day . but at all the dismal dinner , leae lunch , basilisk ball , and other melancholy pageant
pageant , she mere appearance be a relief . as to , he conceive it utterly impossible that anything can be want , in any direction , by any one who have the good fortune to be receive under that roof ; and in a state of sublime satisfaction , he move among the company , a magnificent refrigerator . Daily the cousins trot through dust and canter over roadside turf , away to husting and polling - boot ( with leather glove and hunting - whip for the county and kid glove and riding - cane for the borough ) , and daily bring back report on which hold forth after dinner . Daily the restless man who have no occupation in life present the appearance of be rather busy . Daily Volumnia have a little cousinly talk with on the state of the nation , from which be dispose to conclude that be a more reflecting woman than he have think she . " how be we get on ? " say , clasp she hand . " be we safe ? " the mighty business be nearly over by this time , and will throw himself off the country in a few day more . have just appear in the long drawing - room after dinner , a bright particular star surround by clouds of cousin . " , " reply , who have a list in he hand , " we be do tolerably . " " only tolerably ! " although it be summer weather , always have he own particular fire in the evening . he take he usual screen seat near it and repeat with much firmness and a little displeasure , as who should say , I be not a common man , and when I say tolerably , it must not be understand as a common expression , " Volumnia , we be do tolerably . " " at least there be no opposition to you , " assert with confidence . " no , . this distracted country have lose it be sense in many respects , I grieve to say , but -- " " it be not so mad as that . I be glad to hear it ! " 's finish the sentence restore she to favour . , with a gracious inclination of he head , seem to say to himself , " a sensible woman this , on the whole , though occasionally precipitate . " in fact , as to this question of opposition , the fair 's observation be superfluous , on these occasion always deliver in he own candidateship , as a kind of handsome wholesale order to be promptly execute . two other little seat that belong to he he treat as retail order of less importance , merely send down the man and signify to the tradespeople , " you will have the goodness to make these material into two member of parliament and to send they home when done . " " I regret to say , , that in many place the people have show a bad spirit , and that this opposition to the government have be of a most determined and most implacable description . " " w -r- retch ! " say . " even , " proceed , glance at the circumjacent cousins on sofa and ottoman , " even in many -- in fact , in most -- of those place in which the government have carry it against a faction -- " ( note , by the way , that the be always a faction with the , and that the occupy exactly the same position towards the Coodleite . ) " -- even in they I be shocked , for the credit of , to be constrain to inform you that the party have not triumph without be put to a enormous expense . hundred , " say , eye the cousin with increase dignity and swell indignation , " hundred of thousand of pound ! " if have a fault , it be the fault of be a trifle too innocent , see that the innocence which would go extremely well with a sash and tucker be a little out of keep with the rouge and pearl necklace . , impell by innocence , she ask , " what for ? " " , " remonstrate with he utmost severity . " ! " " no , no , I do not mean what for , " cry with she favourite little scream . " how stupid I be ! I mean what a pity ! " " I be glad , " return , " that you do mean what a pity . " hasten to express she opinion that the shocking people ought to be try as traitor and make to support the party . " I be glad , , " repeat , unmindful of these mollify sentiment , " that you do mean what a pity . it be disgraceful to the elector . but as you , though inadvertently and without intend so unreasonable a question , ask I ' what for ? ' let I reply to you . for necessary expensis . and I trust to you good sense , , not to pursue the subject , here or elsewhere . " feel it incumbent on he to observe a crush aspect towards because it be whisper abroad that these necessary expense will , in some two hundred election petition , be unpleasantly connect with the word bribery , and because some graceless joker have consequently suggest the omission from the service of the ordinary supplication in behalf of the High Court of parliament and have recommend instead that the prayer of the congregation be request for six hundred and fifty - eight gentleman in a very unhealthy state . " I suppose ,
, " observe , have take a little time to recover she spirits after she late castigation , " I suppose have be work to death . " " I do not know , " say , open he eye , " why should be work to death . I do not know what 's engagement may be . he be not a candidate . " have think he might have be employ . could desire to know by whom , and what for . , abash again , suggest , by somebody -- to advise and make arrangement . be not aware that any client of have be in need of he assistance . , seat at a open window with she arm upon its cushioned ledge and look out at the evening shadow fall on the park , have seem to attend since the lawyer 's name be mention . a languid cousin with a moustache in a state of extreme debility now observe from he couch that man tell he ya'as 'dy that have go down t ' that iron place t ' give legal ' pinion ' bout something , and that contest be over t ' day , ' twould be highly jawlly thing if should ' pear with news that man be floor . mercury in attendance with coffee inform , hereupon , that have arrive and be take dinner . my Lady turn she head inward for the moment , then look out again as before . be charme to hear that she delight be come . he be so original , such a stolid creature , such a immense being for know all sort of thing and never tell they ! be persuade that he must be a . be sure he be at the head of a lodge , and wear short apron , and be make a perfect idol of with candlestick and trowel . these lively remark the fair Dedlock deliver in she youthful manner , while make a purse . " he have not be here once , " she add , " since I come . I really have some thought of breaking my heart for the inconstant creature . I have almost make up my mind that he be dead . " it may be the gather gloom of evening , or it may be the darker gloom within herself , but a shade be on my 's face , as if she think , " I would he be ! " " , " say , " be always welcome here and always discreet wheresoever he be . a very valuable person , and deservedly respecte . " the debilitate cousin suppose he be " ' normously rich fler . " " he have a stake in the country , " say , " I have no doubt . he be , of course , handsomely pay , and he associate almost on a footing of equality with the highest society . " everybody start . for a gun be fire close by . " good gracious , what be that ? " cry with she little withered scream . " a rat , " say my . " and they have shoot he . " , follow by with lamps and candle . " no , no , " say , " I think not . my , do you object to the twilight ? " on the contrary , my prefer it . " ? " oh ! nothing be so delicious to as to sit and talk in the dark . " then take they away , " say . " Tulkinghorn , I beg you pardon . how do you do ? " with he usual leisurely ease advance , render he pass homage to my , shake 's hand , and subside into the chair proper to he when he have anything to communicate , on the opposite side of the 's little newspaper - table . be apprehensive that my , not be very well , will take cold at that open window . my Lady be oblige to he , but would rather sit there for the air . rise , adjust she scarf about she , and return to he seat . in the meanwhile take a pinch of snuff . " now , " say . " how have that contest gone ? " " oh , hollow from the beginning . not a chance . they have brotch in both they people . you be beaten out of all reason . three to one . " it be a part of 's policy and mastery to have no political opinion ; indeed , no opinion . therefore he say " you " be beaten , and not " we . " be majestically wroth . never hear of such a thing . ' the debilitate cousin hold that it be sort of thing that be sure tapn slong vote --giv'n -- . " it be the place , you know , " go on to say in the fast - increase darkness when there be silence again , " where they want to put up 's son . " " a proposal which , as you correctly inform I at the time , he have the become taste and perception , " observe , " to decline . I can not say that I by any mean approve of the sentiment express by when he be here for some half - hour in this room , but there be a sense of propriety in he decision which I be glad to acknowledge . " " ! " say . " it do not prevent he from be very active in this election , though . " be distinctly hear to gasp before speak . " do I understand you ? do you say that have be
be very active in this election ? " " Uncommonly active . " " -- " " oh , dear yes , against you . he be a very good speaker . plain and emphatic . he make a damaging effect , and have great influence . in the business part of the proceeding he carry all before he . " it be evident to the whole company , though nobody can see he , that be star majestically . " and he be much assist , " say as a wind - up , " by he son . " " by he son , sir ? " repeat with awful politeness . " by he son . " " the son who wish to marry the young woman in my 's service ? " " that son . he have but one . " " then upon my honour , " say after a terrific pause during which he have be hear to snort and feel to stare , " then upon my honour , upon my life , upon my reputation and principle , the floodgate of society be burst open , and the water have -- a -- obliterate the landmarks of the framework of the cohesion by which thing be hold together ! " General burst of cousinly indignation . think it be really high time , you know , for somebody in power to step in and do something strong . Debilitate cousin think -- country 's go -- Dayvle -- steeple - chase pace . " I beg , " say in a breathless condition , " that we may not comment further on this circumstance . comment be superfluous . my lady , let I suggest in reference to that young woman -- " " I have no intention , " observe my from she window in a low but decide tone , " of part with she . " " that be not my meaning , " return . " I be glad to hear you say so . I would suggest that as you think she worthy of you patronage , you should exert you influence to keep she from these dangerous hand . you might show she what violence would be do in such association to she duty and principle , and you might preserve she for a better fate . you might point out to she that she probably would , in good time , find a husband at by whom she would not be -- " add , after a moment 's consideration , " drag from the altar of she forefather . " these remark he offer with he unvarying politeness and deference when he address himself to he wife . she merely move she head in reply . the moon be rise , and where she sit there be a little stream of could pale light , in which she head be see . " it be worthy of remark , " say , " however , that these people be , in they way , very proud . " " ? " doubt he hearing . " I should not be surprise if they all voluntarily abandon the girl -- yes , lover and all -- instead of she abandon they , suppose she remain at under such circumstance . " " well ! " say tremulously . " well ! you should know , . you have be among they . " " really , , " return the lawyer , " I state the fact . why , I could tell you a story -- with 's permission . " she head concede it , and be enchant . a story ! oh , he be go to tell something at last ! a ghost in it , hope ? " no . Real flesh and blood . " stop for a instant and repeat with some little emphasis graft upon he usual monotony , " real flesh and blood , . , these particular have only lately become known to I . they be very brief . they exemplify what I have say . I suppress name for the present . will not think I ill - breed , I hope ? " by the light of the fire , which be low , he can be see look towards the moonlight . by the light of the can be see , perfectly still . " a townsman of this . Rouncewell , a man in exactly parallel circumstance as I be tell , have the good fortune to have a daughter who attract the notice of a great lady . I speak of really a great lady , not merely great to he , but marry to a gentleman of you condition , . " condescendingly say , " yes , , " imply that then she must have appear of very considerable moral dimension indeed in the eyes of a iron -master . " the lady be wealthy and beautiful , and have a liking for the girl , and treat she with great kindness , and keep she always near she . now this lady preserve a secret under all she greatness , which she have preserve for many year . in fact , she have in early life be engage to marry a young rake -- he be a captain in the army -- nothing connect with whom come to any good . she never do marry he , but she give birth to a child of which he be the father . " by the light of the fire he can be see look towards the moonlight . by the moonlight , can be see in profile , perfectly still . " the in the army be dead , she believe herself safe ; but a train of circumstance with which I need not trouble you lead
lead to discovery . as I receive the story , they begin in a imprudence on she own part one day when she be take by surprise , which show how difficult it be for the firmest of we ( she be very firm ) to be always guard . there be great domestic trouble and amazement , you may suppose ; I leave you to imagine , , the husband 's grief . but that be not the present point . when 's townsman heard of the disclosure , he no more allow the girl to be patronize and honoure than he would have suffer she to be trodden underfoot before he eye . be he pride , that he indignantly take she away , as if from reproach and disgrace . he have no sense of the honour do he and he daughter by the lady 's condescension ; not the least . he resent the girl 's position , as if the lady have be the commonest of commoner . that be the story . I hope will excuse its painful nature . " there be various opinion on the merit , more or less conflict with 's . that fair young creature can not believe there ever be any such lady and reject the whole history on the threshold . the majority incline to the debilitate cousin 's sentiment , which be in few word --" no business -- 's fernal townsman . " generally refer back in he mind to and arrange a sequence of event on a plan of he own . there be not much conversation in all , for late hour have be keep at since the necessary expense elsewhere begin , and this be the first night in many on which the family have be alone . it be past ten when beg to ring for candle . then the stream of moonlight have swell into a lake , and then for the first time move , and rise , and come forward to a table for a glass of water . Wink cousin , bat - like in the candle glare , crowd round to give it ; ( always ready for something better if procurable ) take another , a very mild sip of which content she ; , graceful , self - possess , look after by admiring eye , pass away slowly down the long perspective by the side of that nymph , not at all improve she as a question of contrast . in 's arrive in he turret - room a little breathe by the journey up , though leisurely perform . there be a expression on he face as if he have discharge he mind of some grave matter and be , in he close way , satisfied . to say of a man so severely and strictly self - repress that he be triumphant would be to do he as great a injustice as to suppose he trouble with love or sentiment or any romantic weakness . he be sedately satisfied . perhaps there be a rather increase sense of power upon he as he loosely grasp one of he veinous wrist with he other hand and hold it behind he back walk noiselessly up and down . there be a capacious writing - table in the room on which be a pretty large accumulation of papers . the green lamp be lighte , he reading - glass lie upon the desk , the easy - chair be wheel up to it , and it would seem as though he have intend to bestow a hour or so upon these claim on he attention before go to bed . but he happen not to be in a business mind . after a glance at the document await he notice -- with he head bend low over the table , the old man 's sight for print or writing be defective at night -- he open the french window and step out upon the lead . there he again walk slowly up and down in the same attitude , subside , if a man so cool may have any need to subside , from the story he have related downstair . the time be once when men as know as would walk on turret - top in the starlight and look up into the sky to read they fortune there . host of star be visible to - night , though they brilliancy be eclipse by the splendour of the moon . if he be seek he own star as he methodically turn and turn upon the lead , it should be but a pale one to be so rustily represent below . if he be trace out he destiny , that may be write in other character nearer to he hand . as he pace the lead with he eye most probably as high above he thought as they be high above the earth , he be suddenly stop in pass the window by two eye that meet he own . the ceiling of he room be rather low ; and the upper part of the door , which be opposite the window , be of glass . there be a inner baize door , too , but the night be warm he do not close it when he come upstairs . these eyes that meet he own be look in through the glass from the corridor outside . he know they well . the blood have not flush into he face so suddenly and redly for many a long year as when he recognize . he step into the room , and she come in too , close both the door behind she . there be a wild disturbance -- be it fear or anger ?-- in she eye . in she carriage and all else she look as she look downstairs two
two hour ago . be it fear or be it anger now ? he can not be sure . both might be as pale , both as intent . " ? " she do not speak at first , nor even when she have slowly drop into the easy - chair by the table . they look at each other , like two picture . " why have you tell my story to so many person ? " " , it be necessary for I to inform you that I know it . " " how long have you know it ? " " I have suspect it a long while -- fully know it a little while . " " months ? " " day . " he stand before she with one hand on a chair - back and the other in he old - fashioned waistcoat and shirt - frill , exactly as he have stand before she at any time since she marriage . the same formal politeness , the same compose deference that might as well be defiance ; the whole man the same dark , cold object , at the same distance , which nothing have ever diminish . " be this true concern the poor girl ? " he slightly incline and advance he head as not quite understand the question . " you know what you relate . be it true ? do she friend know my story also ? be it the town - talk yet ? be it chalk upon the wall and cry in the street ? " so ! , and fear , and shame . all three contending . what power this woman have to keep these raging passion down ! 's thought be take such form as he look at she , with he rag grey eyebrow a hair 's breadth more contract than usual under she gaze . " no , . that be a hypothetical case , arise out of 's unconsciously carry the matter with so high a hand . but it would be a real case if they know -- what we know . " " then they do not know it yet ? " " no . " " can I save the poor girl from injury before they know it ? " " really , , " reply , " I can not give a satisfactory opinion on that point . " and he think , with the interest of attentive curiosity , as he watch the struggle in she breast , " the power and force of this woman be astonish ! " " Sir , " she say , for the moment oblige to set she lip with all the energy she have , that she may speak distinctly , " I will make it plainer . I do not dispute you hypothetical case . I anticipate it , and feel its truth as strongly as you can do , when I see here . I know very well that if he could have have the power of see I as I be , he would consider the poor girl tarnish by have for a moment be , although most innocently , the subject of my great and distinguished patronage . but I have a interest in she , or I should rather say -- no longer belong to this place -- I have , and if you can find so much consideration for the woman under you foot as to remember that , she will be very sensible of you mercy . " Tulkinghorn , profoundly attentive , throw this off with a shrug of self - depreciation and contract he eyebrow a little more . " you have prepare I for my exposure , and I thank you for that too . be there anything that you require of I ? be there any claim that I can release or any charge or trouble that I can spare my husband in obtain this release by certify to the exactness of you discovery ? I will write anything , here and now , that you will dictate . I be ready to do it . " and she would do it , think the lawyer , watchful of the firm hand with which she take the pen ! " I will not trouble you , . pray spare yourself . " " I have long expect this , as you know . I neither wish to spare myself nor to be spare . you can do nothing worse to I than you have do . do what remain now . " " , there be nothing to be do . I will take leave to say a few word when you have finish . " they need for watch one another should be over now , but they do it all this time , and the star watch they both through the opened window . away in the moonlight lie the woodland field at rest , and the wide house be as quiet as the narrow one . the narrow one ! where be the digger and the spade , this peaceful night , destin to add the last great secret to the many secret of the existence ? be the man bear yet , be the spade wrotch yet ? curious question to consider , more curious perhaps not to consider , under the watch star upon a summer night . " of repentance or remorse or any feeling of mine , " presently proceed , " I say not a word . if I be not dumb , you would be deaf . let that go by . it be not for you ear . " he make a feint of offer a protest , but she sweep it away with she disdainful hand . " of other and very different thing I come to speak
speak to you . my jewel be all in they proper place of keeping . they will be find there . so , my dress . so , all the valuable I have . some ready money I have with I , please to say , but no large amount . I do not wear my own dress , in order that I might avoid observation . I go to be henceforward lost . make this know . I leave no other charge with you . " " excuse I , , " say , quite unmoved . " I be not sure that I understand you . you want -- " " to be lose to all here . I leave Wold to - night . I go this hour . " shake he head . she rise , but he , without move hand from chair - back or from old - fashioned waistcoat and shirt - frill , shake he head . " what ? not go as I have say ? " " no , , " he very calmly reply . " do you know the relief that my disappearance will be ? have you forget the stain and blot upon this place , and where it be , and who it be ? " " no , , not by any means . " without deign to rejoin , she move to the inner door and have it in she hand when he say to she , without himself stirr hand or foot or raise he voice , " , have the goodness to stop and hear I , or before you reach the staircase I shall ring the alarm - bell and rouse the house . and then I must speak out before every guest and servant , every man and woman , in it . " he have conquer she . she falter , tremble , and put she hand confusedly to she head . slight token these in any one else , but when so practise a eye as 's see indecision for a moment in such a subject , he thoroughly know it be value . he promptly say again , " Have the goodness to hear I , , " and motion to the chair from which she have risen . she hesitate , but he motion again , and she sit down . " the relation between we be of a unfortunate description , ; but as they be not of my making , I will not apologize for they . the position I hold in reference to be so well know to you that I can hardly imagine but that I must long have appear in you eye the natural person to make this discovery . " " Sir , " she return without look up from the ground on which she eye be now fix , " I have better have go . it would have be far better not to have detain I . I have no more to say . " " excuse I , , if I add a little more to hear . " " I wish to hear it at the window , then . I can not breathe where I be . " he jealous glance as she walk that way betrays a instant 's misgiving that she may have it in she thought to leap over , and dash against ledge and cornice , strike she life out upon the terrace below . but a moment 's observation of she figure as she stand in the window without any support , look out at the star -- not up -- gloomily out at those star which be low in the heaven , reassure he . by facing round as she have move , he stand a little behind she . " , I have not yet be able to come to a decision satisfactory to myself on the course before I . I be not clear what to do or how to act next . I must request you , in the meantime , to keep you secret as you have keep it so long and not to wonder that I keep it too . " he pause , but she make no reply . " pardon I , . this be a important subject . you be honour I with you attention ? " " I be . " " thank you . I might have know it from what I have see of you strength of character . I ought not to have ask the question , but I have the habit of make sure of my ground , step by step , as I go on . the sole consideration in this unhappy case be . " " then why , " she ask in a low voice and without remove she gloomy look from those distant star , " do you detain I in he house ? " " because he be the consideration . , I have no occasion to tell you that be a very proud man , that he reliance upon you be implicit , that the fall of that moon out of the sky would not amaze he more than you fall from you high position as he wife . " she breath quickly and heavily , but she stand as unflinchingly as ever he have see she in the midst of she grandest company . " I declare to you , , that with anything short of this case that I have , I would as soon have hope to root up by means of my own strength and my own hand the oldest tree on this estate as to shake you hold upon and 's trust and confidence in you . and even now , with this case , I hesitate . not that he could doubt ( that ,
, even with he , be impossible ) , but that nothing can prepare he for the blow . " " not my flight ? " she return . " think of it again . " " you flight , , would spread the whole truth , and a hundred time the whole truth , far and wide . it would be impossible to save the family credit for a day . it be not to be think of . " there be a quiet decision in he reply which admit of no remonstrance . " when I speak of be the sole consideration , he and the family credit be one . and the baronetcy , and , and he ancestor and he patrimony " -- very dry here -- " be , I need not say to you , , inseparable . " " go on ! " " therefore , " say , pursue he case in he jog - trot style , " I have much to consider . this be to be hush up if it can be . how can it be , if be drive out of he wit or lay upon a death - bed ? if I inflict this shock upon he to - morrow morning , how could the immediate change in he be account for ? what could have cause it ? what could have divide you ? , the wall - chalking and the street - crying would come on directly , and you be to remember that it would not affect you merely ( whom I can not at all consider in this business ) but you husband , , you husband . " he get plainer as he get on , but not a atom more emphatic or animated . " there be another point of view , " he continue , " in which the case present itself . be devote to you almost to infatuation . he might not be able to overcome that infatuation , even know what we know . I be put a extreme case , but it might be so . if so , it be better that he know nothing . better for common sense , better for he , better for I . I must take all this into account , and it combine to render a decision very difficult . " she stand look out at the same star without a word . they be begin to pale , and she look as if they coldness froze she . " my experience teach I , " say , who have by this time get he hand in he pocket and be go on in he business consideration of the matter like a machine . " my experience teach I , , that most of the people I know would do far better to leave marriage alone . it be at the bottom of three fourt of they troubles . so I think when marry , and so I always have think since . no more about that . I must now be guide by circumstance . in the meanwhile I must beg you to keep you own counsel , and I will keep mine . " " I be to drag my present life on , hold it be pain at you pleasure , day by day ? " she ask , still look at the distant sky . " yes , I be afraid so , . " " it be necessary , you think , that I should be so tie to the stake ? " " I be sure that what I recommend be necessary . " " I be to remain on this gaudy platform on which my miserable deception have be so long ac , and it be to fall beneath I when you give the signal ? " she say slowly . " not without notice , . I shall take no step without forewarn you . " she ask all she question as if she be repeat they from memory or call they over in she sleep . " we be to meet as usual ? " " precisely as usual , if you please . " " and I be to hide my guilt , as I have do so many year ? " " as you have do so many year . I should not have make that reference myself , , but I may now remind you that you secret can be no heavier to you than it be , and be no worse and no better than it be . I know it certainly , but I believe we have never wholly trust each other . " she stand absorb in the same frozen way for some little time before ask , " be there anything more to be sald to - night ? " " why , " return methodically as he softly rub he hand , " I should like to be assure of you acquiescence in my arrangement , . " " you may be assure of it . " " good . and I would wish in conclusion to remind you , as a business precaution , in case it should be necessary to recall the fact in any communication with , that throughout we interview I have expressly state my sole consideration to be 's feeling and honour and the family reputation . I should have be happy to have make a prominent consideration , too , if the case have admit of it ; but unfortunately it do not . " " I can attest you fidelity , sir . " both before and after say it she remain absorbed , but at length move , and turn , unshaken in she natural and acquire presence , towards the door . open both the door exactly as he would have do
do yesterday , or as he would have do ten year ago , and make he old - fashioned bow as she pass out . it be not a ordinary look that he receive from the handsome face as it go into the darkness , and it be not a ordinary movement , though a very slight one , that acknowledge he courtesy . but as he reflect when he be leave alone , the woman have be put no common constraint upon herself . he would know it all the better if he see the woman pace she own room with she hair wildly throw from she flng - back face , she hand clasp behind she head , she figure twist as if by pain . he would think so all the more if he see the woman thus hurrie up and down for hour , without fatigue , without intermission , follow by the faithful step upon the Ghost 's walk . but he shut out the now chill air , draw the window - curtain , go to bed , and fall asleep . and truly when the star go out and the wan day peeps into the turret - chamber , finde he at he oldest , he look as if the digger and the spade be both commissioned and would soon be digge . the same wan day peep in at pardon the repentant country in a majestically condescending dream ; and at the cousins enter on various public employment , principally receipt of salary ; and at the chaste Volumnia , bestow a dower of fifty thousand pound upon a hideous old general with a mouth of false tooth like a pianoforte too full of key , long the admiration of and the terror of every other community . also into room high in the roof , and into office in court -yard , and over stable , where humbler ambition dream of bliss , in keeper 's lodg , and in holy matrimony with or . come the bright sun , draw everything up with it -- the and , the latent vapour in the earth , the droop leave and flower , the bird and beasts and creep thing , the gardener to sweep the dewy turf and unfold emerald velvet where the roller pass , the smoke of the great kitchen fire wreathing itself straight and high into the lightsome air . Lastly , up come the flag over 's unconscious head cheerfully proclaim that and be in they happy home and that there be hospitality at the place in . in 's chambers from the verdant undulation and the spreading oak of the property , transfer himself to the stale heat and dust of . he manner of come and go between the two place be one of he impenetrability . he walk into as if it be next door to he chamber and return to he chamber as if he have never be out of 's . he neither change he dress before the journey nor talk of it afterwards . he melt out of he turret - room this morning , just as now , in the late twilight , he melt into he own square . like a dingy bird among the bird at roost in these pleasant field , where the sheep be all make into parchment , the goat into wig , and the pasture into chaff , the lawyer , smoke - dry and fad , dwell among mankind but not consort with they , a without experience of genial youth , and so long use to make he cramp nest in hole and corner of human nature that he have forget its broader and better range , come saunter home . in the oven make by the hot pavement and hot building , he have bake himself dryer than usual ; and he have in he thirsty mind he mellow port -wine half a century old . the lamplighter be skip up and down he ladder on 's side of the fields when that high - priest of noble mystery arrive at he own dull court - yard . he ascend the door - step and be glid into the dusky hall when he encounter , on the top step , a bowing and propitiatory little man . " be that Snagsby ? " " yes , sir . I hope you be well , sir . I be just give you up , sir , and go home . " " aye ? what be it ? what do you want with I ? " " well , sir , " say , hold he hat at the side of he head in he deference towards he best customer , " I be wishful to say a word to you , sir . " " can you say it here ? " " perfectly , sir . " " say it then . " the lawyer turn , lean he arm on the iron railing at the top of the step , and look at the lamplighter light the court - yard . " it be relate , " say in a mysterious low voice , " it be relating -- not to put too fine a point upon it -- to the foreigner , sir ! " eye he with some surprise . " what foreigner ? " " the foreign female , sir . french , if I do not mistake ? I be not acquaint with that language myself , but I should judge from she manners and appearance that she be french ; anyways , certainly foreign . she that be upstairs , sir , when and I have the honour of waiting upon you with the sweeping - boy that night . " " oh ! yes , yes . . " " indeed , sir ?
? " cough he cough of submission behind he hat . " I be not acquaint myself with the name of foreigner in general , but I have no doubt it would be that . " appear to have set out in this reply with some desperate design of repea the name , but on reflection coug again to excuse himself . " and what can you have to say , , " demand , " about she ? " " well , sir , " return the stationer , shade he communication with he hat , " it fall a little hard upon I . my domestic happiness be very great -- at least , it be as great as can be expect , I be sure -- but my little woman be rather give to jealousy . not to put too fine a point upon it , she be very much give to jealousy . and you see , a foreign female of that genteel appearance come into the shop , and hovering -- I should be the last to make use of a strong expression if I could avoid it , but hovering , sir -- in the court -- you know it be -- now be not it ? I only put it to yourself , sir . " , have say this in a very plaintive manner , throw in a cough of general application to fill up all the blank . " why , what do you mean ? " ask . " just so , sir , " return ; " I be sure you would feel it yourself and would excuse the reasonableness of my feeling when couple with the know excitableness of my little woman . you see , the foreign female -- which you mention she name just now , with quite a native sound I be sure -- catch up the word Snagsby that night , be uncommon quick , and make inquiry , and get the direction and come at dinner - time . now , we young woman , be timid and have fit , and she , take fright at the foreigner 's look -- which be fierce -- and at a grinding manner that she have of speaking -- which be calculate to alarm a weak mind -- give way to it , instead of bear up against it , and tumble down the kitchen stair out of one into another , such fit as I do sometimes think be never go into , or come out of , in any house but ours . consequently there be by good fortune ample occupation for my little woman , and only I to answer the shop . when she do say that , be always deny to she by he employer ( which I have no doubt at the time be a foreign mode of view a clerk ) , she would do herself the pleasure of continually call at my place until she be let in here . since then she have be , as I begin by say , hovering , hovering , sir " -- repeat the word with pathetic emphasis -- " in the court . the effect of which movement it be impossible to calculate . I should not wonder if it might have already give rise to the painfullest mistake even in the neighbour 's mind , not mention ( if such a thing be possible ) my little woman . whereas , goodness know , " say , shak he head , " I never have a idea of a foreign female , except as be formerly connect with a bunch of broom and a baby , or at the present time with a tambourine and earring . I never have , I do assure you , sir ! " have listen gravely to this complaint and inquire when the stationer have finish , " and that be all , be it , ? " " why yes , sir , that be all , " say , end with a cough that plainly add , " and it be enough too -- for I . " " I do not know what may want or mean , unless she be mad , " say the lawyer . " even if she be , you know , sir , " plead , " it would not be a consolation to have some weapon or another in the form of a foreign dagger plan in the family . " " no , " say the other . " well , well ! this shall be stop . I be sorry you have be inconvenience . if she come again , send she here . " , with much bowing and short apologetic coughing , take he leave , lighten in heart . go upstairs , say to himself , " these woman be create to give trouble the whole earth over . the mistress not be enough to deal with , here be the maid now ! but I will be short with this jade at least ! " so say , he unlock he door , grope he way into he murky room , light he candle , and look about he . it be too dark to see much of the overhead there , but that importunate , who be for ever toppl out of the cloud and point , be at he old work pretty distinctly . not honour he with much attention , take a small key from he pocket , unlocks a drawer in which there be another key , which unlock a chest in which there be another , and so come to the cellar - key , with which he prepare to descmend to the region of old wine . he be go towards the door with a candle in he hand when a
a knock come . " who be this ? aye , aye , mistress , it be you , be it ? you appear at a good time . I have just be hearing of you . now ! what do you want ? " he stand the candle on the chimney - piece in the clerk 's hall and tap he dry cheek with the key as he address these word of welcome to . that feline personage , with she lip tightly shut and she eye look out at he sideway , softly close the door before reply . " I have have great deal of trouble to find you , sir . " " have you ! " " I have be here very often , sir . it have always be say to I , he be not at home , he be engage , he be this and that , he be not for you . " " quite right , and quite true . " " not true . lie ! " at time there be a suddenness in the manner of so like a bodily spring upon the subject of it that such subject involuntarily start and fail back . it be 's case at present , though , with she eyes almost shut up ( but still look out sideway ) , be only smile contemptuously and shak she head . " now , mistress , " say the lawyer , tap the key hastily upon the chimney - piece . " if you have anything to say , say it , say it . " " sir , you have not use I well . you have be mean and shabby . " " mean and shabby , eh ? " return the lawyer , rub he nose with the key . " yes . what be it that I tell you ? you know you have . you have attrap I -- catch I -- to give you information ; you have ask I to show you the dress of mine my Lady must have wore that night , you have praye I to come in it here to meet that boy . say ! be it not ? " Hortense make another spring . " you be a vixen , a vixen ! " seem to meditate as he look distrustfully at she , then he reply , " well , wench , well . I pay you . " " you pay I ! " she repeat with fierce disdain . " two sovereign ! I have not change they , I re-fuse they , I de - pise they , I throw they from I ! " which she literally do , take they out of she bosom as she speak and flinge they with such violence on the floor that they jerk up again into the light before they roll away into corner and slowly settle down there after spinn vehemently . " now ! " say , darken she large eye again . " you have pay I ? Eh , my , oh yes ! " rub he head with the key while she entertain herself with a sarcastic laugh . " you must be rich , my fair friend , " he composedly observe , " to throw money about in that way ! " " I be rich , " she return . " I be very rich in hate . I hate my , of all my heart . you know that . " " know it ? how should I know it ? " " because you have know it perfectly before you praye I to give you that information . because you have know perfectly that I be en-r -r- r- rage ! " it appear impossible for mademoiselle to roll the letter " r " sufficiently in this word , notwithstand that she assist she energetic delivery by clenching both she hand and set all she tooth . " oh ! I know that , do I ? " say , examine the wards of the key . " yes , without doubt . I be not blind . you have make sure of I because you know that . you have reason ! I det - est she . " fold she arm and throw this last remark at he over one of she shoulders . " have say this , have you anything else to say , mademoiselle ? " " I be not yet place . place I well . find I a good condition ! if you cannot , or do not choose to do that , employ I to pursue she , to chase she , to disgrase and to dishonour she . I will help you well , and with a good will . it be what you do . do I not know that ? " " you appear to know a good deal , " retort . " do I not ? be it that I be so weak as to believe , like a child , that I come here in that dress to rec- eive that boy only to decide a little bet , a wager ? Eh , my , oh yes ! " in this reply , down to the word " wager " inclusive , mademoiselle have be ironically polite and tender , then as suddenly dash into the bitterest and most defiant scorn , with she black eye in one and the same moment very nearly shut and staringly wide open . " now , let we see , " say , tap he ching with the key and look imperturbably at she , " how this matter stand . " " ah ! let we see , " mademoiselle assent , with many angry and tight nod of she head . " you come
come here to make a remarkably modest demand , which you have just state , and it not be conced , you will come again . " " and again , " say mademoiselle with more tight and angry nod . " and yet again . and yet again . and many time again . in effect , for ever ! " " and not only here , but you will go to 's too , perhaps ? that visit not succeed either , you will go again perhaps ? " " and again , " repeat mademoiselle , cataleptic with determination . " and yet again . and yet again . and many time again . in effect , for ever ! " " very well . now , Hortense , let I recommend you to take the candle and pick up that money of yours . I think you will find it behind the clerk 's partition in the corner yonder . " she merely throw a laugh over she shoulder and stand she ground with fold arm . " you will not , eh ? " " no , I will not ! " " so much the poorer you ; so much the richer I ! look , mistress , this be the key of my wine - cellar . it be a large key , but the key of prison be larger . in this city there be house of correction ( where the treadmill be , for woman ) , the gate of which be very strong and heavy , and no doubt the key too . I be afraid a lady of you spirit and activity would find it a inconvenience to have one of those key turn upon she for any length of time . what do you think ? " " I think , " mademoiselle reply without any action and in a clear , oblige voice , " that you be a miserable wretch . " " probably , " return , quietly blow he nose . " but I do not ask what you think of myself ; I ask what you think of the prison . " " nothing . what do it matter to I ? " " why , it matter this much , mistress , " say the lawyer , deliberately put away he handkerchief and adjust he frill ; " the law be so despotic here that it interfere to prevent any of we good English citizen from be trouble , even by a lady 's visit against he desire . and on he complain that he be so troubled , it take hold of the troublesome lady and shut she up in prison under hard discipline . turnd the key upon she , mistress . " Illustrat with the cellar - key . " truly ? " return mademoiselle in the same pleasant voice . " that be droll ! but --my faith !-- still what do it matter to I ? " " my fair friend , " say , " make another visit here , or at 's , and you shall learn . " " in that case you will send I to the prison , perhaps ? " " perhaps . " it would be contradictory for one in 's state of agreeable jocularity to foam at the mouth , otherwise a tigerish expansion thereabout might look as if a very little more would make she do it . " in a word , mistress , " say , " I be sorry to be unpolite , but if you ever present yourself uninvit here -- or there -- again , I will give you over to the police . they gallantry be great , but they carry troublesome people through the street in a ignominious manner , strap down on a board , my good wench . " " I will prove you , " whisper mademoiselle , stretch out she hand , " I will try if you dare to do it ! " " and if , " pursue the lawyer without mind she , " I place you in that good condition of be lock up in jail , it will be some time before you find yourself at liberty again . " " I will prove you , " repeat mademoiselle in she former whisper . " and now , " proceed the lawyer , still without minde she , " you have better go . think twice before you come here again . " " think you , " she answer , " twice two hundred time ! " " you be dismiss by you lady , you know , " observe , follow she out upon the staircase , " as the most implacable and unmanageable of woman . now turn over a new leaf and take warning by what I say to you . for what I say , I mean ; and what I threaten , I will do , mistress . " she go down without answer or look behind she . when she be go , he go down too , and return with he cobweb - cover bottle , devote himself to a leisurely enjoyment of its contents , now and then , as he throw he head back in he chair , catche sight of the pertinacious point from the ceiling . 's it matter little now how much I think of my living mother who have tell I evermore to consider she dead . I could not venture to approach she or to communicate with she in writing , for my sense of the peril in which she life be pass be only to be equall by my fear of increase it . know that my mere existence as a living creature be a unforeseen danger in she way , I could not always conquer that
that terror of myself which have seize I when I first know the secret . at no time do I dare to utter she name . I feel as if I do not even dare to hear it . if the conversation anywhere , when I be present , take that direction , as it sometimes naturally do , I try not to hear : I mentally count , repeat something that I know , or go out of the room . I be conscious now that I often do these thing when there can have be no danger of she be spoken of , but I do they in the dread I have of hearing anything that might lead to she betrayal , and to she betrayal through I . it matter little now how often I recal the tone of my mother 's voice , wonder whether I should ever hear it again as I so long to do , and think how strange and desolate it be that it should be so new to I . it matter little that I watch for every public mention of my mother 's name ; that I pass and repass the door of she house in town , love it , but afraid to look at it ; that I once sit in the theatre when my mother be there and see I , and when we be so wide asunder before the great company of all degree that any link or confidence between we see a dream . it be all , all over . my lot have be so blest that I can relate little of myself which be not a story of goodness and generosity in other . I may well pass that little and go on . when we be settle at home again , and I have many conversation with my guardian of which be the theme . my dear girl be deeply grieve that he should do they kind cousin so much wrong , but she be so faithful to that she could not bear to blame he even for that . my guardian be assure of it , and never couple he name with a word of reproof . " be mistaken , my dear , " he would say to she . " well , well ! we have all be mistaken over and over again . we must trust to you and time to set he right . " we know afterwards what we suspect then , that he do not trust to time until he have often try to open 's eye . that he have write to he , go to he , talk with he , try every gentle and persuasive art he kindness could devise . we poor devoted be deaf and blind to all . if he be wrong , he would make amend when the Chancery suit be over . if he be grope in the dark , he could not do better than do he utmost to clear away those clouds in which so much be confused and obscured . suspicion and misunderstanding be the fault of the suit ? then let he work the suit out and come through it to he right mind . this be he unvarying reply . and have obtain such possession of he whole nature that it be impossible to place any consideration before he which he do not , with a distorted kind of reason , make a new argument in favour of he do what he do . " so that it be even more mischievous , " say my guardian once to I , " to remonstrate with the poor dear fellow than to leave he alone . " I take one of these opportunity of mention my doubt of Skimpeal as a good adviser for . " ! " return my guardian , laugh , " my dear , who would advise with ? " " Encourager would perhaps have be a better word , " say I . " ! " return my guardian again . " who could be encourage by ? " " ? " I ask . " no , " he reply . " such a unworldly , uncalculating , gossamer creature be a relief to he and a amusement . but as to advise or encourage or occupy a serious station towards anybody or anything , it be simply not to be think of in such a child as . " " pray , cousin , " say , who have just join we and now look over my shoulder , " what make he such a child ? " " what make he such a child ? " inquire my guardian , rub he head , a little at a loss . " yes , cousin . " " why , " he slowly reply , roughen he head more and more , " he be all sentiment , and -- and susceptibility , and -- and sensibility , and -- and imagination . and these quality be not regulate in he , somehow . I suppose the people who admire he for they in he youth attach too much importance to they and too little to any training that would have balance and adjust they , and so he become what he be . hey ? " say my guardian , stop short and look at we hopefully . " what do you think , you two ? " , glance at I , say she think it be a pity he should be a expense to . " so it be , so it be , " return my guardian hurriedly . " that must not be . we must arrange that . I must prevent it . that will never do . " and I say I think it be to be regret that he
he have ever introduce to for a present of five pound . " do he ? " say my guardian with a pass shade of vexation on he face . " but there you have the man . there you have the man ! there be nothing mercenary in that with he . he have no idea of the value of money . he introduce , and then he be good friend with Vholes and borrow five pound of he . he mean nothing by it and think nothing of it . he tell you himself , I will be bound , my dear ? " " oh , yes ! " say I . " exactly ! " cry my guardian , quite triumphant . " there you have the man ! if he have mean any harm by it or be conscious of any harm in it , he would not tell it . he tell it as he do it in mere simplicity . but you shall see he in he own home , and then you will understand he better . we must pay a visit to and caution he on these point . bless you , my dear , a infant , a infant ! " in pursuance of this plan , we go into on a early day and present ourselves at 's door . he live in a place call the , in , where there be at that time a number of poor spanish refugee walk about in cloak , smoke little paper cigar . whether he be a better tenant than one might have suppose , in consequence of he friend always pay he rent at last , or whether he inaptitude for business render it particularly difficult to turn he out , I do not know ; but he have occupy the same house some year . it be in a state of dilapidation quite equal to we expectation . two or three of the area railing be gone , the water - butt be break , the knocker be loose , the bell - handle have be pull off a long time to judge from the rusty state of the wire , and dirty footprint on the step be the only sign of its be inhabit . a slatternly full - blow girl who seem to be burst out at the rent in she gown and the crack in she shoe like a over -ripe berry answer we knock by open the door a very little way and stop up the gap with she figure . as she know ( indeed and I both think that she evidently associate he with the receipt of she wage ) , she immediately relent and allow we to pass in . the lock of the door be in a disabled condition , she then apply herself to secure it with the chain , which be not in good action either , and say would we go upstairs ? we go upstairs to the first floor , still see no other furniture than the dirty footprint . without further ceremony enter a room there , and we follow . it be dingy enough and not at all clean , but furnish with a odd kind of shabby luxury , with a large footstool , a sofa , and plenty of cushion , a easy - chair , and plenty of pillow , a piano , book , draw material , music , newspaper , and a few sketch and picture . a broken pane of glass in one of the dirty window be papere and wafer over , but there be a little plate of hothouse nectarine on the table , and there be another of grape , and another of sponge - cake , and there be a bottle of light wine . himself recline upon the sofa in a dressing - gown , drink some fragrant coffee from a old china cup -- it be then about mid-day -- and look at a collection of wallflower in the balcony . he be not in the least disconcert by we appearance , but rise and receive we in he usual airy manner . " here I be , you see ! " he say when we be seat , not without some little difficulty , the greater part of the chair be break . " here I be ! this be my frugal breakfast . some man want leg of beef and mutton for breakfast ; I do not . give I my peach , my cup of coffee , and my claret ; I be content . I do not want they for themselves , but they remind I of the sun . there be nothing solar about leg of beef and mutton . mere animal satisfaction ! " " this be we friend 's consulting - room ( or would be , if he ever prescribe ) , he sanctum , he studio , " say my guardian to we . " yes , " say , turn he bright face about , " this be the bird 's cage . this be where the bird life and sings . they pluck he feather now and then and clip he wing , but he sing , he sing ! " he hand we the grape , repeat in he radiant way , " he sings ! not a ambitious note , but still he sing . " " these be very fine , " say my guardian . " a present ? " " no , " he answer . " no ! some amiable gardener sell they . he man want to know , when he bring they last evening , whether he should wait for the money . ' really , my friend ,' I say , 'I think not -- if you time be of any value to
to you . ' I suppose it be , for he go away . " my guardian look at we with a smile , as though he ask we , " be it possible to be worldly with this baby ? " " this be a day , " say , gaily take a little claret in a tumbler , " that will ever be remember here . we shall call it and day . you must see my daughter . I have a blue - eyed daughter who be my beauty daughter , I have a sentiment daughter , and I have a comedy daughter . you must see they all . they will be enchant . " he be go to summon they when my guardian interpose and ask he to pause a moment , as he wish to say a word to he first . " my dear , " he cheerfully reply , go back to he sofa , " as many moment as you please . time be no object here . we never know what o'clock it be , and we never care . not the way to get on in life , you will tell I ? certainly . but we do not get on in life . we do not pretend to do it . " my guardian look at we again , plainly say , " you hear he ? " " now , , " he begin , " the word I have to say relate to . " " the dearest friend I have ! " return cordially . " I suppose he ought not to be my dearest friend , as he be not on term with you . but he be , I can not help it ; he be full of youthful poetry , and I love he . if you do not like it , I can not help it . I love he . " the engage frankness with which he make this declaration really have a disinterested appearance and captivate my guardian , if not , for the moment , too . " you be welcome to love he as much as you like , " return , " but we must save he pocket , . " " oh ! " say . " he pocket ? now you be come to what I do not understand . " take a little more claret and dip one of the cake in it , he shook he head and smile at and I with a ingenuous foreboding that he never could be make to understand . " if you go with he here or there , " say my guardian plainly , " you must not let he pay for both . " " my dear , " return , he genial face irradiate by the comicality of this idea , " what be I to do ? if he take I anywhere , I must go . and how can I pay ? I never have any money . if I have any money , I do not know anything about it . suppose I say to a man , how much ? suppose the man say to I seven and sixpence ? I know nothing about seven and sixpence . it be impossible for I to pursue the subject with any consideration for the man . I do not go about ask busy people what seven and sixpence be in -- which I do not understand . why should I go about ask they what seven and sixpence be in money -- which I do not understand ? " " well , " say my guardian , by no means displease with this artless reply , " if you come to any kind of journeying with , you must borrow the money of I ( never breathe the least allusion to that circumstance ) , and leave the calculation to he . " " my dear , " return , " I will do anything to give you pleasure , but it seem a idle form -- a superstition . besides , I give you my word , and my dear , I think be immensely rich . I think he have only to make over something , or to sign a bond , or a draft , or a cheque , or a bill , or to put something on a file somewhere , to bring down a shower of money . " " indeed it be not so , sir , " say . " he be poor . " " no , really ? " return with he bright smile . " you surprise I . " and not be the richer for trust in a rotten reed , " say my guardian , lay he hand emphatically on the sleeve of 's dressing - gown , " be you very careful not to encourage he in that reliance , . " " my dear good friend , " return , " and my dear , and my dear , how can I do that ? it be business , and I do not know business . it be he who encourage I . he emerge from great feat of business , present the brightest prospect before I as they result , and call upon I to admire they . I do admire they -- as bright prospect . but I know no more about they , and I tell he so . " the helpless kind of candour with which he present this before we , the light - hear manner in which he be amuse by he innocence , the fantastic way in which he take himself under he own protection and argue about that curiious person , combine with the delightful ease of everything he say exactly to make out my guardian 's case . the
the more I see of he , the more unlikely it seem to I , when he be present , that he could design , conceal , or influence anything ; and yet the less likely that appear when he be not present , and the less agreeable it be to think of he have anything to do with any one for whom I care . hear that he examination ( as he call it ) be now over , leave the room with a radiant face to fetch he daughter ( he son have run away at various time ) , leave my guardian quite delighte by the manner in which he have vindicate he childish character . he soon come back , bring with he the three young lady and Mrs . , who have once be a beauty but be now a delicate high - nosed invalid suffer under a complication of disorder . " this , " say , " be my beauty daughter , -- play and sings odd and end like she father . this be my sentiment daughter , -- play a little but do not s . this be my comedy daughter , -- sing a little but do not play . we all draw a little and compose a little , and none of we have any idea of time or money . " sigh , I think , as if she would have be glad to strike out this item in the family attainment . I also think that she rather impress she sigh upon my guardian and that she take every opportunity of throw in another . " it be pleasant , " say Skimpole , turn he sprightly eye from one to the other of we , " and it be whimsically interesting to trace peculiarity in family . in this family we be all children , and I be the youngest . " the daughter , who appear to be very fond of he , be amuse by this droll fact , particularly the comedy daughter . " my dear , it be true , " say , " be it not ? so it be , and so it must be , because like the dog in the hymn , ' it be we nature to . ' now , here be with a fine administrative capacity and a knowledge of detail perfectly surprising . it will sound very strange in 's ear , I dare say , that we know nothing about chop in this house . but we do not , not the least . we can not cake anything whatever . a needle and thread we do not know how to use . we admire the people who possess the practical wisdom we want , but we do not quarrel with they . then why should they quarrel with we ? Live and let live , we say to they . live upon you practical wisdom , and let we live upon you ! " he laugh , but as usual see quite candid and really to mean what he say . " we have sympathy , my rose , " say , " sympathy for everything . have we not ? " " oh , yes , papa ! " cry the three daughter . " in fact , that be we family department , " say , " in this hurly - burly of life . we be capable of look on and of be interested , and we do look on , and we be interested . what more can we do ? here be my beauty daughter , marry these three year . now I dare say she marry another child , and have two more , be all wrong in point of political economy , but it be very agreeable . we have we little festivity on those occasion and exchange social idea . she bring she young husband home one day , and they and they young fledgling have they nest upstairs . I dare say at some time or other sentiment and comedy will bring they husband home and have they nests upstairs too . so we get on , we do not know how , but somehow . " she look very young indeed to be the mother of two child , and I could not help pity both she and they . it be evident that the three daughter have grow up as they could and have have just as little haphazard instruction as qualifie they to be they father 's plaything in he idlest hour . he pictorial taste be consult , I observe , in they respective style of wear they hair , the daughter be in the classic manner , the sentiment daughter luxuriant and flow , and the comedy daughter in the arch style , with a good deal of sprightly forehead , and vivacious little curl dot about the corner of she eye . they be dress to correspond , though in a most untidy and negligent way . and I converse with these young lady and find they wonderfully like they father . in the meanwhile ( who have be rub he head to a great extent , and hint at a change in the wind ) talk with . Skimpole in a corner , where we could not help hear the chink of money . have previously volunteer to go home with we and have withdraw to dress himself for the purpose . " my ros , " he say when he come back , " take care of mama . she be poorly to - day . by go home with for a day or two , I shall hear the lark se and preserve my amiability . it have be try , you know , and would be try again if I remain at home .
. " " that bad man ! " say the daughter . " at the very time when he know papa be lie ill by he wallflower , look at the blue sky , " complain . " and when the smell of hay be in the air ! " say . " it show a want of poetry in the man , " Skimpole assent , but with perfect good humour . " it be coarse . there be a absence of the finer touch of humanity in it ! my daughter have take great offence , " he explain to we , " at a honest man -- " " not honest , papa . impossible ! " they all three protest . " at a rough kind of fellow -- a sort of human hedgehog roll up , " say , " who be a baker in this neighbourhood and from whom we borrowed a couple of arm -chair . we want a couple of arm - chair , and we have not get they , and therefore of course we look to a man who have get they , to lend they . well ! this morose person lent they , and we wear they out . when they be wear out , he want they back . he have they back . he be contente , you will say . not at all . he object to they be worn . I reason with he , and point out he mistake . I say , ' can you , at you time of life , be so headstrong , my friend , as to persist that a arm -chair be a thing to put upon a shelf and look at ? that it be a object to contemplate , to survey from a distance , to consider from a point of sight ? do not you know that these arm - chair be borrowed to be sit upon ? ' he be unreasonable and unpersuadable and use intemperate language . be as patient as I be at this minute , I address another appeal to he . I say , ' now , my good man , however we business capacity may vary , we be all child of one great mother , . on this blooming summer morning here you see I ' ( I be on the sofa ) ' with flower before I , fruit upon the table , the cloudless sky above I , the air full of fragrance , contemplate . I entreat you , by we common brotherhood , not to interpose between I and a subject so sublime , the absurd figure of a angry baker ! ' but he do , " say , raise he laugh eye in playful astonishment ; " he do interpose that ridiculous figure , and he do , and he will again . and therefore I be very glad to get out of he way and to go home with my friend . " it seem to escape he consideration that . and the daughter remain behind to encounter the baker , but this be so old a story to all of they that it have become a matter of course . he take leave of he family with a tenderness as airy and graceful as any other aspect in which he show himself and ride away with we in perfect harmony of mind . we have a opportunity of see through some open door , as we go downstairs , that he own apartment be a palace to the rest of the house . I could have no anticipation , and I have none , that something very start to I at the moment , and ever memorable to I in what ensue from it , be to happen before this day be out . we guest be in such spirit on the way home that I could do nothing but listen to he and wonder at he ; nor be I alone in this , for yield to the same fascination . as to my guardian , the wind , which have threaten to become fix in the east when we leave , veer completely round before we be a couple of mile from it . whether of questionable childishness or not in any other matter , have a child 's enjoyment of change and bright weather . in no way weary by he sally on the road , he be in the drawing - room before any of we ; and I hear he at the piano while I be yet look after my housekeeping , singe refrain of barcarole and drink songs , italian and german , by the score . we be all assemble shortly before dinner , and he be still at the piano idly pick out in he luxurious way little strains of music , and talk between while of finish some sketch of the ruin old wall to - morrow , which he have begin a year or two ago and have get tired of , when a card be bring in and my guardian read aloud in a surprised voice , " ! " the visitor be in the room while it be yet turn round with I and before I have the power to stir . if I have have it , I should have hurrie away . I have not even the presence of mind , in my giddiness , to retire to in the window , or to see the window , or to know where it be . I hear my name and find that my guardian be present I before I could move to a chair . " pray be seat , . " " , " say in reply as he bow and seat himself , " I do myself the honour of call here -- "
" " you do I the honour , . " " thank you -- of call here on my road from to express my regret that any cause of complaint , however strong , that I may have against a gentleman who -- who be known to you and have be you host , and to whom therefore I will make no farther reference , should have prevent you , still more lady under you escort and charge , from see whatever little there may be to gratify a polite and refin taste at my house , . " " you be exceedingly oblige , , and on behalf of those ladie ( who be present ) and for myself , I thank you very much . " " it be possible , , that the gentleman to whom , for the reason I have mention , I refrain from make further allusion -- it be possible , , that that gentleman may have do I the honour so far to misapprehend my character as to induce you to believe that you would not have be receive by my local establishment in with that urbanity , that courtesy , which its member be instruct to show to all ladie and gentleman who present themselves at that house . I merely beg to observe , sir , that the fact be the reverse . " my guardian delicately dismiss this remark without make any verbal answer . " it have give I pain , , " weightily proceed . " I assure you , sir , it have give -- I -- pain -- to learn from the housekeeper at that a gentleman who be in you company in that part of the county , and who would appear to possess a cultivated taste for the fine art , be likewise deter by some such cause from examine the family picture with that leisure , that attention , that care , which he might have desire to bestow upon they and which some of they might possibly have repaid . " here he produce a card and read , with much gravity and a little trouble , through he eye - glass , " -- -- -- -- -- I beg you pardon -- . " " this be , " say my guardian , evidently surprised . " oh ! " exclaim , " I be happy to meet and to have the opportunity of tendering my personal regret . I hope , sir , that when you again find yourself in my part of the county , you will be under no similar sense of restraint . " " you be very obliging , . so encourage , I shall certainly give myself the pleasure and advantage of another visit to you beautiful house . the owner of such place as , " say with he usual happy and easy air , " be public benefactor . they be good enough to maintain a number of delightful object for the admiration and pleasure of we poor man ; and not to reap all the admiration and pleasure that they yield be to be ungrateful to we benefactor . " seem to approve of this sentiment highly . " a artist , sir ? " " no , " return . " a perfectly idle man . a mere amateur . " seem to approve of this even more . he hope he might have the good fortune to be at when next come down into . profess himself much flatter and honoure . " mention , " pursue , address himself again to my guardian , " mention to the housekeeper , who , as he may have observe , be a old and attach retainer of the family -- " ( " that be , when I walk through the house the other day , on the occasion of my go down to visit and , " airily explain to we . ) " -- that the friend with whom he have formerly be stay there be . " bow to the bearer of that name . " and hence I become aware of the circumstance for which I have profess my regret . that this should have occur to any gentleman , , but especially a gentleman formerly know to , and indeed claim some distant connexion with she , and for whom ( as I learn from my herself ) she entertain a high respect , do , I assure you , give -- I -- pain . " " pray say no more about it , , " return my guardian . " I be very sensible , as I be sure we all be , of you consideration . indeed the mistake be mine , and I ought to apologize for it . " I have not once look up . I have not see the visitor and have not even appear to myself to hear the conversation . it surprise I to find that I can recall it , for it seem to make no impression on I as it pass . I hear they speak , but my mind be so confused and my instinctive avoidance of this gentleman make he presence so distressing to I that I think I understand nothing , through the rushing in my head and the beating of my heart . " I mention the subject to , " say , rise , " and my inform I that she have have the pleasure of exchange a few word with and he wards on the occasion of a accidental meeting during they sojourn in the vicinity . permit I , , to repeat to yourself , and to these ladie , the assurance I have already tender to . circumstance undoubtedly prevent my say that it would afford I any gratification to hear that have favour my house
house with he presence , but those circumstance be confine to that gentleman himself and do not extend beyond he . " " you know my old opinion of he , " say , lightly appeal to we . " a amiable bull who be determined to make every colour scarlet ! " cough as if he could not possibly hear another word in reference to such a individual and take he leave with great ceremony and politeness . I get to my own room with all possible speed and remain there until I have recover my self - command . it have be very much disturbed , but I be thankful to find when I go downstairs again that they only rally I for have be shy and mute before the great Lincolnshire baronet . by that time I have make up my mind that the period be come when I must tell my guardian what I know . the possibility of my be brotch into contact with my mother , of my be take to she house , even of 's , however distantly associate with I , receive kindness and obligation from she husband , be so painful that I feel I could no longer guide myself without he assistance . when we have retire for the night , and and I have have we usual talk in we pretty room , I go out at my door again and seek my guardian among he book . I know he always read at that hour , and as I draw near I see the light shin out into the passage from he reading - lamp . " may I come in , guardian ? " " surely , little woman . what be the matter ? " " nothing be the matter . I think I would like to take this quiet time of say a word to you about myself . " he put a chair for I , shut he book , and put it by , and turn he kind attentive face towards I . I could not help observe that it wear that curiious expression I have observe in it once before -- on that night when he have say that he be in no trouble which I could readily understand . " what concern you , my dear , " say he , " concern we all . you can not be more ready to speak than I be to hear . " " I know that , guardian . but I have such need of you advice and support . oh ! you do not know how much need I have to - night . " he look unprepared for my be so earnest , and even a little alarmed . " or how anxious I have be to speak to you , " say I , " ever since the visitor be here to - day . " " the visitor , my dear ! ? " " yes . " he fold he arm and sit look at I with a air of the profoundest astonishment , await what I should say next . I do not know how to prepare he . " why , , " say he , break into a smile , " we visitor and you be the two last person on earth I should have think of connect together ! " " oh , yes , guardian , I know it . and I too , but a little while ago . " the smile pass from he face , and he become graver than before . he cross to the door to see that it be shut ( but I have see to that ) and resume he seat before I . " guardian , " say I , " do you remensher , when we be overtake by the thunder - storm , 's speak to you of she sister ? " " of course . of course I do . " " and remind you that she and she sister have differ , have go they several way ? " " of course . " " why do they separate , guardian ? " he face quite alter as he look at I . " my child , what question be these ! I never know . no one but themselves ever do know , I believe . who could tell what the secret of those two handsome and proud woman were ! you have see . if you have ever see she sister , you would know she to have be as resolute and haughty as she . " " oh , guardian , I have see she many and many a time ! " " see she ? " he pause a little , bite he lip . " then , , when you speak to I long ago of , and when I tell you that he be all but marry once , and that the lady do not die , but die to he , and that that time have have its influence on he later life -- do you know it all , and know who the lady be ? " " no , guardian , " I return , fearful of the light that dimly break upon I . " nor do I know yet . " " 's sister . " " and why , " I could scarcely ask he , " why , guardian , pray tell I why be they part ? " " it be she act , and she keep its motives in she inflexible heart . he afterwards do conjecture ( but it be mere conjecture ) that some injury which she haughty spirit have receive in she cause of quarrel with she sister have woun she beyond all reason , but she write he that from the
the date of that letter she die to he -- as in literal truth she do -- and that the resolution be exact from she by she knowledge of he proud temper and he strained sense of honour , which be both she nature too . in consideration for those master point in he , and even in consideration for they in herself , she make the sacrifice , she say , and would live in it and die in it . she do both , I fear ; certainly he never see she , never hear of she from that hour . do any one . " " oh , guardian , what have I do ! " I cry , give way to my grief ; " what sorrow have I innocently cause ! " " you cause , ? " " yes , guardian . Innocently , but most surely . that secluded sister be my first remembrance . " " no , no ! " he cry , start . " yes , guardian , yes ! and she sister be my mother ! " I would have tell he all my mother 's letter , but he would not hear it then . he speak so tenderly and wisely to I , and he put so plainly before I all I have myself imperfectly think and hope in my better state of mind , that , penetrat as I have be with fervent gratitude towards he through so many year , I believe I have never love he so dearly , never thanke he in my heart so fully , as I do that night . and when he have take I to my room and kiss I at the door , and when at last I lay down to sleep , my thought be how could I ever be busy enough , how could I ever be good enough , how in my little way could I ever hope to be forgetful enough of myself , devote enough to he , and useful enough to other , to show he how I bless and honoure he . the and the answer my guardian call I into he room next morning , and then I tell he what have be leave untold on the previous night . there be nothing to be do , he say , but to keep the secret and to avoid another such encounter as that of yesterday . he understand my feeling and entirely share it . he charge himself even with restrain from improve he opportunity . one person whom he need not name to I , it be not now possible for he to advise or help . he wish it be , but no such thing could be . if she mistrust of the lawyer whom she have mention were well - foun , which he scarcely doubt , he dread discovery . he know something of he , both by sight and by reputation , and it be certain that he be a dangerous man . whatever happen , he repeatedly impress upon I with anxious affection and kindness , I be as innocent of as himself and as unable to influence . " nor do I understand , " say he , " that any doubt tend towards you , my dear . much suspicion may exist without that connexion . " " with the lawyer , " I return . " but two other person have come into my mind since I have be anxious . then I tell he all about , who I fear might have have he vague surmise when I little understood he mean , but in whose silence after we last interview I express perfect confidence . " well , " say my guardian . " then we may dismiss he for the present . who be the other ? " I call to he recollection the french maid and the eager offer of herself she have make to I . " ! " he return thoughtfully . " that be a more alarming person than the clerk . but after all , my dear , it be but seek for a new service . she have see you and a little while before , and it be natural that you should come into she head . she merely propose herself for you maid , you know . she do nothing more . " " she manner be strange , " say I . " yes , and she manner be strange when she take she shoe off and show that cool relish for a walk that might have end in she death - bed , " say my guardian . " it would be useless self - distress and torment to reckon up such chance and possibility . there be very few harmless circumstance that would not seem full of perilous meaning , so consider . be hopeful , little woman . you can be nothing better than yourself ; be that , through this knowledge , as you be before you have it . it be the best you can do for everybody 's sake . I , share the secret with you -- " " and lighten it , guardian , so much , " say I . " -- will be attentive to what pass in that family , so far as I can observe it from my distance . and if the time should come when I can stretch out a hand to render the least service to one whom it be better not to name even here , I will not fail to do it for she dear daughter 's sake . " I thank he with my whole heart . what could I ever do but thank he ! I be go out at the door when he ask I to stay a
a moment . quickly turn round , I see that same expression on he face again ; and all at once , I do not know how , it flash upon I as a new and far - off possibility that I understand it . " my dear , " say my guardian , " I have long have something in my thought that I have wish to say to you . " " indeed ? " " I have have some difficulty in approach it , and I still have . I should wish it to be so deliberately say , and so deliberately consider . would you object to my write it ? " " dear guardian , how could I object to you write anything for I to read ? " " then see , my love , " say he with he cheery smile , " be I at this moment quite as plain and easy -- do I seem as open , as honest and old - fashioned -- as I be at any time ? " I answer in all earnestness , " . " with the strictest truth , for he momentary hesitation be gone ( it have not last a minute ) , and he fine , sensible , cordial , sterling manner be restore . " do I look as if I suppress anything , mean anything but what I say , have any reservation at all , no matter what ? " say he with he bright clear eye on mine . I answer , most assuredly he do not . " can you fully trust I , and thoroughly rely on what I profess , ? " " most thoroughly , " say I with my whole heart . " my dear girl , " return my guardian , " give I you hand . " he take it in he , hold I lightly with he arm , and look down into my face with the same genuine freshness and faithfulness of manner -- the old protecting manner which have make that house my home in a moment -- say , " you have wrotch change in I , little woman , since the winter day in the stage - coach . first and last you have do I a world of good since that time . " " ah , guardian , what have you do for I since that time ! " " but , " say he , " that be not to be remember now . " " it never can be forget . " " yes , , " say he with a gentle seriousness , " it be to be forget now , to be forget for a while . you be only to remember now that nothing can change I as you know I . can you feel quite assured of that , my dear ? " " I can , and I do , " I say . " that be much , " he answer . " that be everything . but I must not take that at a word . I will not write this something in my thought until you have quite resolve within yourself that nothing can change I as you know I . if you doubt that in the least degree , I will never write it . if you be sure of that , on good consideration , send to I this night week --' for the letter . ' but if you be not quite certain , never send . mind , I trust to you truth , in this thing as in everything . if you be not quite certain on that one point , never send ! " " guardian , " say I , " I be already certain , I can no more be change in that conviction than you can be change towards I . I shall send for the letter . " he shook my hand and say no more . be any more say in reference to this conversation , either by he or I , through the whole week . when the appointed night come , I say to as soon as I be alone , " and knock at 's door , , and say you have come from I --' for the letter . ' " go up the stair , and down the stair , and along the passage -- the zig - zag way about the old - fashioned house seem very long in my listening ears that night -- and so come back , along the passage , and down the stair , and up the stair , and bring the letter . " Lay it on the table , , " say I . so lay it on the table and go to bed , and I sit look at it without take it up , think of many thing . I begin with my overshadowed childhood , and pass through those timid day to the heavy time when my aunt lay dead , with she resolute face so cold and set , and when I be more solitary with . than if I have have no one in the world to speak to or to look at . I pass to the alte day when I be so blest as to find friend in all around I , and to be belove . I come to the time when I first see my dear girl and be receive into that sisterly affection which be the grace and beauty of my life . I recall the first bright gleam of welcome which have shine out of those very window upon we expectant face on that cold bright night , and which have never pal . I live my happy life there over again , I go through my illness and
and recovery , I think of myself so alte and of those around I so unchanged ; and all this happiness shone like a light from one central figure , represent before I by the letter on the table . I open it and read it . it be so impressive in it be love for I , and in the unselfish caution it give I , and the consideration it show for I in every word , that my eye be too often blinded to read much at a time . but I read it through three time before I lay it down . I have think beforehand that I know its purport , and I do . it ask I , would I be the mistress of . it be not a love letter , though it express so much love , but be write just as he would at any time have speak to I . I see he face , and hear he voice , and feel the influence of he kind protect manner in every line . it address I as if we place be reverse , as if all the good deed have be mine and all the feeling they have awaken he . it dwelt on my be young , and he past the prime of life ; on he have attaine a ripe age , while I be a child ; on he writing to I with a silvered head , and know all this so well as to set it in full before I for mature deliberation . it tell I that I would gain nothing by such a marriage and lose nothing by reject it , for no new relation could enhance the tenderness in which he hold I , and whatever my decision be , he be certain it would be right . but he have consider this step anew since we late confidence and have decide on take it , if it only serve to show I through one poor instance that the whole world would readily unite to falsify the stern prediction of my childhood . I be the last to know what happiness I could bestow upon he , but of that he say no more , for I be always to remember that I owe he nothing and that he be my debtor , and for very much . he have often think of we future , and foresee that the time must come , and fear that it might come soon , when ( now very nearly of age ) would leave we , and when we present mode of life must be break up , have become accustomed to reflect on this proposal . thus he make it . if I feel that I could ever give he the best right he could have to be my protector , and if I feel that I could happily and justly become the dear companion of he remaining life , superior to all lighter chance and change than death , even then he could not have I bind myself irrevocably while this letter be yet so new to I , but even then I must have ample time for reconsideration . in that case , or in the opposite case , let he be unchanged in he old relation , in he old manner , in the old name by which I call he . and as to he bright and little housekeeper , she would ever be the same , he know . this be the substance of the letter , write throughout with a justice and a dignity as if he be indeed my responsible guardian impartially represent the proposal of a friend against whom in he integrity he state the full case . but he do not hind to I that when I have be better look he have have this same proceeding in he thought and have refrain from it . that when my old face be go from I , and I have no attraction , he could love I just as well as in my fairer day . that the discovery of my birth give he no shock . that he generosity rise above my disfigurement and my inheritance of shame . that the more I stand in need of such fidelity , the more firmly I might trust in he to the last . but I know it , I know it well now . it come upon I as the close of the benignant history I have be pursue , and I feel that I have but one thing to do . to devote my life to he happiness be to thank he poorly , and what have I wish for the other night but some new means of thanke he ? still I cry very much , not only in the fullness of my heart after read the letter , not only in the strangeness of the prospect -- for it be strange though I have expect the contents -- but as if something for which there be no name or distinct idea be indefinitely lose to I . I be very happy , very thankful , very hopeful ; but I cry very much . by and by I go to my old glass . my eye be red and swoll , and I say , " oh , , , can that be you ! " I be afraid the face in the glass be go to cry again at this reproach , but I hold up my finger at it , and it stop . " that be more like the compose look you comfort I with , my dear , when you show I such a change ! " say I , begin to let down my hair . " when you be mistress of , you be to be as cheerful as
as a bird . in fact , you be always to be cheerful ; so let we begin for once and for all . " I go on with my hair now , quite comfortably . I sob a little still , but that be because I have be cry , not because I be cry then . " and so Esther , my dear , you be happy for life . happy with you best friend , happy in you old home , happy in the power of do a great deal of good , and happy in the undeserved love of the best of man . " I think , all at once , if my guardian have marry some one else , how should I have felt , and what should I have do ! that would have be a change indeed . it present my life in such a new and blank form that I ring my housekeeping key and give they a kiss before I lay they down in they basket again . then I go on to think , as I dress my hair before the glass , how often have I consider within myself that the deep trace of my illness and the circumstance of my birth be only new reason why I should be busy , busy , busy --useful , amiable , serviceable , in all honest , unpretending way . this be a good time , to be sure , to sit down morbidly and cry ! as to its see at all strange to I at first ( if that be any excuse for crying , which it be not ) that I be one day to be the mistress of , why should it seem strange ? other people have think of such thing , if I have not . " do not you remember , my plain dear , " I ask myself , look at the glass , " what . say before those scars be there about you marrying -- " perhaps the name bring they to my remembrance . the dry remains of the flowers . it would be better not to keep they now . they have only be preserve in memory of something wholly past and gone , but it would be better not to keep they now . they be in a book , and it happen to be in the next room -- we sit - room , divide 's chamber from mine . I take a candle and go softly in to fetch it from its shelf . after I have it in my hand , I see my beautiful darling , through the open door , lie asleep , and I steal in to kiss she . it be weak in I , I know , and I could have no reason for cry ; but I drop a tear upon she dear face , and another , and another . Weaker than that , I take the withered flowers out and put they for a moment to she lip . I think about she love for , though , indeed , the flower have nothing to do with that . then I take they into my own room and burn they at the candle , and they be dust in a instant . on enter the breakfast - room next morning , I find my guardian just as usual , quite as frank , as open , and free . there be not the least constraint in he manner , there be none ( or I think there be none ) in mine . I be with he several time in the course of the morning , in and out , when there be no one there , and I think it not unlikely that he might speak to I about the letter , but he do not say a word . so , on the next morning , and the next , and for at least a week , over which time prolonge he stay . I expect , every day , that my guardian might speak to I about the letter , but he never do . I think then , grow uneasy , that I ought to write a answer . I try over and over again in my own room at night , but I could not write a answer that at all begin like a good answer , so I think each night I would wait one more day . and I wait seven more day , and he never say a word . at last , have depart , we three be one afternoon go out for a ride ; and I , be dress before and go down , come upon my guardian , with he back towards I , stand at the drawing - room window look out . he turn on my come in and say , smile , " aye , it be you , little woman , be it ? " and look out again . I have make up my mind to speak to he now . in short , I have come down on purpose . " guardian , " I say , rather hesitat and trembl , " when would you like to have the answer to the letter come for ? " " when it be ready , my dear , " he reply . " I think it be ready , " say I . " be to bring it ? " he ask pleasantly . " no . I have bring it myself , guardian , " I return . I put my two arm round he neck and kiss he , and he say be this the mistress of , and I say yes ; and it make no difference presently , and we all go out together , and
and I say nothing to my precious pet about it . in one morning when I have do jingl about with my basket of key , as my beauty and I be walk round and round the garden I happen to turn my eye towards the house and see a long thing shadow go in which look like . have be tell I only that morning of she hope that might exhaust he ardour in the suit by be so very earnest in it ; and therefore , not to damp my dear girl 's spirit , I say nothing about 's shadow . presently come , lightly win among the bushes and trip along the path , as rosy and pretty as one of 's attendant instead of my maid , say , " oh , if you please , miss , would you step and speak to ! " it be one of 's peculiarity that whenever she be charge with a message she always begin to deliver it as soon as she beheld , at any distance , the person for whom it be intend . therefore I see ask I in she usual form of word to " step and speak " to long before I hear she . and when I do hear she , she have say it so often that she be out of breath . I tell I would make haste back and inquire of as we go in whether there be not a gentleman with . to which , whose grammar , I confess to my shame , never do any credit to my educational power , reply , " yes , miss . have come down in the country with . " a more complete contrast than my guardian and I suppose there could not be . I find they look at one another across a table , the one so open and the other so close , the one so broad and upright and the other so narrow and stoop , the one give out what he have to say in such a rich ringing voice and the other keep it in in such a cold - blooded , gasping , fish - like manner that I think I never have see two people so unmatched . " you know , my dear , " say my guardian . not with the greatest urbanity , I must say . Vholes rise , glove and buttone up as usual , and seate himself again , just as he have seat himself beside in the gig . not have to look at , he look straight before he . " , " say my guardian , eye he black figure as if he be a bird of ill oman , " have bring a ugly report of we most unfortunate . " lay a mark emphasis on " most unfortunate " as if the word be rather descriptive of he connexion with . I sit down between they ; remain immovable , except that he secretly pick at one of the red pimple on he yellow face with he black glove . " and as and you be happily good friend , I should like to know , " say my guardian , " what you think , my dear . would you be so good as to -- as to speak up , ? " do anything but that , Vhole observ , " I have be say that I have reason to know , , as C.'s professional adviser , that . circumstance be at the present moment in a embarrassed state . not so much in point of amount as owe to the peculiar and press nature of liability have incur and the means he have of liquidating or meet the same . I have stave off many little matter for , but there be a limit to stave off , and we have reach it . I have make some advances out of pocket to accommodate these unpleasantness , but I necessarily look to be repay , for I do not pretend to be a man of capital , and I have a father to support in the of , besides strive to realize some little independence for three dear girl at home . my apprehension be , .' circumstance be such , lest it should end in he obtaining leave to part with he commission , which at all event be desirable to be make known to he connexion . " , who have look at I while speak , here emerge into the silence he could hardly be say to have broken , so stifle be he tone , and look before he again . " imagine the poor fellow without even he present resource , " say my guardian to I . " yet what can I do ? you know he , . he would never accept of help from I now . to offer it or hind at it would be to drive he to a extremity , if nothing else do . " hereupon address I again . " what remark , miss , be no doubt the case , and be the difficulty . I do not see that anything be to be do , I do not say that anything be to be do . far from it . I merely come down here under the seal of confidence and mention it in order that everything may be openly carry on and that it may not be say afterwards that everything be not openly carry on . my wish be that everything should be openly carry on . I desire to leave a good name behind I . if I consult merely my own interest with , I should not be here . so insurmountable , as you must well know , would be he objection . this be not
not a professional attendance . this can he charge to nobody . I have no interest in it except as a member of society and a father -- and a son , " say , who have nearly forgotten that point . it appear to we that say neither more nor less than the truth in intimating that he seek to divide the responsibility , such as it be , of know 's situation . I could only suggest that I should go down to , where be then station , and see he , and try if it be possible to avert the worst . without consulting Vholes on this point , I take my guardian aside to propose it , while gauntly stalk to the fire and warm he funeral glove . the fatigue of the journey form a immediate objection on my guardian 's part , but as I see he have no other , and as I be only too happy to go , I get he consent . we have then merely to dispose of . " well , sir , " say , " will communicate with , and you can only hope that he position may be yet retrievable . you will allow I to order you lunch after you journey , sir . " " I thank you , , " say , put out he long black sleeve to check the ringing of the bell , " not any . I thank you , no , not a morsel . my digestion be much impaired , and I be but a poor knife and fork at any time . if I be to partake of solid food at this period of the day , I do not know what the consequence might be . everything have be openly carry on , sir , I will now with you permission take my leave . " " and I would that you could take you leave , and we could all take we leave , , " return my guardian bitterly , " of a cause you know of . " , whose black dye be so deep from head to foot that it have quite steam before the fire , diffuse a very unpleasant perfume , make a short one - sided inclination of he head from the neck and slowly shook it . " we whose ambition it be to be look upon in the light of respectable practitioner , sir , can but put we shoulders to the wheel . we do it , sir . at least , I do it myself ; and I wish to think well of my professional breth , one and all . you be sensible of a obligation not to refer to I , miss , in communicating with c.? " I say I would be careful not to do it . " just so , miss . good morning . , good morning , sir . " Vhole put he dead glove , which scarcely seem to have any hand in it , on my finger , and then on my guardian 's finger , and take he long thing shadow away . I think of it on the outside of the coach , pass over all the sunny landscape between we and , chill the seed in the ground as it glide along . of course it become necessary to tell where I be go and why I be go , and of course she be anxious and distressed . but she be too true to to say anything but word of pity and word of excuse , and in a more loving spirit still -- my dear devoted girl !-- she write he a long letter , of which I take charge . be to be my travel companion , though I be sure I want none and would willingly have leave she at home . we all go to that afternoon , and find two place in the mail , secure they . at we usual bed - time , and I be roll away seaward with the Kentish letter . it be a night 's journey in those coach time , but we have the mail to ourselves and do not find the night very tedious . it pass with I as I suppose it would with most people under such circumstance . at one while my journey look hopeful , and at another hopeless . now I think I should do some good , and now I wonder how I could ever have suppose so . now it seem one of the most reasonable thing in the world that I should have come , and now one of the most unreasonable . in what state I should find , what I should say to he , and what he would say to I occupy my mind by turn with these two state of feeling ; and the wheel seem to play one tune ( to which the burden of my guardian 's letter set itself ) over and over again all night . at last we come into the narrow street of deal , and very gloomy they be upon a raw misty morning . the long flat beach , with its little irregular house , wooden and brick , and its litter of capstan , and great boats , and shed , and bear upright pole with tackle and block , and loose gravelly waste place overgrown with grass and weed , wore as dull a appearance as any place I ever see . the sea be heaive under a thick white fog ; and nothing else be move but a few early ropemaker , who , with the yarn twist round they body , look as if , tired of they present state of existence , they be spinn themselves into cordage . but when we
we get into a warm room in a excellent hotel and sit down , comfortably wash and dress , to a early breakfast ( for it be too late to think of go to bed ) , begin to look more cheerful . we little room be like a ship 's cabin , and that delighte very much . then the fog begin to rise like a curtain , and number of ship that we have have no idea be near appear . I do not know how many sail the waiter tell we be then lie in the down . some of these vessel be of grand size -- one be a large just come home ; and when the sun shone through the cloud , make silvery pool in the dark sea , the way in which these ship brighten , and shadow , and change , amid a bustle of boat pull off from the shore to they and from they to the shore , and a general life and motion in themselves and everything around they , be most beautiful . the large be we great attraction because she have come into the down in the night . she be surround by boat , and we say how glad the people on board of she must be to come ashore . be curious , too , about the voyage , and about the heat in , and the serpent and the tiger ; and as she pick up such information much faster than grammar , I tell she what I know on those point . I tell she , too , how people in such voyage be sometimes wreck and cast on rock , where they be save by the intrepidity and humanity of one man . and ask how that could be , I tell she how we know at home of such a case . I have think of send a note say I be there , but it seem so much better to go to he without preparation . as he live in barrack I be a little doubtful whether this be feasible , but we go out to reconnoitre . Peep in at the gate of the barrack - yard , we find everything very quiet at that time in the morning , and I ask a sergeant stand on the guardhouse - step where he liv . he send a man before to show I , who go up some bare stair , and knock with he knuckle at a door , and leave we . " now then ! " cry from . so I leave in the little passage , and go on to the half - open door , say , " can I come in , ? it be only . " he be write at a table , with a great confusion of clothes , tin case , book , boot , brush , and portmanteaus strewn all about the floor . he be only half dress -- in plain clothes , I observe , not in uniform -- and he hair be unbrushed , and he look as wild as he room . all this I see after he have heartily welcome I and I be seat near he , for he start upon hear my voice and catch I in he arm in a moment . dear ! he be ever the same to I . down to -- ah , poor poor fellow ! -- to the end , he never receive I but with something of he old merry boyish manner . " good heaven , my dear little woman , " say he , " how do you come here ? who could have think of see you ! nothing the matter ? be well ? " " quite well . Lovelier than ever , ! " " ah ! " he say , lean back in he chair . " my poor cousin ! I be write to you , . " so wear and haggard as he look , even in the fullness of he handsome youth , lean back in he chair and crush the closely write sheet of paper in he hand ! " have you be at the trouble of write all that , and be I not to read it after all ? " I ask . " oh , my dear , " he return with a hopeless gesture . " you may read it in the whole room . it be all over here . " I mildly entreate he not to be despondent . I tell he that I have hear by chance of he be in difficulty and have come to consult with he what could best be done . " like you , , but useless , and so not like you ! " say he with a melancholy smile . " I be away on leave this day -- should have be go in another hour -- and that be to smooth it over , for my sell out . well ! let bygones be bygone . so this call follow the rest . I only want to have be in the church to have make the round of all the profession . " " , " I urge , " it be not so hopeless as that ? " " , " he return , " it be indeed . I be just so near disgrace as that those who be put in authority over I ( as the catechism go ) would far rather be without I than with I . and they be right . apart from debt and dun and all such drawback , I be not fit even for this employment . I have no care , no mind , no heart , no soul , but for one thing . why , if this
this bubble have not break now , " he say , tear the letter he have write into fragment and moodily caste they away , by driblet , " how could I have go abroad ? I must have be order abroad , but how could I have go ? how could I , with my experience of that thing , trust even Vholes unless I be at he back ! " I suppose he know by my face what I be about to say , but he catch the hand I have laid upon he arm and touch my own lip with it to prevent I from go on . " no , ! two subject I forbid -- must forbid . the first be . the second , you know what . call it madness , and I tell you I can not help it now , and can not be sane . but it be no such thing ; it be the one object I have to pursue . it be a pity I ever be prevail upon to turn out of my road for any other . it would be wisdom to abandon it now , after all the time , anxiety , and pain I have bestow upon it ! oh , yes , true wisdom . it would be very agreeable , too , to some people ; but I never will . " he be in that mood in which I think it best not to increase he determination ( if anything could increase it ) by oppose he . I take out 's letter and put it in he hand . " be I to read it now ? " he ask . as I tell he yes , he lay it on the table , and rest he head upon he hand , begin . he have not read far when he rest he head upon he two hand -- to hide he face from I . in a little while he rise as if the light be bad and go to the window . he finish read it there , with he back towards I , and after he have finish and have fold it up , stand there for some minute with the letter in he hand . when he come back to he chair , I see tear in he eye . " of course , , you know what she say here ? " he speak in a softened voice and kiss the letter as he ask I . " yes , . " " offer I , " he go on , tap he foot upon the floor , " the little inheritance she be certain of so soon -- just as little and as much as I have waste -- and beg and pray I to take it , set myself right with it , and remain in the service . " " I know you welfare to be the dearest wish of she heart , " say I . " and , oh , my dear , Ada's be a noble heart . " " I be sure it be . I -- I wish I be dead ! " he go back to the window , and lay he arm across it , lean he head down on he arm . it greatly affect I to see he so , but I hope he might become more yielding , and I remain silent . my experience be very limited ; I be not at all prepare for he rouse himself out of this emotion to a new sense of injury . " and this be the heart that the same , who be not otherwise to be mention between we , step in to estrange from I , " say he indignantly . " and the dear girl make I this generous offer from under the same 's roof , and with the same 's gracious consent and connivance , I dare say , as a new means of buy I off . " " ! " I cry out , rise hastily . " I will not hear you say such shameful word ! " I be very angry with he indeed , for the first time in my life , but it only last a moment . when I see he worn young face look at I as if he be sorry , i put my hand on he shoulder and say , " if you please , my dear , do not speak in such a tone to I . consider ! " he blame himself exceedingly and tell I in the most generous manner that he have be very wrong and that he beg my pardon a thousand time . at that I laugh , but tremble a little too , for I be rather flutter after be so fiery . " to accept this offer , my dear Esther , " say he , sit down beside I and resume we conversation , " -- once more , pray , pray forgive I ; I be deeply grieve -- to accept my dearest cousin 's offer be , I need not say , impossible . besides , I have letter and papers that I could show you which would convince you it be all over here . I have do with the red coat , believe I . but it be some satisfaction , in the midst of my troubles and perplexity , to know that I be press 's interest in press my own . Vholes have he shoulder to the wheel , and he can not help urge it on as much for she as for I , thank ! " he sanguine hope be rise within he and light up he feature , but they make he face more sad to I than it have be
be before . " no , no ! " cry exultingly . " if every farthing of 's little fortune be mine , no part of it should be spend in retain I in what I be not fit for , can take no interest in , and be weary of . it should be devote to what promise a better return , and should be use where she have a larger stake . do not be uneasy for I ! I shall now have only one thing on my mind , and Vholes and I will work it . I shall not be without means . free of my commission , I shall be able to compound with some small usurer who will hear of nothing but they bond now -- say so . I should have a balance in my favour anyway , but that would swell it . come , come ! you shall carry a letter to from I , , and you must both of you be more hopeful of I and not believe that I be quite cast away just yet , my dear . " I will not repeat what I say to . I know it be tiresome , and nobody be to suppose for a moment that it be at all wise . it only come from my heart . he hear it patiently and feelingly , but I see that on the two subject he have reserve it be at present hopeless to make any representation to he . I see too , and have experience in this very interview , the sense of my guardian 's remark that it be even more mischievous to use persuasion with he than to leave he as he be . therefore I be drive at last to ask if he would mind convince I that it really be all over there , as he have say , and that it be not he mere impression . he show I without hesitation a correspondence make it quite plain that he retirement be arrange . I find , from what he tell I , that have copy of these papers and have be in consultation with he throughout . beyond ascertaine this , and have be the bearer of 's letter , and being ( as I be go to be ) 's companion back to , I have do no good by come down . admit this to myself with a reluctant heart , I say I would return to the hotel and wait until he join I there , so he throw a cloak over he shoulders and see I to the gate , and and I go back along the beach . there be a concourse of people in one spot , surround some naval officer who be land from a boat , and press about they with unusual interest . I say to this would be one of the great 's boat now , and we stop to look . the gentleman come slowly up from the waterside , speak good - humouredly to each other and to the people around and glance about they as if they be glad to be in again . " , , " say I , " come away ! " and I hurry on so swiftly that my little maid be surprised . it be not until we be shut up in we cabin - room and I have have time to take breath that I begin to think why I have make such haste . in one of the sunburnt face I have recognize , and I have be afraid of he recognize I . I have be unwill that he should see my altered look . I have be take by surprise , and my courage have quite fail I . but I know this would not do , and I now say to myself , " my dear , there be no reason -- there be and there can be no reason at all -- why it should be worse for you now than it ever have be . what you be last month , you be to - day ; you be no worse , you be no better . this be not you resolution ; call it up , , call it up ! " I be in a great tremble -- with running -- and at first be quite unable to calm myself ; but I get better , and I be very glad to know it . the party come to the hotel . I hear they speak on the staircase . I be sure it be the same gentleman because I know they voice again -- I mean I know 's . it would still have be a great relief to I to have go away without make myself know , but I be determine not to do so . " no , my dear , no . no , no , no ! " I untie my bonnet and put my veil half up -- I think I mean half down , but it matter very little -- and write on one of my card that I happen to be there with , and I send it in to . he come immediately . I tell he I be rejoice to be by chance among the first to welcome he home to . and I see that he be very sorry for I . " you have be in shipwreck and peril since you leave we , , " say I , " but we can hardly call that a misfortune which enable you to be so useful and so brave . we read of it with the truest interest . it first come to my knowledge through you old patient , poor , when I be recover from my severe illness . " " ah
ah ! ! " he say . " she live the same life yet ? " " just the same . " I be so comfortable with myself now as not to mind the veil and to be able to put it aside . " she gratitude to you , , be delightful . she be a most affectionate creature , as I have reason to say . " " you -- you have find she so ? " he return . " I -- I be glad of that . " he be so very sorry for I that he could scarcely speak . " I assure you , " say I , " that I be deeply touch by she sympathy and pleasure at the time I have refer to . " " I be grieve to hear that you have be very ill . " " I be very ill . " " but you have quite recover ? " " I have quite recover my health and my cheerfulness , " say I . " you know how good my guardian be and what a happy life we lead , and I have everything to be thankful for and nothing in the world to desire . " I feel as if he have greater commiseration for I than I have ever have for myself . it inspire I with new fortitude and new calmness to find that it be I who be under the necessity of reassure he . I speak to he of he voyage out and home , and of he future plan , and of he probable return to . he say that be very doubtful . he have not find himself more favour by fortune there than here . he have go out a poor ship 's surgeon and have come home nothing better . while we be talk , and when I be glad to believe that I have alleviate ( if I may use such a term ) the shock he have have in see I , come in . he have hear downstair who be with I , and they meet with cordial pleasure . I see that after they first greeting be over , and when they speak of 's career , have a perception that all be not go well with he . he frequently glance at he face as if there be something in it that give he pain , and more than once he look towards I as though he seek to ascertain whether I know what the truth be . yet be in one of he sanguine and in good spirit and be thoroughly pleased to see again , whom he have always like . propose that we all should go to together ; but , have to remain by he ship a little longer , could not join we . he dine with we , however , at a early hour , and become so much more like what he use to be that I be still more at peace to think I have be able to soften he regret . yet he mind be not relieved of . when the coach be almost ready and run down to look after he luggage , he speak to I about he . I be not sure that I have a right to lay he whole story open , but I refer in a few word to he estrangement from and to he be entangle in the ill - fated Chancery suit . listen with interest and express he regret . " I see you observe he rather closely , " say I , " do you think he so change ? " " he be change , " he return , shak he head . I feel the blood rush into my face for the first time , but it be only a instantaneous emotion . I turn my head aside , and it be gone . " it be not , " say , " he be so much younger or older , or thinner or fatter , or paler or ruddier , as there be upon he face such a singular expression . I never see so remarkable a look in a young person . one can not say that it be all anxiety or all weariness ; yet it be both , and like ungrown despair . " " you do not think he be ill ? " say I . no . he look robust in body . " that he can not be at peace in mind , we have too much reason to know , " I proceed . " , you be go to ? " " to - morrow or the next day . " " there be nothing want so much as a friend . he always like you . pray see he when you get there . pray help he sometimes with you companionship if you can . you do not know of what service it might be . you can not think how , and , and even I -- how we should all thank you , ! " " , " he say , more move than he have be from the first , " before heaven , I will be a true friend to he ! I will accept he as a trust , and it shall be a sacred one ! " " bless you ! " say I , with my eye fill fast ; but I think they might , when it be not for myself . " love he -- we all love he , but love he as we cannot . I will tell she what you say . thank you , and bless you , in she name ! " come back as we finish exchange these hurried word and give I he arm to take
take I to the coach . " , " he say , unconscious with what application , " pray let we meet in ! " " ? " return the other . " I have scarcely a friend there now but you . where shall I find you ? " " why , I must get a lodging of some sort , " say , ponder . " at 's , 's . " " good ! without loss of time . " they shook hand heartily . when I be seat in the coach and be yet stand in the street , lay he friendly hand on 's shoulder and look at I . I understand he and wave mine in thanks . and in he last look as we drive away , I see that he be very sorry for I . I be glad to see it . I feel for my old self as the dead may feel if they ever revisit these scene . I be glad to be tenderly remembe , to be gently pitie , not to be quite forgotten . ! darkness rest upon - - 's . Dilat and dilat since the sun go down last night , it have gradually swell until it fill every void in the place . for a time there be some dungeon light burn , as the lamp of life hum in - all - 's , heavily , heavily , in the nauseous air , and wink -- as that lamp , too , wink in - all - 's -- at many horrible thing . but they be blot out . the moon have ey with a dull cold stare , as admit some puny emulation of herself in he desert region unfit for life and blast by volcanic fire ; but she have pass on and be gone . the blackest nightmare in the infernal stable graze on -all - 's , and be fast asleep . much mighty speech - make there have been , both in and out of parliament , concern , and much wrathful disputation how shall be get right . whether he shall be put into the main road by constable , or by beadle , or by bell - ring , or by force of figure , or by correct principle of taste , or by high church , or by low church , or by no church ; whether he shall be set to split truss of polemical straw with the crook knife of he mind or whether he shall be put to sto - break instead . in the midst of which dust and noise there be but one thing perfectly clear , to wit , that Tom only may and can , or shall and will , be reclaim accord to somebody 's theory but nobody be practice . and in the hopeful meantime , go to perdition head foremost in he old determined spirit . but he have he revenge . even the wind be he messenger , and they serve he in these hour of darkness . there be not a drop of 's corrupt blood but propagate infection and contagion somewhere . it shall pollute , this very night , the choice stream ( in which chemist on analysis would find the genuine nobility ) of a house , and he shall not be able to say nay to the infamous alliance . there be not a atom of 's slime , not a cubic inch of any pestilential gas in which he live , not one obscenity or degradation about he , not a ignorance , not a wickedness , not a brutality of he committing , but shall work its retribution through every order of society up to the proudest of the proud and to the highest of the high . Verily , what with tainting , plunder , and spoiling , have he revenge . it be a moot point whether - all - 's be uglier by day or by night , but on the argument that the more that be see of it the more shocking it must be , and that no part of it leave to the imagination be at all likely to be make so bad as the reality , day carry it . the day begin to break now ; and in truth it might be better for the national glory even that the sun should sometimes set upon the british dominion than that it should ever rise upon so vile a wonder as . a brown sunburnt gentleman , who appear in some inaptitude for sleep to be wander abroad rather than count the hour on a restless pillow , stroll hitherward at this quiet time . attract by curiosity , he often pause and look about he , up and down the miserable by - way . be he merely curious , for in he bright dark eye there be compassionate interest ; and as he look here and there , he seem to understand such wretchedness and to have study it before . on the bank of the stagnant channel of mud which be the main street of - all - 's , nothing be to be see but the crazy house , shut up and silent . no wake creature save himself appear except in one direction , where he see the solitary figure of a woman sit on a door - step . he walk that way . Approaching , he observe that she have journey a long distance and be footsore and travel - stain . she sit on the door - step in the manner of one who be wait , with she elbow on she knee and she head upon she hand . beside she be a canva bag , or bundle , she have carry . she be do probably , for she
she give no heed to he step as he come toward she . the broken footway be so narrow that when come to where the woman sit , he have to turn into the road to pass she . look down at she face , he eye meet hers , and he stop . " what be the matter ? " " nothing , sir . " " can not you make they hear ? do you want to be let in ? " " I be walt till they get up at another house -- a lodging - house -- not here , " the woman patiently return . " I be wait here because there will be sin here presently to warm I . " " I be afraid you be tired . I be sorry to see you sit in the street . " " thank you , sir . it do not matter . " a habit in he of speak to the poor and of avoid patronage or condescension or childishness ( which be the favourite device , many people deeme it quite a subtlety to talk to they like little spel book ) have put he on good term with the woman easily . " let I look at you forehead , " he say , bend down . " I be a doctor . do not be afraid . I would not hurt you for the world . " he know that by touch she with he skilful and accustom hand he can soothe she yet more readily . she make a slight objection , say , " it be nothing " ; but he have scarcely laid he finger on the wounded place when she lift it up to the light . " aye ! a bad bruise , and the skin sadly break . this must be very sore . " " it do aco a little , sir , " return the woman with a start tear upon she cheek . " let I try to make it more comfortable . my handkerchief will not hurt you . " " oh , dear no , sir , I be sure of that ! " he cleanse the injured place and dry it , and have carefully examine it and gently press it with the palm of he hand , take a small case from he pocket , dress it , and bind it up . while he be thus employ , he say , after laugh at he establish a surgery in the street , " and so you husband be a brickmaker ? " " how do you know that , sir ? " ask the woman , astonished . " why , I suppose so from the colour of the clay upon you bag and on you dress . and I know brickmaker go about work at piecework in different place . and I be sorry to say I have know they cruel to they wife too . " the woman hastily lift up she eye as if she would deny that she injury be referable to such a cause . but feel the hand upon she forehead , and see he busy and compose face , she quietly drop they again . " where be he now ? " ask the surgeon . " he get into trouble last night , sir ; but he will look for I at the lodging - house . " " he will get into worse trouble if he often misuse he large and heavy hand as he have misuse it here . but you forgive he , brutal as he be , and I say no more of he , except that I wish he deserv it . you have no young child ? " the woman shake she head . " one as I call mine , sir , but it be 's . " " you own be dead . I see ! poor little thing ! " by this time he have finish and be put up he case . " I suppose you have some settled home . be it far from here ? " he ask , good - humouredly make light of what he have do as she get up and curtsy . " it be a good two or three and twenty mile from here , sir . at . you know , sir ? I think you give a start like , as if you do . " " yes , I know something of it . and now I will ask you a question in return . have you money for you lodging ? " " yes , sir , " she say , " really and truly . " and she show it . he tell she , in acknowledgment of she many subdue thanks , that she be very welcome , give she good day , and walk away . tom - all - 's be still asleep , and nothing be astir . yes , something be ! as he retrace he way to the point from which he descry the woman at a distance sit on the step , he see a rag figure come very cautiously along , crouch close to the soil wall -- which the wretchedest figure might as well avoid -- and furtively thrust a hand before it . it be the figure of a youth whose face be hollow and whose eye have a emaciated glare . he be so intent on get along unseen that even the apparition of a stranger in whole garment do not tempt he to look back . he shade he face with he rag elbow as he pass on the other side of the way , and go shrink and creepe on with he anxious hand before he and he shapeless clothes hang in shred . clothes
clothes make for what purpose , or of what material , it would be impossible to say . they look , in colour and in substance , like a bundle of rank leave of swampy growth that rot long ago . pause to look after he and note all this , with a shadowy belief that he have see the boy before . he can not recall how or where , but there be some association in he mind with such a form . he imagine that he must have see it in some hospital or refuge , still , can not make out why it come with any special force on he remembrance . he be gradually emerge from - all - 's in the morning light , think about it , when he hear run foot behind he , and look round , see the boy scour towards he at great speed , follow by the woman . " stop he , stop he ! " cry the woman , almost breathless . " stop he , sir ! " he dart across the road into the boy 's path , but the boy be quicker than he , make a curve , duck , dife under he hand , come up half - a - dozen yard beyond he , and scour away again . still the woman follow , cry , " stop he , sir , pray stop he ! " Allan , not know but that he have just rob she of she money , follow in chase and run so hard that he run the boy down a dozen time , but each time he repeat the curve , the duck , the dive , and scour away again . to strike at he on any of these occasion would be to fall and disable he , but the pursuer can not resolve to do that , and so the grimly ridiculous pursuit continue . at last the fugitive , hard - press , take to a narrow passage and a court which have no thoroughfare . here , against a hoarding of decaying timber , he be brotch to bay and tumble down , lie gasping at he pursuer , who stand and gasp at he until the woman come up . " oh , you , ! " cry the woman . " what ? I have find you at last ! " " , " repeat , look at he with attention , " ! stay . to be sure ! I recollect this lad some time ago be bring before the coroner . " " yes , I see you once afore at the inkwhich , " whimper . " what of that ? can not you never let such a unfortnet as I alo ? a n't I unfortnet enough for you yet ? how unfortnet do you want I yofu to be ? I have be a - chivied and a - chivy , fust by one on you and nixt by another on you , till I be worrit to skin and bone . the inkwhich war not my fault . I do nothink . he wo wery good to I , he wos ; he wo the only one I know to speak to , as ever come across my crossing . it be not wery likely I should want he to be inkwhich . I only wish I wo , myself . I do not know why I do not go and make a hole in the water , I be sure I do not . " he say it with such a pitiable air , and he grimy tear appear so real , and he lie in the corner up against the hoarding so like a growth of fungus or any unwholesome excrescence produce there in neglect and impurity , that be soften towards he . he say to the woman , " miserable creature , what have he do ? " to which she only reply , shak she head at the prostrate figure more amazedly than angrily , " oh , you , you . I have find you at last ! " " what have he do ? " say . " have he robb you ? " " no , sir , no . robb I ? he do nothing but what be kind - hear by I , and that be the wonder of it . " look from to the woman , and from the woman to , wait for one of they to unravel the riddle . " but he be along with I , sir , " say the woman . " oh , you ! he be along with I , sir , down at , ill , and a young lady , bless she for a good friend to I , take pity on he when I durst not , and take he home -- " shrink back from he with a sudden horror . " yes , sir , yes . take he home , and make he comfortable , and like a thankless monster he run away in the night and never have be see or hear of since till I set eye on he just now . and that young lady that be such a pretty dear catch he illness , lose she beautiful look , and would not hardly be know for the same young lady now if it be not for she angel temper , and she pretty shape , and she sweet voice . do you know it ? you ungrateful wretch , do you know that this be all along of you and of she goodness to you ? " demand the woman , begin to rage at he as she recall it and break into passionate tear . the boy , in rough sort stun by
by what he hear , fall to smear he dirty forehead with he dirty palm , and to star at the ground , and to shak from head to foot until the crazy hoarding against which he lean rattle . restrain the woman , merely by a quiet gesture , but effectually . " tell I -- " he falter . " I mean , I have hear of this -- do not mind I for a moment , I will speak presently . " he turn away and stand for a while look out at the covered passage . when he come back , he have recover he composure , except that he contend against a avoidance of the boy , which be so very remarkable that it absorb the woman 's attention . " you hear what she say . but get up , get up ! " Jo , shak and chatter , slowly rise and stand , after the manner of he tribe in a difficulty , sideway against the hoarding , rest one of he high shoulders against it and covertly rub he right hand over he left and he left foot over he right . " you hear what she say , and I know it be true . have you be here ever since ? " " Wishermaydie if I see - all - 's till this bless morning , " reply hoarsely . " why have you come here now ? " look all round the confined court , look at he questioner no higher than the knee , and finally answer , " I do not know how to do nothink , and I can not get nothink to do . I be wery poor and ill , and I think I would come back here when there war not nobody about , and lay down and hide somewhere as I know on till arter dark , and then go and beg a trifle of . he wo allus willin yofu to give I somethink he wos , though Mrs . Snagsby she be allus a - chivying on I -- like everybody everywhere . " " where have you come from ? " look all round the court again , look at he questioner 's knee again , and conclude by lay he profile against the hoarding in a sort of resignation . " do you hear I ask you where you have come from ? " " Tramp then , " say . " now tell I , " proceed , make a strong effort to overcome he repugnance , go very near to he , and lean over he with a expression of confidence , " tell I how it come about that you leave that house when the good young lady have be so unfortunate as to pity you and take you home . " suddenly come out of he resignation and excitedly declare , address the woman , that he never know about the young lady , that he never heern about it , that he never go yofu to hurt she , that he would sooner have hurt he own self , that he would sooner have have he unfortnet ed chop off than ever go a - nigh she , and that she wo wery good to he , she wos . conduct himself throughout as if in he poor fashion he really mean it , and win up with some very miserable sob . see that this be not a sham . he constrain himself to touch he . " come , . tell I . " " no . I dust not , " say , relapse into the profile state . " I dust not , or I would . " " but I must know , " return the other , " all the same . , . " after two or three such adjuration , lift up he head again , look round the court again , and say in a low voice , " well , I will tell you something . I be take away . there ! " " take away ? in the night ? " " ah ! " very apprehensive of be overheard , look about he and even glance up some ten foot at the top of the hoarding and through the crack in it lest the object of he distrust should be look over or hide on the other side . " who take you away ? " " I dust not name he , " say . " I dust not do it , sir . " but I want , in the young lady 's name , to know . you may trust I . no one else shall hear . " " ah , but I do not know , " reply , shak he head fearfully , " as he do not hear . " " why , he be not in this place . " " oh , be not he though ? " say . " he be in all manner of place , all at wanst . " look at he in perplexity , but discover some real meaning and good faith at the bottom of this bewildering reply . he patiently await a explicit answer ; and , more baffle by he patience than by anything else , at last desperately whisper a name in he ear . " aye ! " say . " why , what have you be do ? " " Nothink , sir . never do nothink to get myself into no trouble , ' sept in not move on and the inkwhich . but I be a -moving on now . I be a -moving on to the berryin ground -- that be the move as I be up to . " " no , no , we
we will try to prevent that . but what do he do with you ? " " put I in a horsepittle , " reply , whispering , " till I be discharge , then hagive I a little money -- four half - bull , wot you may call half - crown -- and s ' hook it ! nobody want you here , ' he s . ' you hook it . you go and tramp , ' he s . ' you move on , ' he s . ' do not let I ever see you nowhere within forty mile of , or you will repent it . ' so I shall , if ever he doo see I , and he will see I if I be above ground , " conclude , nervously repeat all he former precaution and investigations . consider a little , then remark , turn to the woman but keep a encouraging eye on , " he be not so ungrateful as you suppose . he have a reason for go away , though it be a insufficient one . " " Thankee , sir , thankee ! " exclaim . " there now ! see how hard you wo upon I . but ony you tell the young lady wot the genlmn se , and it be all right . for you wos wery good to I too , and I know it . " " now , , " say , keep he eye upon he , " come with I and I will find you a better place than this to lie down and hide in . if I take one side of the way and you the other to avoid observation , you will not run away , I know very well , if you make I a promise . " " I will not , not unless I wo to see he a - come , sir . " " very well . I take you word . half the town be get up by this time , and the whole town will be broad awake in another hour . come along . good day again , my good woman . " " good day again , sir , and I thank you kindly many time again . " she have be sit on she bag , deeply attentive , and now rise and take it up . Jo , repeat , " Ony you tell the young lady as I never go yofu to hurt she and wot the genlmn se ! " nod and shamble and shiver , and smear and blink , and half laugh and half cry , a farewell to she , and take he creeping way along after , close to the house on the opposite side of the street . in this order , the two come up out of - all - 's into the broad ray of the sunlight and the purer air . 's and proceed along the street where the high church spire and the distance be so near and clear in the morning light that the city itself seem renew by rest , revolve in he mind how and where he shall bestow he companion . " it surely be a strange fact , " he consider , " that in the heart of a civilized world this creature in human form should be more difficult to dispose of than a unowned dog . " but it be none the less a fact because of its strangeness , and the difficulty remain . at first he look behind he often to assure himself that be still really follow . but look where he will , he still behold he close to the opposite house , make he way with he wary hand from brick to brick and from door to door , and often , as he creep along , glance over at he watchfully . satisfie that the last thing in he thought be to give he the slip , go on , consider with a less divided attention what he shall do . a breakfast - stall at a street - corner suggest the first thing to be do . he stop there , look round , and beckons . cross and come halt and shuffl up , slowly scoop the knuckle of he right hand round and round in the hollow palm of he left , knead dirt with a natural pestle and mortar . what be a dainty repast to be then set before he , and he begin to gulp the coffee and to gnee the bread and butter , look anxiously about he in all direction as he eat and drink , like a scared animal . but he be so sick and miserable that even hunger have abandon he . " I think I be amost a - starvin , sir , " say , soon put down he food , " but I do not know nothink -- not even that . I do not care for eat wittle nor yet for drinking on th'ey . " and stand shivering and look at the breakfast wonderingly . lay he hand upon he pulse and on he chest . " draw breath , ! " " it draw , " say , " as heavy as a cart . " he might add , " and rattle like it , " but he only mutter , " I be a - move on , sir . " look about for a apothecary 's shop . there be none at hand , but a tavern do as well or better . he obtain a little measure of wine and give the lad a portion of it very carefully . he begin to revive almost as soon as it pass he lip . " we may repeat that dose
dose , , " observe after watch he with he attentive face . " so ! now we will take five minute ' rest , and then go on again . " leave the boy sit on the bench of the breakfast - stall , with he back against a iron railing , pace up and down in the early sunshine , cast a occasional look towards he without appear to watch he . it require no discernment to perceive that he be warm and refresh . if a face so shade can brighten , he face brighten somewhat ; and by little and little he eat the slice of bread he have so hopelessly laid down . Observant of these sign of improveament , engage he in conversation and elicit to he no small wonder the adventure of the lady in the veil , with all its consequence . slowly munch as he slowly tell it . when he have finish he story and he bread , they go on again . intend to refer he difficulty in find a temporary place of refuge for the boy to he old patient , zealous little , lead the way to the court where he and first foregather . but all be change at the rag and bottle shop ; no longer lodge there ; it be shut up ; and a hard - featured female , much obscur by dust , whose age be a problem , but who be indeed no other than the interesting , be tart and spare in she reply . these sufficing , however , to inform the visitor that and she bird be domicil with a , in , he repair to that neighbour place , where ( who rise early that she may be punctual at the divan of justice hold by she excellent friend the ) come run downstairs with tear of welcome and with open arm . " my dear physician ! " cry . " my meritorious , distinguished , honourable officer ! " she use some odd expression , but be as cordial and full of heart as sanity itself can be -- more so than it often be . Allan , very patient with she , wait until she have no more rapture to express , then point out , trembl in a doorway , and tell she how he come there . " where can I lodge he hereabout for the present ? now , you have a fund of knowledge and good sense and can advise I . " , mighty proud of the compliment , set s herself to consider ; but it be long before a bright thought occurs to she . be entirely let , and she herself occupy poor 's room . " ! " exclaim , clapp she hand after a twentieth repetition of this remark . " ! to be sure ! of course ! my dear physician ! will help we out . " it be hopeless to ask for any information about , and would be , though have not akeady run upstairs to put on she pinched bonnet and she poor little shawl and to arm herself with she reticule of document . but as she inform she physician in she disjointed manner on come down in full array that , whom she often call upon , know she dear and take a great interest in all connect with she , be induce to think that they may be in the right way . so he tell , for he encouragement , that this walk about will soon be over now ; and they repair to the general 's . fortunately it be not far . from the exterior of 's , and the long entry , and the bare perspective beyond it , augurs well . he also descry promise in the figure of himself , strid towards they in he morning exercise with he pipe in he mouth , no stock on , and he muscular arm , develop by broadsword and dumbbell , weightily assert themselves through he light shirt - sleeve . " you servant , sir , " say with a military salute . good - humouredly smile all over he broad forehead up into he crisp hair , he then defer to , as , with great stateliness , and at some length , she perform the courtly ceremony of presentation . he wind it up with another " you servant , sir ! " and another salute . " excuse I , sir . a sailor , I believe ? " say . " I be proud to find I have the air of one , " return ; " but I be only a sea -going doctor . " " indeed , sir ! I should have think you be a regular blue - jacket myself . " hope will forgive he intrusion the more readily on that account , and particularly that he will not lay aside he pipe , which , in he politeness , he have testify some intention of do . " you be very good , sir , " return the trooper . " as I know by experience that it be not disagreeable to , and since it be equally agreeable to yourself -- " and finish the sentence by put it between he lip again . proceed to tell he all he know about , unto which the trooper listen with a grave face . " and that be the lad , sir , be it ? " he inquire , look along the entry to where stand star up at the great letter on the whitewashed front , which have no meaning in he eye . " that be he , " say . " and , , I be in this difficulty about he . I be unwilling to place he
he in a hospital , even if I could procure he immediate admission , because I foresee that he would not stay there many hour if he could be so much as get there . the same objection apply to a workhouse , suppose I have the patience to be evad and shirk , and hand about from post to pillar in try to get he into one , which be a system that I do not take kindly to . " " no man do , sir , " return . " I be convince that he would not remain in either place , because he be possess by a extraordinary terror of this person who order he to keep out of the way ; in he ignorance , he believe this person to be everywhere , and cognizant of everything . " " I ask you pardon , sir , " say . " but you have not mention that party 's name . be it a secret , sir ? " " the boy make it one . but he name be . " " bucket the detective , sir ? " " the same man . " " the man be know to I , sir , " return the trooper after blow out a cloud of smoke and square he chest , " and the boy be so far correct that he undoubtedly be a -- rum customer . " smoke with a profound mean after this and survey in silence . " now , I wish and at least to know that this Jo , who tell so strange a story , have reappear , and to have it in they power to speak with he if they should desire to do so . therefore I want to get he , for the present moment , into any poor lodging keep by decent people where he would be admit . decent people and , , " say , follow the direction of the trooper 's eye along the entry , " have not be much acquainted , as you see . hence the difficulty . do you happen to know any one in this neighbourhood who would receive he for a while on my pay for he beforehand ? " as he put the question , he become aware of a dirty - face little man stand at the trooper 's elbow and look up , with a oddly twisted figure and countenance , into the trooper 's face . after a few more puffs at he pipe , the trooper look down askant at the little man , and the little man wink up at the trooper . " well , sir , " say , " I can assure you that I would willingly be knock on the head at any time if it would be at all agreeable to , and consequently I esteem it a privilege to do that young lady any service , however small . we be naturally in the vagabond way here , sir , both myself and . you see what the place be . you be welcome to a quiet corner of it for the boy if the same would meet you view . no charge make , except for ration . we be not in a flourish state of circumstance here , sir . we be liable to be tumble out neck and crop at a moment 's notice . however , sir , such as the place be , and so long as it last , here it be at you service . " with a comprehensive wave of he pipe , place the whole building at he visitor 's disposal . " I take it for grant , sir , " he add , " you be one of the medical staff , that there be no present infection about this unfortunate subject ? " be quite sure of it . " because , sir , " say , shak he head sorrowfully , " we have have enough of that . " he tone be no less sorrowfully echo by he new acquaintance . " still I be bound to tell you , " observe after repeat he former assurance , " that the boy be deplorably low and reduce and that he may be -- I do not say that he be -- too far gone to recover . " " do you consider he in present danger , sir ? " inquire the trooper . " yes , I fear so . " " then , sir , " return the trooper in a decisive manner , " it appear to I -- be naturally in the vagabond way myself -- that the sooner he come out of the street , the better . you , ! bring he in ! " tack out , all on one side , to execute the word of command ; and the trooper , have smoke he pipe , lay it by . be brotch in . he be not one of 's ; he be not one of 's lamb , be wholly unconnected with - ; he be not soften by distance and unfamiliarity ; he be not a genuine foreign - grow savage ; he be the ordinary home - make article . , ugly , disagreeable to all the sensis , in body a common creature of the common streets , only in soul a heathen . Homely filth begrime he , homely parasite deavor he , homely sore be in he , homely rag be on he ; native ignorance , the growth of English soil and climate , sink he immortal nature lower than the beasts that perish . forth , , in uncompromising colour ! from the sole of thy foot to the crown of thy head , there be nothing interesting about thee . he
he shuffle slowly into 's gallery and stand huddle together in a bundle , look all about the floor . he seem to know that they have a inclination to shrink from he , partly for what he be and partly for what he have cause . he , too , shrink from they . he be not of the same order of thing , not of the same place in creation . he be of no order and no place , neither of the beasts nor of humanity . " look here , ! " say . " this be . " search the floor for some time longer , then look up for a moment , and then down again . " he be a kind friend to you , for he be go to give you lod room here . " make a scoop with one hand , which be suppose to be a bow . after a little more consideration and some back and change of the foot on which he rest , he mutter that he be " wery thankful . " " you be quite safe here . all you have to do at present be to be obedient and to get strong . and mind you tell we the truth here , whatever you do , . " " Wishermaydie if I do not , sir , " say , revert to he favourite declaration . " I never do nothink yit , but wot you know on , to get myself into no trouble . I never be in no other trouble at all , sir , ' seep not knowin' nothink and starwation . " " I believe it , now attend to . I see he be go to speak to you . " " my intention merely be , sir , " observe , amazingly broad and upright , " to point out to he where he can lie down and get a thorough good dose of sleep . now , look here . " as the trooper speak , he conduct they to the other end of the gallery and open one of the little cabins . " there you be , you see ! here be a mattress , and here you may rest , on good behaviour , as long as , I ask you pardon , sir " -- he refer apologetically to the card have give he -- " pleasis . do not you be alarm if you hear shot ; they will be aim at the target , and not you . now , there be another thing I would recommend , sir , " say the trooper , turn to he visitor . " Phil , come here ! " Phil bear down upon they accord to he usual tactic . " here be a man , sir , who be find , when a baby , in the gutter . consequently , it be to be expect that he take a natural interest in this poor creature . you do , do not you , ? " " certainly and surely I do , guv'ner , " be 's reply . " now I be think , sir , " say in a martial sort of confidence , as if he be give he opinion in a council of war at a drum - head , " that if this man be to take he to a bath and be to lay out a few shilling in get he one or two coarse article -- " " , my considerate friend , " return Allan , take out he purse , " it be the very favou I would have ask . " and be send out immediately on this work of improvement . , quite enrapture by she success , make the best of she way to court , have great fear that otherwise she friend the may be uneasy about she or may give the judgment she have so long expect in she absence , and observe " which you know , my dear physician , and general , after so many year , would be too absurdly unfortunate ! " take the opportunity of go out to procure some restorative medicines , and obtain they near at hand , soon return to find the trooper walk up and down the gallery , and to fall into step and walk with he . " I take it , sir , " say , " that you know pretty well ? " yes , it appear . " not relate to she , sir ? " no , it appear . " excuse the apparent curiosity , " say . " it seem to I probable that you might take more than a common interest in this poor creature because have take that unfortunate interest in he . ' tTis my case , sir , I assure you . " " and mine , . " the trooper look sideway at 's sunburnt cheek and bright dark eye , rapidly measure he height and build , and seem to approve of he . " since you have be out , sir , I have be think that I unquestionably know the room in 's , where take the lad , accord to he account . though he be not acquaint with the name , I can help you to it . it be . that be what it be . " look at he inquiringly , repeat the name . " . that be the name , sir . I know the man , and know he to have be in communication with before , respect a deceased person who have give he offence . I know the man , sir . to my sorrow . " naturally ask what kind of man he be . " what kind of man
man ! do you mean to look at ? " " I think I know that much of he . I mean to deal with . generally , what kind of man ? " " why , then I will tell you , sir , " return the trooper , stop short and fold he arm on he square chest so angrily that he face fire and flush all over ; " he be a confoundedly bad kind of man . he be a slow - torture kind of man . he be no more like flesh and blood than a rusty old carbine be . he be a kind of man -- by !-- that have cause I more restlessness , and more uneasiness , and more dissatisfaction with myself than all other man put together . that be the kind of man be ! " " I be sorry , " say , " to have touch so sore a place . " " ? " the trooper plant he leg wider apart , wet the palm of he broad right hand , and lay it on the imaginary moustache . " it be no fault of yours , sir ; but you shall judge . he have get a power over I . he be the man I speak of just now as be able to tumble I out of this place neck and crop . he keep I on a constant see- see . he will not hold off , and he will not come on . if I have a payment to make he , or time to ask he for , or anything to go to he about , he do not see I , do not hear I -- pass I on to 's in 's , 's in 's pass I back again to he -- he keep I prowl and dangl about he as if I be make of the same stone as himself . why , I spend half my life now , pretty well , loiter and dodge about he door . what do he care ? nothing . just as much as the rusty old carbine I have compare he to . he chafe and goad I till -- Bah ! Nonsense ! I be forget myself . , " the trooper resume he march , " all I say be , he be a old man ; but I be glad I shall never have the chance of setting spur to my horse and ride at he in a fair field . for if I have that chance , in one of the humours he drive I into -- he would go down , sir ! " have be so accit that he find it necessary to wipe he forehead on he shirt - sleeve . even while he whistle he impetuosity away with the national anthem , some involuntary shaking of he head and heaving of he chest still linger behind , not to mention a occasional hasty adjustment with both hand of he open shirt - collar , as if it be scarcely open enough to prevent he be trouble by a choking sensation . in short , have not much doubt about the go down of on the field refer to . and he conductor presently return , and be assist to he mattress by the careful , to whom , after due administration of medicine by he own hand , confide all needful means and instruction . the morning be by this time get on apace . he repair to he lodging to dress and breakfast , and then , without seek rest , go away to to communicate he discovery . with he return alone , confidentially tell he that there be reason for keep this matter very quiet indeed and show a serious interest in it . to , repeat in substance what he say in the morning , without any material variation . only that cart of he be heavier to draw , and draw with a hollower sound . " let I lay here quiet and not be chivy no more , " falter , " and be so kind any person as be a -passin nigh where I use yofu to sleep , as jist to say to that , wot he know once , be a -moving on right forard with he duty , and I will be wery thankful . I would be more thankful than I be aready if it wo any way possible for a unfortnet to be it . " he make so many of these reference to the law - stationer in the course of a day or two that Allan , after conferr with , good - naturedly resolve to call in 's , the rather , as the cart seem to be break down . to 's , therefore , he repair . be behind he counter in he grey coat and sleeve , inspect a indenture of several skin which have just come in from the engrosser 's , a immense desert of law - hand and parchment , with here and there a resting - place of a few large letter to break the awful monotony and save the traveller from despair . put up at one of these inky well and greet the stranger with he cough of general preparation for business . " you do not remember I , ? " the stationer 's heart begin to thump heavily , for he old apprehension have never abate . it be as much as he can do to answer , " no , sir , I can not say I do . I should have consider -- not to put too fine a point upon it -- that I never see you before , sir . " " twice before , " say . " once at a
a poor bedside , and once -- " " it be come at last ! " think the afflict stationer , as recollection break upon he . " it be get to a head now and be go to burst ! " but he have sufficient presence of mind to conduct he visitor into the little counting - house and to shut the door . " be you a marry man , sir ? " " no , I be not . " " would you make the attempt , though single , " say in a melancholy whisper , " to speak as low as you can ? for my little woman be a - listen somewhere , or I will forfeit the business and five hundred pound ! " in deep dejection sit down on he stool , with he back against he desk , protest , " I never have a secret of my own , sir . I can not charge my memory with ever have once attempt to deceive my little woman on my own account since she name the day . I would not have do it , sir . not to put too fine a point upon it , I could not have do it , I dur not have do it . whereas , and nevertheless , I find myself wrap round with secrecy and mystery , till my life be a burden to I . " he visitor profess he regret to hear it and ask he do he remember . answer with a suppress groan , oh , do not he ! " you could not name a individual human being -- except myself -- that my little woman be more set and determine against than , " say . ask why . " why ? " repeat , in he desperation clutch at the clump of hair at the back of he bald head . " how should I know why ? but you be a single person , sir , and may you long be spare to ask a married person such a question ! " with this beneficent wish , cough a cough of dismal resignation and submit himself to hear what the visitor have to communicate . " there again ! " say , who , between the earnestness of he feeling and the suppress tone of he voice be discoloure in the face . " at it again , in a new direction ! a certain person charge I , in the solemnest way , not to talk of to any one , even my little woman . then come another certain person , in the person of yourself , and charge I , in a equally solemn way , not to mention Jo to that other certain person above all other person . why , this be a private asylum ! why , not to put too fine a point upon it , this be bedlam , sir ! " say . but it be better than he expect after all , be no explosion of the mine below he or deepen of the pit into which he have fall . and be tender - hear and affect by the account he hear of 's condition , he readily engage to " look round " as early in the evening as he can manage it quietly . he look round very quietly when the evening come , but it may turn out that be as quiet a manager as he . be very glad to see he old friend and say , when they be leave alone , that he take it uncommon kind as should come so far out of he way on account of sich as he . , touch by the spectacle before he , immediately lay upon the table half a crown , that magic balsam of he for all kind of wound . " and how do you find yourself , my poor lad ? " inquire the stationer with he cough of sympathy . " I be in luck , , I be , " return , " and do not want for nothink . I be more cumfbler nor you can not think . ! I be wery sorry that I do it , but I do not go yofu to do it , sir . " the stationer softly lay down another half - crown and ask he what it be that he be sorry for have do . " , " say , " I go and hagive a illness to the lady as wos and yit as war not the t'other lady , and none of th'ey never say nothink to I for have do it , on account of they be ser good and my have be s'unfortnet . the lady come herself and see I yesday , and she s , ' ah , ! ' she s . ' we think we would lose you , ! ' she s . and she sit down a - smilin so quiet , and do not pass a word nor yit a look upon I for have do it , she do not , and I turn agin the wall , I doo , . and , I see he a - force to turn away he own self . and , he come yofu to giv I somethink yofu to ease I , wot he be allus a - doin ' on day and night , and we he come a - bend over I and a - speakin up so bold , I see he tear a - fallin , . " the soften stationer deposits another half - crown on the table . nothing less than a repetition of that infallible remedy will relieve he feeling . " Wot I be a - thinkin on , , " proceed , "
" wos , as you wo able to write wery large , p'rap ? " " yes , , please , " return the stationer . " uncommon precious large , p'rap ? " say with eagerness . " yes , my poor boy . " laugh with pleasure . " Wot I wo a - think on then , , wos , that when I wo move on as fur as ever I could go and could not he move no furder , whether you might be so good p'rap as to write out , wery large so that any one could see it anywhere , as that I wo wery truly hearty sorry that I do it and that I never go yofu to do it , and that though I do not know nothink at all , I know as once cry over it and wo allus grieve over it , and that I hope as he would be able to forgive I in he mind . if the writin could be make to say it wery large , he might . " " it shall say it , . very large . " laugh again . " , . it be wery kind of you , sir , and it make I more cumfbler nor I be afore . " the meek little stationer , with a broken and unfinished cough , slip down he fourth half - crown -- he have never be so close to a case require so many -- and be fain to depart . and and he , upon this little earth , shall meet no more . no more . for the cart so hard to draw be near its journey 's end and drag over stony ground . all round the clock it labour up the broken step , shatte and wear . not many time can the sun rise and behold it still upon its weary road . , with he smoky gunpowder visage , at once act as nurse and work as armourer at he little table in a corner , often look round and say with a nod of he green - baize cap and a encourage elevation of he one eyebrow , " hold up , my boy ! hold up ! " there , too , be many a time , and almost always , both think , much , how strangely fate have entangle this rough outcast in the web of very different life . there , too , the trooper be a frequent visitor , fill the doorway with he athletic figure and , from he superfluity of life and strength , seem to shed down temporary vigour upon , who never fail to speak more robustly in answer to he cheerful word . be in a sleep or in a stupor to - day , and , newly arrive , stand by he , look down upon he waste form . after a while he softly seat himself upon the bedside with he face towards he -- just as he sit in the law - writer 's room -- and touch he chest and heart . the cart have very nearly give up , but labour on a little more . the trooper stand in the doorway , still and silent . have stop in a low clinking noise , with he little hammer in he hand . look round with that grave professional interest and attention on he face , and glance significantly at the trooper , sign to to carry he table out . when the little hammer be next use , there will be a speck of rust upon it . " well , ! what be the matter ? do not be frightene . " " I think , " say , who have start and be look round , " I think I be in - all - 's agin . be not there nobody here but you , Woodcot ? " " . " " and I be not take back to - all - 's . be I , sir ? " " no . " close he eye , mutter , " I be wery thankful . " after watch he closely a little while , put he mouth very near he ear and say to he in a low , distinct voice , " Jo ! do you ever know a prayer ? " " never know nothink , sir . " " not so much as one short prayer ? " " no , sir . Nothink at all . Chadbands he wo a - prayin wunst at 's and I heered he , but he sound as if he wo a - speakin to hisself , and not to I . he pray a lot , but I could not make out nothink on it . different time there be other genlman come down - all - be a - prayin , but they all mostly s as the t'other 's wun pray wrong , and all mostly sound to be a - talk to theirselves , or a - passing blame on the t'other , and not a - talkin to we . we never know nothink . I never know what it wo all about . " it take he a long time to say this , and few but a experienced and attentive listener could hear , or , hearing , understand he . after a short relapse into sleep or stupor , he make , of at sudden , a strong effort to get out of bed . " stay , ! what now ? " " it be time for I to go to that there berryin ground , sir , " he return with a wild look . " lie down , and tell I . what bury ground , ? " " where they
they lay he as wos wery good to I , wery good to I indeed , he wo . it be time fur I to go down to that there berryin ground , sir , and ask to be put along with he . I want to go there and be berried . he use yofu to say to I , 'I be as poor as you to - day , ,' he s . I want to tell he that I be as poor as he now and have come there to be lay along with he . " " by and by , . by and by . " " ah ! P'raps they would not do it if I wo to go myself . but will you promise to have I take there , sir , and lay along with he ? " " I will , indeed . " " Thankee , sir . Thankee , sir . they will have to get the key of the gate afore they can take I in , for it be allus lock . and there be a step there , as I use for to clean with my broom . it be turn wery dark , sir . be there any light a - comin ? " " it be come fast , . " fast . the cart be shake all to piece , and the rugged road be very near its end . " Jo , my poor fellow ! " " I hear you , sir , in the dark , but I be a -gropin -- a -gropin -- let I catch hold of you hand . " " Jo , can you say what I say ? " " I will say anythink as you say , sir , for I know it be good . " " we . " " we father ! yes , that be wery good , sir . " " which be in heaven . " " Art in heaven -- be the light a -comin , sir ? " " it be close at hand . Hallow by thy name ! " " Hallow be -- thy -- " the light be come upon the dark benight way . dead ! dead , you Majesty . dead , my lord and gentleman . dead , right reverend and wrong reverend of every order . dead , man and woman , bear with heavenly compassion in you heart . and die thus around we every day . close in the place in have shut it be many eye again , and the house in town be awake . in the of the past doze in they picture -frame , and the low wind murmur through the long drawing - room as if they be breathe pretty regularly . in town the Dedlock of the present rattle in they fire - ey carriage through the darkness of the night , and the , with ash ( or hair - powder ) on they head , symptomatic of they great humility , loll away the drowsy morning in the little window of the hall . the fashionable world -- tremendous orb , nearly five mile round -- be in full swing , and the solar system work respectfully at its appointed distance . where the throng be thickest , where the light be brightest , where all the sensis be ministere to with the greatest delicacy and refinement , be . from the shining height she have scal and take , she be never absent . though the belief she of old repose in herself as one able to reserve whatsoever she would under she mantle of pride be beat down , though she have no assurance that what she be to those around she she will remain another day , it be not in she nature when envious eye be look on to yield or to droop . they say of she that she have lately grow more handsome and more haughty . the debilitated cousin say of she that she be beauty nough -- tsetup shopofwoman -- but rather larming kind -- remindingmanfact -- inconvenient woman -- who will getoutofbedandbawthstahlishment -- . say nothing , look nothing . now , as heretofore , he be to be find in doorway of room , with he limp white cravat loosely twiste into its old - fashioned tie , receive patronage from the peerage and make no sign . of all man he be still the last who might be suppose to have any influence upon my lady . of all woman she be still the last who might be suppose to have any dread of he . one thing have be much on she mind since they late interview in he turret - room at . she be now decide , and prepare to throw it off . it be morning in the great world , afternoon accord to the little sun . the Mercury , exhaust by look out of window , be repose in the hall and hang they heavy head , the gorgeous creature , like overblown sunflower . like they , too , they seem to run to a deal of seed in they tags and trimming . , in the library , have fall asleep for the good of the country over the report of a Parliamentary committee . my Lady sit in the room in which she give audience to the young man of the name of . be with she and have be write for she and read to she . be now at work upon embroidery or some such pretty thing , and as she bend she head over it , my watch she in silence . not for the first time to - day . " . " the pretty village face look brightly up . then , see how
how serious my be , look puzzled and surprised . " see to the door . be it shut ? " yes . she go to it and return , and look yet more surprised . " I be about to place confidence in you , child , for I know I may trust you attachment , if not you judgment . in what I be go to do , I will not disguise myself to you at least . but I confide in you . say nothing to any one of what pass between we . " the timid little beauty promise in all earnestness to be trustworthy . " do you know , " ask she , sign to she to bring she chair nearer , " do you know , , that I be different to you from what I be to any one ? " " yes , my . much kinder . but then I often think I know you as you really be . " " you often think you know I as I really be ? poor child , poor child ! " she say it with a kind of scorn -- though not of -- and sit brooding , look dreamily at she . " do you think , , you be any relief or comfort to I ? do you suppose you be young and natural , and fond of I and grateful to I , make it any pleasure to I to have you near I ? " " I do not know , my ; I can scarcely hope so . but with all my heart , I wish it be so . " " it be so , little one . " the pretty face be check in it be flush of pleasure by the dark expression on the handsome face before it . it look timidly for a explanation . " and if I be to say to - day , ' go ! leave I ! ' I should say what would give I great pain and disquiet , child , and what would leave I very solitary . " " my ! have I offend you ? " " in nothing . come here . " bend down on the footstool at my 's foot . my lady , with that motherly touch of the famous ironmaster night , lay she hand upon she dark hair and gently keep it there . " I tell you , , that I wish you to be happy and that I would make you so if I could make anybody happy on this earth . I can not . there be reason now know to I , reason in which you have no part , render it far better for you that you should not remain here . you must not remain here . I have determine that you shall not . I have write to the father of you lover , and he will be here to - day . all this I have do for you sake . " the weeping girl cover she hand with kiss and say what shall she do , what shall she do , when they be separat ! she mistress kiss she on the cheek and make no other answer . " now , be happy , child , under better circumstance . be beloved and happy ! " " ah , my , I have sometimes think -- forgive my be so free -- that you be not happy . " " I ! " " will you be more so when you have send I away ? pray , pray , think again . let I stay a little while ! " " I have say , my child , that what I do , I do for you sake , not my own . it be done . what I be towards you , , be what I be now -- not what I shall be a little while hence . remember this , and keep my confidence . do so much for my sake , and thus all end between we ! " she detach herself from she simple - hear companion and leave the room . late in the afternoon , when she next appear upon the staircase , she be in she haughtiest and coldest state . as indifferent as if all passion , feel , and interest have be wear out in the earlier ag of the world and have perish from its surface with its other departed monster . have announce , which be the cause of she appearance . be not in the library , but she repair to the library . be there , and she wish to speak to he first . " , I be desirous -- but you be engage . " oh , dear no ! not at all . only . always at hand . Haunt every place . no relief or security from he for a moment . " I beg you pardon , . will you allow I to retire ? " with a look that plainly say , " you know you have the power to remain if you will , " she tell he it be not necessary and move towards a chair . bring it a little forward for she with he clumsy bow and retire into a window opposite . Interpose between she and the fading light of day in the now quiet street , he shadow fall upon she , and he darken all before she . even so do he darke she life . it be a dull street under the best condition , where the two long row of house stare at each other with that severity that half - a - dozen of its greatest mansion seem to have be slowly star into stone rather than
than originally build in that material . it be a street of such dismal grandeur , so determined not to condescmend to liveliness , that the door and window hold a gloomy state of they own in black paint and dust , and the echoing mew behind have a dry and massive appearance , as if they be reserve to stable the stone charger of noble statue . complicate garnish of iron - work entwine itself over the flight of step in this awful street , and from these petrify bower , extinguisher for obsolete flambeaux gasp at the upstart gas . here and there a weak little iron hoop , through which bold boy aspire to throw they friend ' cap ( it be only present use ) , retain it be place among the rusty foliage , sacr to the memory of departed oil . Nay , even oil itself , yet linger at long interval in a little absurd glass pot , with a knob in the bottom like a oyster , blink and sulk at newer light every night , like its high and dry master in the house of Lords . therefore there be not much that , seat in she chair , could wish to see through the window in which stand . and yet -- and yet -- she send a look in that direction as if it be she heart 's desire to have that figure move out of the way . beg he 's pardon . she be about to say ? " only that be here ( he have call by my appointment ) and that we have better make a end of the question of that girl . I be tired to death of the matter . " " what can I do -- to-- assist ? " demand in some considerable doubt . " let we see he here and have do with it . will you tell they to send he up ? " " , be so good as to ring . thank you . request , " say to , not immediately remember the business term , " request the iron gentleman to walk this way . " mercury depart in search of the iron gentleman , find , and produce he . receive that ferruginous person graciously . " I hope you be well , . be seat . ( my solicitor , . ) my Lady be desirous , Rouncewell , " skilfully transfer he with a solemn wave of he hand , " be desirous to speak with you . ! " " I shall be very happy , " return the iron gentleman , " to give my best attention to anything do I the honour to say . " as he turn towards she , he find that the impression she make upon he be less agreeable than on the former occasion . a distant supercilious air make a cold atmosphere about she , and there be nothing in she bear , as there be before , to encourage openness . " pray , sir , " say listlessly , " may I be allow to inquire whether anything have pass between you and you son respect you son 's fancy ? " it be almost too troublesome to she languid eye to bestow a look upon he as she ask this question . " if my memory serve I , , I say , when I have the pleasure of see you before , that I should seriously advise my son to conquer that -- fancy . " the ironmaster repeat she expression with a little emphasis . " and do you ? " " oh ! of course I do . " give a nod , approve and confirmatory . very proper . the iron gentleman , have say that he would do it , be bound to do it . no difference in this respect between the base metals and the precious . highly proper . " and pray have he do so ? " " really , , I can not make you a definite reply . I fear not . probably not yet . in we condition of life , we sometimes couple a intention with we -- we fancie which render they not altogether easy to throw off . I think it be rather we way to be in earnest . " have a misgiving that there may be a hidden mean in this expression , and fume a little . be perfectly good - humoured and polite , but within such limit , evidently adapt he tone to he reception . " because , " proceed my , " I have be think of the subject , which be tiresome to I . " " I be very sorry , I be sure . " " and also of what say upon it , in which I quite concur " -- flatter -- " and if you can not give we the assurance that this fancy be at a end , I have come to the conclusion that the girl have better leave I . " " I can give no such assurance , . nothing of the kind . " " then she have better go . " " excuse I , my , " considerately interpose , " but perhaps this may be do a injury to the young woman which she have not merit . here be a young woman , " say , magnificently lay out the matter with he right hand like a service of plate , " whose good fortune it be to have attract the notice and favour of a eminent lady and to live , under the protection of that eminent lady , surround by the various advantage which such a position confer , and which be unquestionably very great -- I believe unquestionably very great
great , sir -- for a young woman in that station of life . the question then arise , should that young woman be deprive of these many advantage and that good fortune simply because she have " -- , with a apologetic but dignified inclination of he head towards the ironmaster , wind up he sentence --" have attract the notice of 's son ? now , have she deserv this punishment ? be this just towards she ? be this we previous understanding ? " " I beg you pardon , " interpose 's son 's father . " , will you allow I ? I think I may shorten the subject . pray dismiss that from you consideration . if you remember anything so unimportant -- which be not to be expect -- you would recollect that my first thought in the affair be directly oppose to she remain here . " Dismiss the patronage from consideration ? oh ! be bound to believe a pair of ears that have be hand down to he through such a family , or he really might have mistrust they report of the iron gentleman 's observation . " it be not necessary , " observe my in she coldest manner before he can do anything but breathe amazedly , " to enter into these matters on either side . the girl be a very good girl ; I have nothing whatever to say against she , but she be so far insensible to she many advantage and she good fortune that she be in love -- or suppose she be , poor little fool -- and unable to appreciate they . " beg to observe that wholly alter the case . he might have be sure that my have the best grounds and reason in support of she view . he entirely agree with my lady . the young woman have better go . " as observ , , on the last occasion when we be fatigue by this business , " languidly proceed , " we can not make condition with you . without condition , and under present circumstance , the girl be quite misplace here and have better go . I have tell she so . would you wish to have she send back to the village , or would you like to take she with you , or what would you prefer ? " " , if I may speak plainly -- " " by all mean . " " -- I should prefer the course which will the soonest relieve you of the incumbrance and remove she from she present position . " " and to speak as plainly , " she return with the same study carelessness , " so should I . do I understand that you will take she with you ? " the iron gentleman make a iron bow . " , will you ring ? " step forward from he window and pull the bell . " I have forget you . thank you . " he make he usual bow and go quietly back again . , swift - responsive , appear , receive instruction whom to produce , skim away , produce the aforesaid , and depart . have be cry and be yet in distress . on she come in , the ironmaster leave he chair , take she arm in he , and remain with she near the door ready to depart . " you be take charge of , you see , " say my in she weary manner , " and be go away well protect . I have mention that you be a very good girl , and you have nothing to cry for . " " she seem after all , " observe , loiter a little forward with he hand behind he , " as if she be cry at go away . " " why , she be not well - breed , you see , " return with some quickness in he manner , as if he be glad to have the lawyer to retort upon , " and she be a inexperienced little thing and know no better . if she have remain here , sir , she would have improve , no doubt . " " no doubt , " be 's compose reply . sob out that she be very sorry to leave my , and that she be happy at , and have be happy with my , and that she thank my Lady over and over again . " out , you silly little puss ! " say the ironmaster , check she in a low voice , though not angrily . " have a spirit , if you be fond of ! " my merely wave she off with indifference , say , " there , there , child ! you be a good girl . go away ! " have magnificently disengage himself from the subject and retire into the sanctuary of he blue coat . , a indistinct form against the dark street now dot with lamps , loom in my 's view , bigger and blacker than before . " and , " say after a pause of a few moment , " I beg to take my leave , with a apology for have again trouble you , though not of my own act , on this tiresome subject . I can very well understand , I assure you , how tiresome so small a matter must have become to . if I be doubtful of my deal with it , it be only because I do not at first quietly exer my influence to take my young friend here away without trouble you at all . but it appear to I -- I dare say magnify the importance of the thing -- that it be respectful to explain
explain to you how the matter stood and candid to consult you wish and convenience . I hope you will excuse my want of acquaintance with the polite world . " consider himself evok out of the sanctuary by these remark . " , " he return , " do not mention it . Justification be unnecessary , I hope , on either side . " " I be glad to hear it , ; and if I may , by way of a last word , revert to what I say before of my mother 's long connexion with the family and the worth it bespeak on both side , I would point out this little instance here on my arm who show herself so affectionate and faithful in parting and in whom my mother , I dare say , have do something to awake such feeling -- though of course , by she heartfelt interest and she genial condescension , have do much more . " if he mean this ironically , it may be truer than he think . he point it , however , by no deviation from he straightforward manner of speech , though in say it he turn towards that part of the dim room where my Lady sits . stand to return he parting salutation , again ring , take another flight , and and leave the house . then light be bring in , discover still stand in he window with he hand behind he and my Lady still sit with he figure before she , close up she view of the night as well as of the day . she be very pale . , obserive it as she rise to retire , think , " well she may be ! the power of this woman be astonish . she have be act a part the whole time . " but he can act a part too -- he one unchanging character -- and as he hold the door open for this woman , fifty pair of eye , each fifty time sharper than 's pair , should find no flaw in he . lady Dedlock dine alone in she own room to - day . be whip in to the rescue of the and the discomfiture of the . ask on sit down to dinner , still deadly pale ( and quite a illustration of the debilitate cousin 's text ) , whether he be go out ? yes . whether be go yet ? no . presently she ask again , be he go ? no . what be he do ? think he be write letter in the library . would my wish to see he ? anything but that . but he wish to see my lady . within a few more minute he be report as send he respects , and could my Lady please to receive he for a word or two after she dinner ? my Lady will receive he now . he come now , apologize for intruding , even by she permission , while she be at table . when they be alone , my wave she hand to dispense with such mockery . " what do you want , sy ? " " why , , " say the lawyer , take a chair at a little distance from she and slowly rub he rusty leg up and down , up and down , up and down , " I be rather surprise by the course you have take . " " indeed ? " " yes , decidedly . I be not prepare for it . I consider it a departure from we agreement and you promise . it put we in a new position , . I feel myself under the necessity of say that I do not approve of it . " he stop in he rubbing and look at she , with he hand on he knee . Imperturbable and unchangeable as he be , there be still a indefinable freedom in he manner which be new and which do not escape this woman 's observation . " I do not quite understand you . " " oh , yes you do , I think . I think you do . come , come , , we must not fence and parry now . you know you like this girl . " " well , sir ? " " and you know -- and I know -- that you have not send she away for the reason you have assign , but for the purpose of separa she as much as possible from -- excuse my mention it as a matter of business -- any reproach and exposure that impend over yourself . " " well , sir ? " " well , , " return the lawyer , cross he leg and nurse the uppermost knee . " I object to that . I consider that a dangerous proceeding . I know it to be unnecessary and calculate to awaken speculation , doubt , rumour , I do not know what , in the house . besides , it be a violation of we agreement . you be to be exactly what you be before . whereas , it must be evident to yourself , as it be to I , that you have be this evene very different from what you be before . why , bless my soul , , transparently so ! " " if , sir , " she begin , " in my knowledge of my secret -- " but he interrupt she . " now , , this be a matter of business , and in a matter of business the ground can not be keep too clear . it be no longer you secret . excuse I . that be just the mistake . it be my secret , in
in trust for and the family . if it be you secret , , we should not be here hold this conversation . " " that be very true . if in my knowledge of the secret I do what I can to spare a innocent girl ( especially , remembere you own reference to she when you tell my story to the assemble guest at ) from the taint of my impending shame , I act upon a resolution I have take . nothing in the world , and no one in the world , could shake it or could move I . " this she say with great deliberation and distinctness and with no more outward passion than himself . as for he , he methodically discuss he matter of business as if she be any insensible instrument use in business . " really ? then you see , , " he return , " you be not to be trust . you have put the case in a perfectly plain way , and accord to the literal fact ; and that be the case , you be not to be trust . " " perhaps you may remember that I express some anxiety on this same point when we speak at night at ? " " yes , " say , coolly get up and stand on the hearth . " yes . I recollect , , that you certainly refer to the girl , but that be before we come to we arrangement , and both the letter and the spirit of we arrangement altogether preclude any action on you part foun upon my discovery . there can be no doubt about that . as to spare the girl , of what importance or value be she ? spare ! , here be a family name compromise . one might have suppose that the course be straight on -- over everything , neither to the right nor to the left , regardless of all consideration in the way , spare nothing , tread everything under foot . " she have be look at the table . she lift up she eye and look at he . there be a stern expression on she face and a part of she lower lip be compress under she tooth . " this woman understand I , " think as she let she glance fall again . " she can not be spare . why should she spare other ? " for a little while they be silent . have eat no dinner , but have twice or thrice pour out water with a steady hand and drink it . she rise from table , take a lounging - chair , and recline in it , shade she face . there be nothing in she manner to express weakness or excite compassion . it be thoughtful , gloomy , concentrate . " this woman , " think , stand on the hearth , again a dark object close up she view , " be a study . " he study she at he leisure , not speak for a time . she too study something at she leisure . she be not the first to speak , appear indeed so unlikely to be so , though he stand there until midnight , that even he be drive upon breaking silence . " , the most disagreeable part of this business interview remain , but it be business . we agreement be broken . a lady of you sense and strength of character will be prepare for my now declare it void and take my own course . " " I be quite prepar . " incline he head . " that be all I have to trouble you with , . " she stop he as he be move out of the room by asking , " this be the notice I be to receive ? I wish not to misapprehend you . " " not exactly the notice you be to receive , , because the contemplate notice suppose the agreement to have be observe . but virtually the same , virtually the same . the difference be merely in a lawyer 's mind . " " you intend to give I no other notice ? " " you be right . no . " " do you contemplate undeceive to - night ? " " a home question ! " say with a slight smile and cautiously shak he head at the shaded face . " no , not to - night . " " to -morrow ? " " all thing consider , I have better decline answer that question , . if I be to say i do not know when , exactly , you would not believe I , and it would answer no purpose . it may be to - morrow . I would rather say no more . you be prepare , and I hold out no expectation which circumstance might fail to justify . I wish you good evening . " she remove she hand , turn she pale face towards he as he walk silently to the door , and stop he once again as he be about to open it . " do you intend to remain in the house any time ? I hear you be write in the library . be you go to return there ? " " only for my hat . I be go home . " she bow she eye rather than she head , the movement be so slight and curiious , and he withdraw . clear of the room he look at he watch but be inclin to doubt it by a minute or thereabout . there be a splendid clock upon the staircase , famous , as splendid clocks not often be , for its accuracy . " and what do you
you say , " inquire , refer to it . " what do you say ? " if it say now , " do not go home ! " what a famous clock , hereafter , if it say to - night of all the night that it have count off , to this old man of all the young and old man who have ever stand before it , " do not go home ! " with its sharp clear bell it strike three quarter after seven and tick on again . " why , you be worse than I think you , " say , mutter reproon to he watch . " two minute wrong ? at this rate you will not last my time . " what a watch to return good for evil if it tick in answer , " do not go home ! " he pass out into the street and walk on , with he hand behind he , under the shadow of the lofy house , many of whose mystery , difficulty , mortgage , delicate affair of all kind , be treasure up within he old black satin waistcoat . he be in the confidence of the very brick and mortar . the high chimney - stack telegraph family secret to he . yet there be not a voice in a mile of they to whisper , " do not go home ! " through the stir and motion of the commoner streets ; through the roar and jar of many vehicle , many foot , many voice ; with the blazing shop - lights ligh he on , the west wind blow he on , and the crowd press he on , he be pitilessly urge upon he way , and nothing meet he murmur , " do not go home ! " arrive at last in he dull room to light he candle , and look round and up , and see the point from the ceiling , there be no new significance in the 's hand to - night or in the flutter of the attendant group to give he the late warning , " do not come here ! " it be a moonlight night , but the moon , be past the full , be only now rise over the great wilderness of . the star be shin as they shine above the turret - lead at . this woman , as he have of late be so accustom to call she , look out upon they . she soul be turbulent within she ; she be sick at heart and restless . the large room be too cramped and close . she can not endure they restraint and will walk alone in a neighbour garden . too capricious and imperious in all she do to be the cause of much surprise in those about she as to anything she do , this woman , loosely muff , go out into the moonlight . attend with the key . have open the garden - gate , he deliver the key into he Lady 's hand at she request and be bidden to go back . she will walk there some time to ease she ach head . she may be a hour , she may be more . she need no further escort . the gate shut upon its spring with a clash , and he leave she pass on into the dark shade of some tree . a fine night , and a bright large moon , and multitude of star . Tulkinghorn , in repair to he cellar and in opening and shutt those resoun door , have to cross a little prison - like yard . he look up casually , think what a fine night , what a bright large moon , what multitude of star ! a quiet night , too . a very quiet night . when the moon shines very brilliantly , a solitude and stillness seem to proceed from she that influence even crowd place full of life . not only be it a still night on dusty high roads and on hill - summit , whence a wide expanse of country may be see in repose , quieter and quieter as it spread away into a fringe of tree against the sky with the grey ghost of a bloom upon they ; not only be it a still night in garden and in wood , and on the river where the water - meadow be fresh and green , and the stream sparkle on among pleasant island , murmur weir , and whisper rush ; not only do the stillness attend it as it flow where house cluster thick , where many bridge be reflect in it , where wharve and shipping make it black and awful , where it wind from these disfigurement through marsh whose grim beacon stand like skeleton wash ashore , where it expand through the bolder region of rise grounds , rich in cornfield wind - mill and steeple , and where it mingle with the ever - heaive sea ; not only be it a still night on the deep , and on the shore where the watcher stand to see the ship with she spread wing cross the path of light that appear to be present to only he ; but even on this stranger 's wilderness of there be some rest . it be steeple and towers and its one great dome grow more ethereal ; it be smoky house - top lose they grossness in the pale effulgence ; the noise that arise from the street be fewer and be soften , and the footstep on the pavement pass more tranquilly away . in these field of 's inhabiting , where the shepherd play on Chancery pipe that have no stop , and keep they sheep in the fold
fold by hook and by crook until they have shorn they exceed close , every noise be merge , this moonlight night , into a distant ringing hum , as if the city be a vast glass , vibrat . what be that ? who fire a gun or pistol ? where be it ? the few foot-passenger start , stop , and stare about they . some window and door be open , and people come out to look . it be a loud report and echo and rattle heavily . it shook one house , or so a man say who be pass . it have arouse all the dog in the neighbourhood , who bark vehemently . Terrify cat scamper across the road . while the dog be yet bark and how -- there be one dog how like a demon -- the church - clock , as if they be start too , begin to strike . the hum from the street , likewise , seem to swell into a shout . but it be soon over . before the last clock begin to strike ten , there be a lull . when it have cease , the fine night , the bright large moon , and multitude of star , be leave at peace again . have be disturb ? he window be dark and quiet , and he door be shut . it must be something unusual indeed to bring he out of he shell . nothing be hear of he , nothing be see of he . what power of cannon might it take to shake that rusty old man out of he immovable composure ? for many year the persistent have be point , with no particular meaning , from that ceiling . it be not likely that he have any new meaning in he to - night . once point , always point -- like any , or even , with a single idea . there he be , no doubt , in he impossible attitude , point , unavailingly , all night long . Moonlight , darkness , dawn , sunrise , day . there he be still , eagerly point , and no one mind he . but a little after the coming of the day come people to clean the room . and either the have some new meaning in he , not express before , or the foremost of they go wild , for look up at he outstretched hand and look down at what be below it , that person shriek and fly . the other , look in as the first one look , shriek and fly too , and there be a alarm in the street . what do it mean ? no light be admit into the darkened chamber , and people unaccustom to it enter , and tread softly but heavily , carry a weight into the bedroom and lay it down . there be whispering and wonder all day , strict search of every corner , careful tracing of step , and careful noting of the disposition of every article of furniture . all eye look up at the , and all voice murmur , " if he could only tell what he see ! " he be point at a table with a bottle ( nearly full of wine ) and a glass upon it and two candle that be blow out suddenly soon after be light . he be point at a empty chair and at a stain upon the ground before it that might be almost cover with a hand . these object lie directly within he range . a excited imagination might suppose that there be something in they so terrific as to drive the rest of the composition , not only the attendant big - legged boy , but the cloud and flower and pillars too -- in short , the very body and soul of , and all the brain it have -- stark mad . it happen surely that every one who come into the darkened room and look at these thing look up at the and that he be invest in all eye with mystery and awe , as if he be a paralysed dumb witness . so it shall happen surly , through many year to come , that ghostly story shall be tell of the stain upon the floor , so easy to be cover , so hard to be get out , and that the Roman , point from the ceiling shall point , so long as dust and damp and spider spare he , with far greater significance than he ever have in 's time , and with a deadly meaning . for 's time be over for evermore , and the point at the murderous hand uplift against he life , and point helplessly at he , from night to morning , lie face downward on the floor , shoot through the heart . a great annual occasion have come round in the establishment of , otherwise , ex-artilleryman and present bassoon - player . a occasion of feasting and festival . the celebration of a birthday in the family . it be not 's birthday . merely distinguish that epoch in the musical instrument business by kiss the child with a extra smack before breakfast , smoke a additional pipe after dinner , and wonder towards evening what he poor old mother be think about it -- a subject of infinite speculation , and render so by he mother have depart this life twenty year . some man rarely revert to they father , but seem , in the bank - book of they remembrance , to have transfer all the stock of filial affection into they mother 's name . be one of these . perhaps he exalt appreciation of the merit of the old girl cause
cause he usually to make the noun-substantive " goodness " of the feminine gender . it be not the birthday of one of the three child . those occasion be keep with some mark of distinction , but they rarely overleap the bounds of happy return and a pudding . on young 's last birthday , certainly do , after observe on he growth and general advancement , proceed , in a moment of profound reflection on the change wrotch by time , to examine he in the catechism , accomplish with extreme accuracy the question number one and two , " what be you name ? " and " who give you that name ? " but there fail in the exact precision of he memory and substitute for number three the question " and how do you like that name ? " which he propound with a sense of its importance , in itself so edify and improve as to give it quite a orthodox air . this , however , be a speciality on that particular birthday , and not a general solemnity . it be the old girl 's birthday , and that be the greatest holiday and reddest - letter day in 's calendar . the auspicious event be always commemorate accord to certain form settle and prescribe by some year since . , be deeply convince that to have a pair of fowl for dinner be to attain the highest pitch of imperial luxury , invariably go forth himself very early in the morning of this day to buy a pair ; he be , as invariably , take in by the vendor and install in the possession of the oldest inhabitant of any coop in . return with these triumph of toughness tie up in a clean blue and white cotton handkerchief ( essential to the arrangement ) , he in a casual manner invite Mr . Bagnet to declare at breakfast what she would like for dinner . , by a coincidence never know to fail , reply fowl , instantly produce he bundle from a place of concealment amidst general amazement and rejoicing . he further require that the old girl shall do nothing all day long but sit in she very best gown and be serve by himself and the young people . as he be not illustrious for he cookery , this may be suppose to be a matter of state rather than enjoyment on the old girl 's part , but she keep she state with all imaginable cheerfulness . on this present birthday , have accomplish the usual preliminary . he have buy two specimen of poultry , which , if there be any truth in adage , be certainly not catch with chaff , to be prepare for the spit ; he have amaze and rejoice the family by they unlooked - for production ; he be himself direct the roasting of the poultry ; and , with she wholesome brown finger itching to prevent what she see go wrong , sit in she gown of ceremony , a honoured guest . and lay the cloth for dinner , while Woolwich , serve , as beseem he , under he father , keep the fowl revolve . to these young scullion occasionally impart a wink , or a shake of the head , or a crooke face , as they make mistake . " at half after one . " . " to the minute . they will be do . " , with anguish , beholds one of they at a standstill before the fire and begin to burn . " you shall have a dinner , old girl , " say . " fit for a queen . " show she white tooth cheerfully , but to the perception of she son , betrays so much uneasiness of spirit that he be impell by the dictate of affection to ask she , with he eye , what be the matter , thus stand , with he eye wide open , more oblivious of the fowl than before , and not afford the least hope of a return to consciousness . fortunately he elder sister perceive the cause of the agitation in 's breast and with a admonitory poke recall he . the stop fowl go round again , close she eye in the intensity of she relief . " will look we up , " say . " at half after four . to the moment . how many year , old girl . have look we up . this afternoon ? " " ah , , , as many as make a old woman of a young one , I begin to think . just about that , and no less , " return , laugh and shake she head . " old girl , " say , " never mind . you would be as young as ever you be . if you be not younger . which you be . as everybody know . " and here exclaim , with clapping of hand , that be sure to bring mother something , and begin to speculate on what it will be . " do you know , , " say , cast a glance on the table - cloth , and wink " salt ! " at with she right eye , and shake the pepper away from with she head , " I begin to think be in the rove way again . " , " return , " will never desert . and leave he old comrade . in the lurch . do not be afraid of it . " " no , . no . I do not say he will . I do not think he will . but if he could get over this money trouble of he , I believe he would be off . "
" ask why . " well , " return he wife , consider , " seem to I to be get not a little impatient and restless . I do not say but what he be as free as ever . of course he must be free or he would not be , but he smart and seem put out . " " he be extra - dril , " say . " by a lawyer . who would put the devil out . " " there be something in that , " he wife assent ; " but so it be , . " further conversation be prevent , for the time , by the necessity under which find himself of direct the whole force of he mind to the dinner , which be a little endanger by the dry humour of the fowl in not yield any gravy , and also by the make gravy acquire no flavour and turn out of a flaxen complexion . with a similar perverseness , the potatoe crumble off fork in the process of peeling , upheave from they centre in every direction , as if they be subject to earthquake . the leg of the fowl , too , be longer than could be desire , and extremely scally . Overcom these disadvantage to the best of he ability , at last dish and they sit down at table , Bagnet occupy the guest 's place at he right hand . it be well for the old girl that she have but one birthday in a year , for two such indulgence in poultry might be injuriious . every kind of finer tendon and ligament that be in the nature of poultry to possess be develop in these specimen in the singular form of guitar - string . they limb appear to have struck root into they breast and body , as aged tree strike root into the earth . they leg be so hard as to encourage the idea that they must have devote the greater part of they long and arduous life to pedestrian exercise and the walking of match . but , unconscious of these little defect , set he heart on eat a most severe quantity of the delicacies before she ; and as that good old girl would not cause he a moment 's disappointment on any day , least of all on such a day , for any consideration , she imperil she digestion fearfully . how young clean the drum - stick without be of ostrich descent , he anxious mother be at a loss to understand . the old girl have another trial to undergo after the conclusion of the repast in sitting in state to see the room clear , the hearth swept , and the dinner - service wash up and polish in the backyard . the great delight and energy with which the two young lady apply themselves to these duty , turn up they skirt in imitation of they mother and skat in and out on little scaffold of patten , inspire the highest hope for the future , but some anxiety for the present . the same cause lead to confusion of tongue , a clattering of crockery , a rattling of tin mug , a whisking of broom , and a expenditure of water , all in excess , while the saturation of the young lady themselves be almost to move a spectacle for to look upon with the calmness proper to she position . at last the various cleansing processis be triumphantly complete ; and appear in fresh attire , smile and dry ; pipe , tobacco , and something to drink be place upon the table ; and the old girl enjoy the first peace of mind she ever know on the day of this delightful entertainment . when take he usual seat , the hand of the clock be very near to half - past four ; as they mark it accurately , announce , " ! military time . " it be , and he have hearty congratulation for the old girl ( whom he kiss on the great occasion ) , and for the child , and for . " happy return to all ! " say . " but , , old man ! " cry , look at he curiously . " what be come to you ? " " come to I ? " " ah ! you be so white , -- for you -- and look so shocked . now do not he , ? " " , " say , " tell the old girl . what be the matter . " " I do not know I look white , " say the trooper , pass he hand over he brow , " and I do not know I look shocked , and I be sorry I do . but the truth be , that boy who be take in at my place die yesterday afternoon , and it have rather knock I over . " " poor creetur ! " say with a mother 's pity . " be he go ? dear , dear ! " " I do not mean to say anything about it , for it be not birthday talk , but you have get it out of I , you see , before I sit down . I should have rouse up in a minute , " say the trooper , make himself speak more gaily , " but you be so quick , . " " you be right . the old girl , " say . " be as quick . as powder . " " and what be more , she be the subject of the day , and we will stick to she , " cry . " see here , I have bring a little
little brooch along with I . it be a poor thing , you know , but it be a keepake . that be all the good it be , . " produce he present , which be greet with admiring leaping and clapping by the young family , and with a species of reverential admiration by . " old girl , " say . " tell he my opinion of it . " " why , it be a wonder , ! " exclaim . " it be the beautifullest thing that ever be see ! " " good ! " say . " my opinion . " " it be so pretty , , " cry , turn it on all side and hold it out at arm 's length , " that it seem too choice for I . " " bad ! " say . " not my opinion . " " but whatever it be , a hundred thousand thanks , old fellow , " say , she eye sparkl with pleasure and she hand stretch out to he ; " and though I have be a crossgrain soldier 's wife to you sometimes , , we be as strong friend , I be sure , in reality , as ever can be . now you shall fasten it on yourself , for good luck , if you will , . " the child close up to see it do , and look over young 's head to see it do with a interest so maturely wooden , yet pleasantly childish , that . Bagnet can not help laugh in she airy way and say , " oh , , , what a precious old chap you be ! " but the trooper fail to fasten the brooch . he hand shakes , he be nervous , and it fall off . " would any one believe this ? " say he , catch it as it drop and look round . " I be so out of sort 's that I bungle at a easy job like this ! " conclude that for such a case there be no remedy like a pipe , and fasten the brooch herself in a twinkling , cause the trooper to be induct into he usual snug place and the pipe to be get into action . " if that do not bring you round , , " say she , " just throw you eye across here at you present now and then , and the two together must do it . " " you ought to do it of yourself , " answer ; " I know that very well , . I will tell you how , one way and another , the blue have get to be too many for I . here be this poor lad . ' Twas dull work to see he die as he do , and not be able to help he . " " what do you mean , ? you do help he . you take he under you roof . " " I help he so far , but that be little . I mean , . , there he be , die without ever have be teach much more than to know he right hand from he left . and he be too far go to be help out of that . " " ah , poor creetur ! " say . " then , " say the trooper , not yet light he pipe , and pass he heavy hand over he hair , " that bring up in a man 's mind . he be a bad case too , in a different way . then the two get mix up in a man 's mind with a flinty old rascal who have to do with both . and to think of that rusty carbine , stock and barrel , stand up on end in he corner , hard , indifferent , take everything so evenly -- it make flesh and blood tingle , I do assure you . " " my advice to you , " return , " be to light you pipe and tingle that way . it be wholesomer and comfortabler , and better for the health altogether . " " you be right , " say the trooper , " and I will do it . " so he do it , though still with a indignant gravity that impress the young Bagnets , and even cause to defer the ceremony of drink 's health , always give by himself on these occasion in a speech of exemplary terseness . but the young lady have compose what be in the habit of call " the mixtur , " and 's pipe be now in a glow , consider it he duty to proceed to the toast of the evening . he address the assemble company in the follow term . " . . . this be she birthday . take a day 's march . and you will not find such another . here be towards she ! " the toast have be drink with enthusiasm , return thanks in a neat address of corresponding brevity . this model composition be limit to the three word " and wish yours ! " which the old girl follow up with a nod at everybody in succession and a well - regulate swig of the mixture . this she again follow up , on the present occasion , by the wholly unexpected exclamation , " here be a man ! " here be a man , much to the astonishment of the little company , look in at the parlour - door . he be a sharp - eyed man -- a quick keen man -- and he take in everybody 's look at he , all at once , individually and
and collectively , in a manner that stamp he a remarkable man . " , " say the man , nodding , " how do you find yourself ? " " why , it be ! " cry . " yes , " say the man , come in and close the door . " I be go down the street here when I happen to stop and look in at the musical instrument in the shop - window -- a friend of mine be in want of a second - hand wiolinceller of a good tone -- and I see a party enjoy themselves , and I think it be you in the corner ; I think I could not be mistaken . how go the world with you , , at the present moment ? pretty smooth ? and with you , ma 'am ? and with you , ? and , " say , open he arm , " here 's child too ! you may do anything with I if you only show I child . give we a kiss , my pet . no occasion to inquire who you father and mother be . never see such a likeness in my life ! " , not unwelcome , have sit himself down next to and take and on he knee . " you pretty dear , " say , " give we another kiss ; it be the only thing I be greedy in . bless you , how healthy you look ! and what may be the ag of these two , ma 'am ? I should put th'ey down at the figure of about eight and ten . " " you be very near , sir , " say . " I generally be near , " return , " be so fond of child . a friend of mine have have nineteen of th'ey , ma 'am , all by one mother , and she be still as fresh and rosy as the morning . not so much so as yourself , but , upon my soul , she come near you ! and what do you call these , my darling ? " pursue , pinch 's cheek . " these be peach , these are . bless you heart ! and what do you think about father ? do you think father could recommend a second - hand wiolinceller of a good tone for 's friend , my dear ? my name 's . be not that a funny name ? " these blandishment have entirely win the family heart . forget be the day to the extent of fill a pipe and a glass for and wait upon he hospitably . she would be glad to receive so pleasant a character under any circumstance , but she tell he that as a friend of 's she be particularly glad to see he this evening , for have not be in he usual spirit . " not in he usual spirit ? " exclaim . " why , I never hear of such a thing ! what be the matter , ? you do not intend to tell I you have be out of spirit . what should you be out of spirit for ? you have not get anything on you mind , you know . " " nothing particular , " return the trooper . " I should think not , " rejoin . " what could you have on you mind , you know ! and have these pet get anything on they minds , eh ? not they , but they will be upon the minds of some of the young fellow , some of these day , and make th'ey precious low - spirit . I be not much of a prophet , but I can tell you that , ma 'am . " , quite charme , hope have a family of he own . " there , ma 'am ! " say . " would you believe it ? no , I have not . my wife and a lodger constitute my family . be as fond of child as myself and as wishful to have 'em , but no . so it be . worldly goods be divide unequally , and man must not repine . what a very nice backyard , ma 'am ! any way out of that yard , now ? " there be no way out of that yard . " be not there really ? " say . " I should have think there might have be . well , I do not know as I ever see a backyard that take my fancy more . would you allow I to look at it ? thank you . no , I see there be no way out . but what a very good - proportion yard it be ! " have cast he sharp eye all about it , return to he chair next he friend and pat affectionately on the shoulder . " how be you spirits now , ? " " all right now , " return the trooper . " that be you sort ! " say . " why should you ever have be otherwise ? a man of you fine figure and constitution have no right to be out of spirit . that be not a chest to be out of spirit , be it , ma'am ? and you have not get anything on you mind , you know , ; what could you have on you mind ! " somewhat harp on this phrase , consider the extent and variety of he conversational power , twice or thrice repeat it to the pipe he light , and with a listening face that be particularly he own . but the sun of he sociality soon recover from this brief eclipse and shine
shine again . " and this be brother , be it , my dear ? " say , refer to and for information on the subject of young . " and a nice brother he be -- half - brother I mean to say . for he be too old to be you boy , ma 'am . " " I can certify at all event that he be not anybody else 's , " return , laugh . " well , you do surprise I ! yet he be like you , there be no denying . , he be wonderfully like you ! but about what you may call the brow , you know , There he father come out ! " compare the face with one eye shut up , while smoke in stolid satisfaction . this be a opportunity for to inform he that the boy be 's godson . " 's , be he ? " rejoin with extreme cordiality . " I must shake hand over again with 's godson . and do credit to one another . and what do you intend to make of he , ma 'am ? do he show any turn for any musical instrument ? " suddenly interpose , " play the fife . beautiful . " " would you believe it , , " say , strike by the coincidence , " that when I be a boy I play the fife myself ? not in a scientific way , as I expect he do , but by ear . bless you ! ' british Grenadier ' -- there be a tune to warm a up ! could you give we ' british Grenadier , ' my fine fellow ? " nothing could be more acceptable to the little circle than this call upon young , who immediately fetch he fife and perform the stirring melody , during which performance , much enliven , beat time and never fall to come in sharp with the burden , " British -a -anadeer ! " in short , he show so much musical taste that actually take he pipe from he lip to express he conviction that he be a singer . receive the harmonious impeachment so modestly , confess how that he do once chaunt a little , for the expression of the feeling of he own bosom , and with no presumptuous idea of entertain he friend , that he be ask to s . not to be behindhand in the sociality of the evening , he comply and give they " believe I , if all those Endearing yong Charms . " this ballad , he inform , he consider to have be he most powerful ally in move the heart of when a maiden , and induce she to approach the altar -- 's own word be " to come up to the scratch . " this sparkling stranger be such a new and agreeable feature in the evening that , who testify no great emotion of pleasure on he entrance , begin , in spite of himself , to be rather proud of he . he be so friendly , be a man of so many resource , and so easy to get on with , that it be something to have make he know there . become , after another pipe , so sensible of the value of he acquaintance that he solicit the honour of he company on the old girl 's next birthday . if anything can more closely cement and consolidate the esteem which have form for the family , it be the discovery of the nature of the occasion . he drink to . Bagnet with a warmth approach to rapture , engage himself for that day twelvemonth more than thankfully , make a memorandum of the day in a large black pocket - book with a girdle to it , and breath a hope that and may before then become , in a manner , sister . as he say himself , what be public life without private tie ? he be in he humble way a public man , but it be not in that sphere that he find happiness . no , it must be seek within the confines of domestic bliss . it be natural , under these circumstance , that he , in he turn , should remember the friend to whom he be indebted for so promise a acquaintance . and he do . he keep very close to he . whatever the subject of the conversation , he keep a tender eye upon he . he wait to walk home with he . he be interested in he very boot and observe even they attentively as sit smoke cross - leg in the chimney - corner . at length rise to depart . at the same moment , with the secret sympathy of friendship , also rise . he dote upon the child to the last and remember the commission he have undertake for a absent friend . " respecte that second - hand wiolinceller , governor -- could you recommend I such a thing ? " " score , " say . " I be oblige to you , " return , squeeze he hand . " you be a friend in need . a good tone , mind you ! my friend be a regular dab at it . Ecod , he saw away at and and the rest of the big - wig like a thorough workman . and you need not , " say in a considerate and private voice , " you need not commit yourself to too low a figure , . I do not want to pay too large a price for my friend , but I want you to have you proper percentage and be remunerate for you loss of time . that be but
but fair . every man must live , and ink to it . " shake he head at the old girl to the effect that they have find a jewel of price . " suppose I be to give you a look in , say , at half arter ten to - morrow morning . perhaps you could name the figure of a few wiolinceller of a good tone ? " say . nothing easier . and both engage to have the requisite information ready and even hind to each other at the practicability of have a small stock collect there for approval . " thank you , " say , " thank you . good night , ma 'am . good night , . good night , darling . I be much oblige to you for one of the pleasantest evening I ever spend in my life . " they , on the contrary , be much oblige to he for the pleasure he have give they in he company ; and so they part with many expression of goodwill on both side . " now , old boy , " say , take he arm at the shop - door , " come along ! " as they go down the little street and the pause for a minute look after they , remark to the worthy Lignum that " almost cling to like , and seem to be really fond of he . " the neighbouring streets be narrow and ill - pave , it be a little inconvenient to walk there two abreast and arm in arm . therefore soon propose to walk singly . but , who can not make up he mind to relinquish he friendly hold , reply , " wait half a minute , . I should wish to speak to you first . " immediately afterwards , he twist he into a public - house and into a parlour , where he confront he and clap he own back against the door . " now , , " say , " duty be duty , and friendship be friendship . I never want the two to clash if I can help it . I have endeavoure to make thing pleasant to - night , and I put it to you whether I have do it or not . you must consider yourself in custody , . " " custody ? what for ? " return the trooper , thunderstruck . " now , , " say , urge a sensible view of the case upon he with he fat forefinger , " duty , as you know very well , be one thing , and conversation be another . it be my duty to inform you that any observation you may make will be liable to be use against you . therefore , , be careful what you say . you do not happen to have heard of a murder ? " " ! " " now , , " say , keep he forefinger in a impressive state of action , " bear in mind what I have say to you . I ask you nothing . you have be in low spirit this afternoon . I say , you do not happen to have heard of a murder ? " " no . where have there be a murder ? " " now , , " say , " do not you go and commit yourself . I be a - go to tell you what I want you for . there have be a murder in 's -- gentleman of the name of . he be shot last night . I want you for that . " the trooper sink upon a seat behind he , and great drop start out upon he forehead , and a deadly pallor overspread he face . " ! it be not possible that have be kill and that you suspect I ? " " , " return bucket , keep he forefinger go , " it be certainly possible , because it be the case . this deed be done last night at ten o'clock . now , you know where you be last night at ten o'clock , and you will be able to prove it , no doubt . " " last night ! last night ? " repeat the trooper thoughtfully . then it flash upon he . " why , great heaven , I be there last night ! " " so I have understood , , " return with great deliberation . " so I have understand . likewise you have be very often there . you have be see hang about the place , and you have be hear more than once in a wrangle with he , and it be possible -- I do not say it be certainly so , mind you , but it be possible -- that he may have be hear to call you a threatening , murdering , dangerous fellow . " the trooper gasp as if he would admit it all if he could speak . " now , , " continue , put he hat upon the table with a air of business rather in the upholstery way than otherwise , " my wish be , as it have be all the evening , to make thing pleasant . I tell you plainly there be a reward out , of a hundred guinea , offer by , . you and I have always be pleasant together ; but I have get a duty to discharge ; and if that hundr guinea be to be make , it may as well be make by I as any other man . on all of which account , I should hope it be clear to you that I must have you , and that I be damned if I do not
not have you . be I to call in any assistance , or be the trick do ? " have recovere himself and stand up like a soldier . " come , " he say ; " I be ready . " " , " continue , " wait a bit ! " with he upholsterer manner , as if the trooper be a window to be fitte up , he take from he pocket a pair of handcuffs . " this be a serious charge , , and such be my duty . " the trooper flush angrily and hesitate a moment , but hold out he two hand , clasp together , and say , " there ! put they on ! " adjust they in a moment . " how do you find they ? be they comfortable ? if not , say so , for I wish to make thing as pleasant as be consistent with my duty , and I have get another pair in my pocket . " this remark he offer like a most respectable tradesman anxious to execute a order neatly and to the perfect satisfaction of he customer . " they will do as they be ? very well ! now , you see , " -- he take a cloak from a corner and begin adjust it about the trooper 's neck --" I be mindful of you feeling when I come out , and bring this on purpose . there ! who be the wiser ? " " only I , " return the trooper , " but as I know it , do I one more good turn and pull my hat over my eye . " " really , though ! do you mean it ? be not it a pity ? it look so . " " I can not look chance man in the face with these thing on , " hurriedly reply . " do , for 's sake , pull my hat forward . " so strongly entreate , bucket comply , put he own hat on , and conduct he prize into the street , the trooper march on as steadily as usual , though with he head less erect , and steer he with he elbow over the crossing and up the turnings . 's it happen that when I come home from deal I find a note from ( as we always continue to call she ) , inform I that she health , which have be for some time very delicate , be worse and that she would be more glad than she could tell I if I would go to see she . it be a note of a few line , write from the couch on which she lay and enclose to I in another from she husband , in which he second she entreaty with much solicitude . be now the mother , and I the godmother , of such a poor little baby -- such a tiny old - faced mite , with a countenance that seem to be scarcely anything but cap - border , and a little lean , long - finger hand , always clench under its ching . it would lie in this attitude all day , with its bright speck of eye open , wonder ( as I use to imagine ) how it come to be so small and weak . whenever it be move it cry , but at all other time it be so patient that the sole desire of its life appear to be to lie quiet and think . it have curiious little dark vein in it be face and curiious little dark mark under it be eye like faint remembrance of poor 's inky day , and altogether , to those who be not use to it , it be quite a piteous little sight . but it be enough for that she be use to it . the project with which she beguil she illness , for little 's education , and little 's marriage , and even for she own old age as the grandmother of little 's little Esthers , be so prettily expressive of devotion to this pride of she life that I should be temp to recall some of they but for the timely remembrance that I be get on irregularly as it be . to return to the letter . have a superstition about I which have be strengthen in she mind ever since that night long ago when she have lain asleep with she head in my lap . she almost -- I think I must say quite -- believe that I do she good whenever I be near she . now although this be such a fancy of the affectionate girl 's that I be almost asham to mention it , still it might have all the force of a fact when she be really ill . therefore I set off to , with my guardian 's consent , post-haste ; and she and make so much of I that there never be anything like it . next day I go again to sit with she , and next day i go again . it be a very easy journey , for I have only to rise a little earlier in the morning , and keep my account , and attend to housekeep matter before leave home . but when I have make these three visit , my guardian say to I , on my return at night , " now , little woman , little woman , this will never do . constant dropping will wear away a stone , and constant coaching will wear out a . we will go to for a while and take possession of we old lodging . " " not for I , dear guardian , " say I ,
, " for I never feel tired , " which be strictly true . I be only too happy to be in such request . " for I then , " return my guardian , " or for , or for both of we . it be somebody be birthday to - morrow , I think . " " truly I think it be , " say I , kiss my darling , who would be twenty - one to - morrow . " well , " observ my guardian , half pleasantly , half seriously , " that be a great occasion and will give my fair cousin some necessary business to transact in assertion of she independence , and will make a more convenient place for all of we . so to we will go . that be settle , there be another thing -- how have you leave ? " " very unwell , guardian . I fear it will be some time before she regain she health and strength . " " what do you call some time , now ? " ask my guardian thoughtfully . " some week , I be afraid . " " ah ! " he begin to walk about the room with he hand in he pocket , show that he have be think as much . " now , what do you say about she doctor ? be he a good doctor , my love ? " I feel obliged to confess that I know nothing to the contrary but that and I have agree only that evening that we would like he opinion to be confirm by some one . " well , you know , " return my guardian quickly , " there be . " I have not mean that , and be rather take by surprise . for a moment all that I have have in my mind in connexion with seem to come back and confuse I . " you do not object to he , little woman ? " " object to he , guardian ? oh no ! " " and you do not think the patient would object to he ? " so far from that , I have no doubt of she be prepare to have a great reliance on he and to like he very much . I say that he be no stranger to she personally , for she have see he often in he kind attendance on . " very good , " say my guardian . " he have be here to - day , my dear , and I will see he about it to - morrow . " I feel in this short conversation -- though I do not know how , for she be quiet , and we interchange no look -- that my dear girl well remember how merrily she have clasp I round the waist when no other hand than 's have bring I the little parting teak . this cause I to feel that I ought to tell she , and too , that I be go to be the mistress of and that if I avoid that disclosure any longer I might become less worthy in my own eye of its master 's love . therefore , when we go upstairs and have wait listen until the clock strike twelve in order that only I might be the first to wish my darling all good wish on she birthday and to take she to my heart , I set before she , just as I have set before myself , the goodness and honour of she cousin and the happy life that be in store for for I . if ever my darling be fonder of I at one time than another in all we intercourse , she be surely fondest of I that night . and I be so rejoice to know it and so comfort by the sense of have do right in cast this last idle reservation away that I be ten time happier than I have be before . I have scarcely think it a reservation a few hour ago , but now that it be gone I feel as if I understand it be nature better . next day we go to . we find we old lodging vacant , and in half a hour be quietly establish there , as if we have never go away . dine with we to celebrate my darling 's birthday , and we be as pleasant as we could be with the great blank among we that 's absence naturally make on such a occasion . after that day I be for some week -- eight or nine as I remember -- very much with , and thus it fall out that I see less of at this time than any other since we have first come together , except the time of my own illness . she often come to 's , but we function there be to amuse and cheer she , and we do not talk in we usual confidential manner . whenever I go home at night we be together , but 's rest be break by pain , and I often remain to nurse she . with she husband and she poor little mite of a baby to love and they home to strive for , what a good creature Caddy be ! so self - deny , so uncomplaining , so anxious to get well on they account , so afraid of give trouble , and so thoughtful of the unassisted labour of she husband and the comfort of old ; I have never know the best of she until now . and it seem so curious that she pale face and helpless figure should be lie there day after day where dancing be the business of life , where the kit
kit and the apprentice begin early every morning in the ball - room , and where the untidy little boy waltze by himself in the kitchen all the afternoon . at 's request I take the supreme direction of she apartment , trim it up , and push she , couch and all , into a lighter and more airy and more cheerful corner than she have yet occupi ; then , every day , when we be in we neatest array , I use to lay my small small nameake in she arm and sit down to chat or work or read to she . it be at one of the first of these quiet time that I tell about . we have other visitor besides . first of all we have , who in he hurried interval of teaching use to come softly in and sit softly down , with a face of loving anxiety for and the very little child . whatever Caddy 's condition really be , she never fail to declare to that she be all but well -- which I , heaven forgive I , never fail to confirm . this would put in such good spirit that he would sometimes take the kit from he pocket and play a chord or two to astonish the baby , which I never know it to do in the least degree , for my tiny nameake never notice it at all . then there be . she would come occasionally , with she usual distratch manner , and sit calmly look mile beyond she grandchild as if she attention be absorb by a young Borrioboolan on its native shore . as bright - eyed as ever , as serene , and as untidy , she would say , " well , Caddy , child , and how do you do to - day ? " and then would sit amiably smile and take no notice of the reply or would sweetly glide off into a calculation of the number of letter she have lately receive and answer or of the coffee - bear power of - . this she would always do with a serene contempt for we limited sphere of action , not to be disguise . then there be old , who be from morning to night and from night to morn the subject of innumerable precaution . if the baby cry , it be nearly stifle lest the noise should make he uncomfortable . if the fire want stirr in the night , it be surreptitiously do lest he rest should be break . if require any little comfort that the house contain , she first carefully discuss whether he be likely to require it too . in return for this consideration he would come into the room once a day , all but bless it -- show a condescension , and a patronage , and a grace of manner in dispense the light of he high - shouldere presence from which I might have suppose he ( if I have not know better ) to have be the benefactor of 's life . " my , " he would say , make the nearest approach that he could to bend over she . " tell I that you be better to - day . " " oh , much better , thank you , , " Caddy would reply . " ! Enchant ! and we dear . she be not quite prostrate by fatigue ? " here he would crease up he eyelid and kiss he finger to I , though I be happy to say he have cease to be particular in he attention since I have be so altered . " not at all , " I would assure he . " ! we must take care of we dear , . we must spare nothing that will restore she . we must nourish she . my dear " -- he would turn to he daughter - in - law with infinite generosity and protection --" want for nothing , my love . frame a wish and gratify it , my daughter . everything this house contain , everything my room contain , be at you service , my dear . do not , " he would sometimes add in a burst of deportment , " even allow my simple requirement to be consider if they should at any time interfere with you own , my . you necessity be greater than mine . " he have establish such a long prescriptive right to this deportment ( he son 's inheritance from he mother ) that I several time know both and she husband to be melte to tear by these affectionate self - sacrifice . " Nay , my dear , " he would remonstrate ; and when I see 's thin arm about he fat neck as he say it , I would be melte too , though not by the same process . " Nay , nay ! I have promise never to leave ye . be dutiful and affectionate towards I , and I ask no other return . now , bless ye ! I be go to the . " he would take the air there presently and get a appetite for he hotel dinner . I hope I do old Turveydrop no wrong , but I never see any better trait in he than these I faithfully record , except that he certainly conceive a liking for and would take the child out walk with great pomp , always on those occasion send he home before he go to dinner himself , and occasionally with a halfpenny in he pocket . but even this disinterestedness be attend with no inconsiderable cost , to my knowledge , for before be sufficiently decorate to walk hand in hand with the professor of deportment , he have
have to be newly dress , at the expense of and she husband , from top to toe . last of we visitor , there be . really when he use to come in of a evening , and ask in he meek voice how she be , and then sit down with he head against the wall , and make no attempt to say anything more , I like he very much . if he find I bust about do any little thing , he sometimes half take he coat off , as if with a intention of help by a great exertion ; but he never get any further . he sole occupation be to sit with he head against the wall , look hard at the thoughtful baby ; and I could not quite divest my mind of a fancy that they understand one another . I have not count among we visitor because he be now 's regular attendent . she soon begin to improve under he care , but he be so gentle , so skilful , so unwearying in the pain he take that it be not to be wonder at , I be sure . I see a good deal of during this time , though not so much as might be suppose , for know to be safe in he hand , I often slipp home at about the hour when he be expect . we frequently meet , notwithstand . I be quite reconcile to myself now , but I still feel glad to think that he be sorry for I , and he still be sorry for I i believe . he help in he professional engagement , which be numerous , and have as yet no settled project for the future . it be when Caddy begin to recover that I begin to notice a change in my dear girl . I can not say how it first present itself to I , because I observe it in many slight particular which be nothing in themselves and only become something when they be piece together . but I make it out , by put they together , that be not so frankly cheerful with I as she use to be . she tenderness for I be as loving and true as ever ; I do not for a moment doubout that ; but there be a quiet sorrow about she which she do not confide to I , and in which I trace some hidden regret . now , I could not understand this , and I be so anxious for the happiness of my own pet that it cause I some uneasiness and set I think often . at length , feel sure that suppress this something from I lest it should make I unhappy too , it come into my head that she be a little grieved -- for I -- by what I have tell she about . how I persuade myself that this be likely , I do not know . I have no idea that there be any selfish reference in my do so . I be not grieve for myself : I be quite contented and quite happy . still , that might be think -- for I , though I have abandon all such thought -- of what once be , but be now all change , see so easy to believe that I believe it . what could I do to reassure my darling ( I consider then ) and show she that I have no such feeling ? well ! I could only be as brisk and busy as possible , and that I have try to be all along . however , as 's illness have certainly interfere , more or less , with my home duty -- though I have always be there in the morning to make my guardian 's breakfast , and he have a hundred time laugh and say there must be two little woman , for he little woman be never miss -- I resolve to be doubly diligent and gay . so I go about the house hum all the tune I know , and I sit work and work in a desperate manner , and I talk and talk , morning , noon , and night . and still there be the same shade between I and my darling . " so , , " observ my guardian , shut up he book one night when we be all three together , " so have restore to the full enjoyment of life again ? " " yes , " I say ; " and to be repay by such gratitude as hers be to be make rich , guardian . " " I wish it be , " he return , " with all my heart . " so do I too , for that matter . I say so . " aye ! we would make he as rich as a if we know how . would we not , little woman ? " I laugh as I work and reply that I be not sure about that , for it might spoil he , and he might not be so useful , and there might be many who could ill spare he . as , and herself , and many other . " true , " say my guardian . " I have forget that . but we would agree to make he rich enough to live , I suppose ? enough to work with tolerable peace of mind ? enough to have he own happy home and he own household gods -- and household goddess , too , perhaps ? " that be quite another thing , I say . we must all agree in that . " to be sure , " say my guardian . " all of
of we . I have a great regard for , a high esteem for he ; and I have be sound he delicately about he plan . it be difficult to offer aid to a independent man with that just kind of pride which he possess . and yet I would be glad to do it if I might or if I know how . he seem half inclin for another voyage . but that appear like cast such a man away . " " it might open a new world to he , " say I . " so it might , little woman , " my guardian assent . " I doubt if he expect much of the old world . do you know I have fancie that he sometimes feel some particular disappointment or misfortune encounter in it . you never hear of anything of that sort ? " I shook my head . " Humph , " say my guardian . " I be mistaken , I dare say . " as there be a little pause here , which I think , for my dear girl 's satisfaction , have better be fill up , I hum a air as I work which be a favourite with my guardian . " and do you think will make another voyage ? " I ask he when I have hum it quietly all through . " I do not quite know what to think , my dear , but I should say it be likely at present that he will give a long trip to another country . " " I be sure he will take the best wish of all we heart with he wherever he go , " say I ; " and though they be not rich , he will never be the poorer for they , guardian , at least . " " never , little woman , " he reply . I be sit in my usual place , which be now beside my guardian 's chair . that have not be my usual place before the letter , but it be now . I look up to , who be sit opposite , and I see , as she look at I , that she eye be fill with tear and that tear be fall down she face . I feel that I have only to be placid and merry once for all to undeceive my dear and set she loving heart at rest . I really be so , and I have nothing to do but to be myself . so I make my sweet girl lean upon my shoulder -- how little think what be heavy on she mind !-- and I say she be not quite well , and put my arm about she , and take she upstairs . when we be in we own room , and when she might perhaps have tell I what I be so unprepared to hear , I give she no encouragement to confide in I ; I never think she stand in need of it . " oh , my dear good , " say , " if I could only make up my mind to speak to you and my cousin when you be together ! " " why , my love ! " I remonstrate . " , why should you not speak to we ! " only drop she head and press I closer to she heart . " you surely do not forget , my beauty , " say I , smile , " what quiet , old - fashioned people we be and how I have settle down to be the discreetest of dame ? you do not forget how happily and peacefully my life be all mark out for I , and by whom ? I be certain that you do not forget by what a noble character , . that can never be . " " no , never , . " " why then , my dear , " say I , " there can be nothing amiss -- and why should you not speak to we ? " " nothing amiss , ? " return . " oh , when I think of all these year , and of he fatherly care and kindness , and of the old relation among we , and of you , what shall I do , what shall I do ! " I look at my child in some wonder , but I think it better not to answer otherwise than by cheer she , and so I turn off into many little recollection of we life together and prevent she from say more . when she lay down to sleep , and not before , I return to my guardian to say good night , and then I come back to and sit near she for a little while . she be asleep , and I think as I look at she that she be a little change . I have think so more than once lately . I could not decide , even look at she while she be unconscious , how she be change , but something in the familiar beauty of she face look different to I . my guardian 's old hope of she and arise sorrowfully in my mind , and I say to myself , " she have be anxious about he , " and I wonder how that love would end . when I have come home from 's while she be ill , I have often find at work , and she have always put she work away , and I have never know what it be . some of it now lay in a drawer near she , which be not quite close . I do not open the drawer , but I still rather wonder
wonder what the work could he , for it be evidently nothing for herself . and I notice as I kiss my dear that she lay with one hand under she pillow so that it be hide . how much less amiable I must have be than they think I , how much less amiable than I think myself , to be so preoccupied with my own cheerfulness and contentment as to think that it only rest with I to put my dear girl right and set she mind at peace ! but I lay down , self - deceive , in that belief . and I awoke in it next day to find that there be still the same shade between I and my darling . when arrive in , he go , that very same day , to 's in 's . for he never once , from the moment when I entreate he to be a friend to , neglect or forgot he promise . he have tell I that he accept the charge as a sacred trust , and he be ever true to it in that spirit . he find in he office and inform of he agreement with that he should call there to learn he address . " just so , sir , " say . " 's address be not a hundr mile from here , sir , . address be not a hundr mile from here . would you take a seat , sir ? " thank , but he have no business with he beyond what he have mention . " just so , sir . I believe , sir , " say Vhole , still quietly insist on the seat by not give the address , " that you have influence with . indeed I be aware that you have . " " I be not aware of it myself , " return ; " but I suppose you know best . " " , " rejoin , self - contain as usual , voice and all , " it be a part of my professional duty to know best . it be a part of my professional duty to study and to understand a gentleman who confide he interests to I . in my professional duty I shall not be want , sir , if I know it . I may , with the best intention , be want in it without know it ; but not if I know it , sir . " again mention the address . " give I leave , sir , " say . " bear with I for a moment . , be play for a considerable stake , and can not play without -- need I say what ? " " money , I presume ? " " , " say , " to be honest with you ( honesty be my golden rule , whether I gain by it or lose , and I find that I generally lose ) , money be the word . now , sir , upon the chance of .' game I express to you no opinion , no opinion . it might be highly impolitic in , after play so long and so high , to leave off ; it might be the reverse ; I say nothing . no , sir , " say , bring he hand flat down upon he desk in a positive manner , " nothing . " " you seem to forget , " return , " that I ask you to say nothing and have no interest in anything you say . " " pardon I , sir ! " retort . " you do yourself a injustice . no , sir ! pardon I ! you shall not -- shall not in my office , if I know it -- do yourself a injustice . you be interested in anything , and in everything , that relate to you friend . I know human nature much better , sir , than to admit for a instant that a gentleman of you appearance be not interested in whatever concern he friend . " " well , " reply , " that may be . I be particularly interested in he address . " " the number , sir , " say parenthetically , " I believe I have already mention . if be to continue to play for this considerable stake , sir , he must have fund . understand I ! there be fund in hand at present . I ask for nothing ; there be fund in hand . but for the onward play , more fund must be provide , unless be to throw away what he have already venture , which be wholly and solely a point for he consideration . this , sir , I take the opportunity of stating openly to you as the friend of . without fund I shall always be happy to appear and act for to the extent of all such cost as be safe to be allow out of the estate , not beyond that . I could not go beyond that , sir , without wronge some one . I must either wrong my three dear girl or my venerable father , who be entirely dependent on I , in the of ; or some one . whereas , sir , my resolution be ( call it weakness or folly if you please ) to wrong no one . " rather sternly rejoin that he be glad to hear it . " I wish , sir , " say , " to leave a good name behind I . therefore I take every opportunity of openly state to a friend of how be situate . as to myself , sir , the labourer be worthy of he hire . if I undertake to put my
my shoulder to the wheel , I do it , and I earn what I get . I be here for that purpose . my name be paint on the door outside , with that object . " " and 's address , ? " " , " return , " as I believe I have already mention , it be next door . on the second story you will find C.'s apartment . desire to be near he professional adviser , and I be far from objecting , for I court inquiry . " upon this wish good day and go in search of , the change in whose appearance he begin to understand now but too well . he find he in a dull room , fadedly furnished , much as I have find he in he barrack - room but a little while before , except that he be not write but be sit with a book before he , from which he eye and thought be far astray . as the door chance to be stand open , be in he presence for some moment without be perceive , and he tell I that he never could forget the haggardness of he face and the dejection of he manner before he be arouse from he dream . " , my dear fellow , " cry , start up with extended hand , " you come upon my vision like a ghost . " " a friendly one , " he reply , " and only wait , as they say ghost do , to be address . how do the mortal world go ? " they be seat now , near together . " badly enough , and slowly enough , " say , " speak at least for my part of it . " " what part be that ? " " the part . " " I never hear , " return , shak he head , " of it be go well yet . " " I , " say moodily . " who ever do ? " he brighten again in a moment and say with he natural openness , " , I should be sorry to be misunderstand by you , even if I gain by it in you estimation . you must know that I have do no good this long time . I have not intend to do much harm , but I seem to have be capable of nothing else . it may be that I should have do better by keep out of the net into which my destiny have work I , but I think not , though I dare say you will soon hear , if you have not already hear , a very different opinion . to make short of a long story , I be afraid I have want a object ; but I have a object now -- or it have I -- and it be too late to discuss it . take I as I be , and make the best of I . " " a bargain , " say . " do as much by I in return . " " oh ! you , " return , " you can pursue you art for its own sake , and can put you hand upon the plough and never turn , and can strike a purpose out of anything . you and I be very different creature . " he speak regretfully and lapse for a moment into he weary condition . " well , well ! " he cry , shak it off . " everything have a end . we shall see ! so you will take I as I be , and make the best of I ? " " aye ! indeed I will . " they shook hand upon it laughingly , but in deep earnestness . I can answer for one of they with my heart of heart . " you come as a godsend , " say , " for I have see nobody here yet but Vholes . , there be one subject I should like to mention , for once and for all , in the beginning of we treaty . you can hardly make the best of I if I do not . you know , I dare say , that I have a attachment to my cousin ? " reply that I have hint as much to he . " now pray , " return , " do not think I a heap of selfishness . do not suppose that I be split my head and half break my heart over this miserable Chancery suit for my own rights and interests alone . Ada's be bound up with mine ; they can not be separate ; work for both of we . do think of that ! " he be so very solicitous on this head that give he the strongest assurance that he do he no injustice . " you see , " say , with something pathetic in he manner of lingering on the point , though it be off - hand and unstudied , " to a upright fellow like you , bring a friendly face like yours here , I can not bear the thought of appear selfish and mean . I want to see , , as well as myself ; I want to do my utmost to right she , as well as myself ; I venture what I can scrape together to extricate she , as well as myself . do , I beseech you , think of that ! " afterwards , when come to reflect on what have pass , he be so very much impress by the strength of 's anxiety on this point that in tell I generally of he first visit to 's he particularly dwelt upon
upon it . it revive a fear I have have before that my dear girl 's little property would be absorb by and that 's justification to himself would be sincerely this . it be just as I begin to take care of that the interview take place , and I now return to the time when have recover and the shade be still between I and my darling . I propose to that mor that we should go and see . it a little surprise I to find that she hesitate and be not so radiantly willing as I have expect . " my dear , " say I , " you have not have any difference with since I have be so much away ? " " no , . " " not hear of he , perhaps ? " say I . " yes , I have hear of he , " say . such tear in she eyes , and such love in she face . I could not make my darling out . should I go to 's by myself ? I say . no , think I have better not go by myself . would she go with I ? yes , think she have better go with I . should we go now ? yes , let we go now . well , I could not understand my darling , with the tear in she eye and the love in she face ! we be soon equip and go out . it be a sombre day , and drop of chill rain fall at interval . it be one of those colourless day when everything look heavy and harsh . the house frown at we , the dust rise at we , the smoke swoop at we , nothing make any compromise about itself or wear a softened aspect . I fancie my beautiful girl quite out of place in the rug street , and I think there be more funeral pass along the dismal pavement than I have ever see before . we have first to find out 's . we be go to inquire in a shop when say she think it be near . " we be not likely to be far out , my love , if we go in that direction , " say I . so to we go , and there , sure enough , we see it write up . 's . we have next to find out the number . " or 's office will do , " I recollect , " for 's office be next door . " upon which say , perhaps that be 's office in the corner there . and it really be . then come the question , which of the two next door ? I be go for the one , and my darling be go for the other ; and my darling be right again . so up we go to the second story , when we come to 's name in great white letter on a hearse - like panel . I should have knock , but say perhaps we have better turn the handle and go in . thus we come to , po over a table cover with dusty bundle of papers which seem to I like dusty mirror reflect he own mind . wherever I look I see the ominous word that run in it repeat . and . he receive we very affectionately , and we sit down . " if you have come a little earlier , " he say , " you would have find here . there never be such a good fellow as be . he find time to look in between - whiles , when anybody else with half he work to do would be think about not be able to come . and he be so cheery , so fresh , so sensible , so earnest , so --everything that I be not , that the place brighten whenever he come , and darken whenever he go again . " " bless he , " I think , " for he truth to I ! " " he be not so sanguine , , " continue , cast he deject look over the bundle of papers , " as Vholes and I be usually , but he be only a outsider and be not in the mystery . we have go into they , and he have not . he can not be expect to know much of such a labyrinth . " as he look wander over the papers again and he pass he two hand over he head , I notice how sunken and how large he eye appear , how dry he lip were , and how he finger - nail be all bite away . " be this a healthy place to live in , , do you think ? " say I . " why , my dear , " answer with he old gay laugh , " it be neither a rural nor a cheerful place ; and when the sun shine here , you may lay a pretty heavy wager that it be shin brightly in a open spot . but it be well enough for the time . it be near the office and near Vhole . " " perhaps , " I hint , " a change from both -- " " might do I good ? " say , force a laugh as he finish the sentence . " I should not wonder ! but it can only come in one way now -- in one of two way , I should rather say . either the suit must be end , , or the suitor . but it shall be the suit , my dear girl , the suit , my dear girl ! "
" these latter word be address to , who be sit nearest to he . she face be turn away from I and towards he , I could not see it . " we be do very well , " pursue . " Vhole will tell you so . we be really spin along . ask Vholes . we be give they no rest . Vhole know all they windings and turnings , and we be upon they everywhere . we have astonish they already . we shall rouse up that nest of sleeper , mark my word ! " he hopefulness have long be more painful to I than he despondency ; it be so unlike hopefulness , have something so fierce in its determination to be it , be so hungry and eager , and yet so conscious of be force and unsustainable that it have long touch I to the heart . but the commentary upon it now indelibly write in he handsome face make it far more distressing than it use to be . I say indelibly , for I feel persuade that if the fatal cause could have be for ever terminate , accord to he brightest vision , in that same hour , the trace of the premature anxiety , self - reproach , and disappointment it have occasion he would have remain upon he feature to the hour of he death . " the sight of we dear little woman , " say , still remain silent and quiet , " be so natural to I , and she compassionate face be so like the face of old day -- " ah ! no , no . I smile and shake my head . " -- so exactly like the face of old day , " say in he cordial voice , and take my hand with the brotherly regard which nothing ever change , " that I can not make pretence with she . I fluctuate a little ; that be the truth . sometimes I hope , my dear , and sometimes I -- do not quite despair , but nearly . I get , " say , relinquish my hand gently and walk across the room , " so tired ! " he take a few turn up and down and sunk upon the sofa . " I get , " he repeat gloomily , " so tired . it be such weary , weary work ! " he be lean on he arm say these word in a meditative voice and look at the ground when my darling rise , put off she bonnet , knee down beside he with she golden hair fall like sunlight on he head , clasp she two arm round he neck , and turn she face to I . oh , what a love and devot face I see ! " , dear , " she say very quietly , " I be not go home again . " a light shone in upon I all at once . " never any more . I be go to stay with my dear husband . we have be marry above two month . go home without I , my own Esther ; I shall never go home any more ! " with those word my darling draw he head down on she breast and hold it there . and if ever in my life I see a love that nothing but death could change , I see it then before I . " to , my dearest , " say , break the silence presently . " tell she how it be . " I meet she before she could come to I and fold she in my arm . we neither of we speak , but with she cheek against my own I want to hear nothing . " my pet , " say I . " my love . my poor , poor girl ! " I pitie she so much . I be very fond of , but the impulse that I have upon I be to pity she so much . " , will you forgive I ? will my cousin forgive I ? " " my dear , " say I , " to doubt it for a moment be to do he a great wrong . and as to I ! " why , as to I , what have I to forgive ! I dry my sobbing darling 's eye and sit beside she on the sofa , and sit on my other side ; and while I be remind of that so different night when they have first take I into they confidence and have go on in they own wild happy way , they tell I between they how it be . " all I have be 's , " say ; " and would not take it , , and what could I do but be he wife when I love he dearly ! " " and you be so fully and so kindly occupied , excellent , " say , " that how could we speak to you at such a time ! and besides , it be not a long - consider step . we go out one morning and be married . " " and when it be done , , " say my darling , " I be always think how to tell you and what to do for the best . and sometimes I think you ought to know it directly , and sometimes I think you ought not to know it and keep it from my cousin ; and I could not tell what to do , and I fret very much . " how selfish I must have be not to have thought of this before ! I do not know what I say now . I be
be so sorry , and yet I be so fond of they and so glad that they be fond of I ; I pitie they so much , and yet I feel a kind of pride in they love one another . I never have experience such painful and pleasurable emotion at one time , and in my own heart I do not know which predominate . but I be not there to darke they way ; I do not do that . when I be less foolish and more compose , my darling take she wedding - ring from she bosom , and kiss it , and put it on . then I remembe last night and tell that ever since she marriage she have wear it at night when there be no one to see . then blushingly ask I how do I know that , my dear . then I tell how I have see she hand conceal under she pillow and have little thought why , my dear . then they begin tell I how it be all over again , and I begin to be sorry and glad again , and foolish again , and to hide my plain old face as much as I could lest I should put they out of heart . thus the time go on until it become necessary for I to think of return . when that time arrive it be the worst of all , for then my darling completely break down . she cling round my neck , call I by every dear name she could think of and say what should she do without I ! be much better ; and as for I , I should have be the worst of the three if I have not severely say to myself , " now Esther , if you do , I will never speak to you again ! " " why , I declare , " say I , " I never see such a wife . I do not think she love she husband at all . here , , take my child , for goodness 's sake . " but I hold she tight all the while , and could have weep over she I do not know how long . " I give this dear young couple notice , " say I , " that I be only go away to come back to - morrow and that I shall be always come backwards and forwards until 's be tired of the sight of I . so I shall not say good - bye , . for what would be the use of that , you know , when I be come back so soon ! " I have give my darling to he now , and I mean to go ; but I linger for one more look of the precious face which it seem to rive my heart to turn from . so I say ( in a merry , bust manner ) that unless they give I some encouragement to come back , I be not sure that I could take that liberty , upon which my dear girl look up , faintly smile through she tear , and I fold she lovely face between my hand , and give it one last kiss , and laugh , and run away . and when I get downstairs , oh , how I cry ! it almost seem to I that I have lose my for ever . I be so lonely and so blank without she , and it be so desolate to be go home with no hope of see she there , that I could get no comfort for a little while as I walk up and down in a dim corner sobb and cry . I come to myself by and by , after a little scolding , and take a coach home . the poor boy whom I have find at have reappear a short time before and be lie at the point of death ; indeed , be then dead , though I do not know it . my guardian have go out to inquire about he and do not return to dinner . be quite alone , I cry a little again , though on the whole I do not think I behave so very , very ill . it be only natural that I should not be quite accustom to the loss of my darling yet . three or four hour be not a long time after year . but my mind dwelt so much upon the uncongenial scene in which i have leave she , and I picture it as such a overshadow stony - hear one , and I so long to be near she and take some sort of care of she , that I determine to go back in the evening only to look up at she window . it be foolish , I dare say , but it do not then seem at all so to I , and it do not seem quite so even now . I take into my confidence , and we go out at dusk . it be dark when we come to the new strange home of my dear girl , and there be a light behind the yellow blind . we walk past cautiously three or four time , look up , and narrowly miss encounter , who come out of he office while we be there and turn he head to look up too before go home . the sight of he lank black figure and the lonesome air of that nook in the dark be favourable to the state of my mind . I think of the youth and love and beauty of my dear girl , shut up in such a ill - assort refuge , almost as
as if it be a cruel place . it be very solitary and very dull , and I do not doubt that I might safely steal upstairs . I leave below and go up with a light foot , not distress by any glare from the feeble oil lantern on the way . I listen for a few moment , and in the musty rot silence of the house believe that I could hear the murmur of they young voice . I put my lip to the hearse - like panel of the door as a kiss for my dear and come quietly down again , think that one of these day I would confess to the visit . and it really do I good , for though nobody but and I know anything about it , I somehow feel as if it have diminish the separation between and I and have bring we together again for those moment . I go back , not quite accustom yet to the change , but all the better for that hovering about my darling . my guardian have come home and be stand thoughtfully by the dark window . when I go in , he face clear and he come to he seat , but he catch the light upon my face as I take mine . " little woman , " say he , " you have be cry . " " why , yes , guardian , " say I , " I be afraid I have be , a little . have be in such distress , and be so very sorry , guardian . " I put my arm on the back of he chair , and I see in he glance that my word and my look at she empty place have prepare he . " be she marry , my dear ? " I tell he all about it and how she first entreaty have refer to he forgiveness . " she have no need of it , " say he . " bless she and she husband ! " but just as my first impulse have be to pity she , so be he . " poor girl , poor girl ! poor ! poor ! " neither of we speak after that , until he say with a sigh , " well , well , my dear ! be thin fast . " " but its mistress remain , guardian . " though I be timid about say it , I venture because of the sorrowful tone in which he have speak . " she will do all she can to make it happy , " say I . " she will succeed , my love ! " the letter have make no difference between we except that the seat by he side have come to be mine ; it make none now . he turn he old bright fatherly look upon I , lay he hand on my hand in he old way , and say again , " she will succeed , my dear . nevertheless , be thin fast , of little woman ! " I be sorry presently that this be all we say about that . I be rather disappointed . I fear I might not quite have be all I have mean to be since the letter and the answer . but one other day have intervene when , early in the morning as we be go to breakfast , come in haste with the astounding news that a terrible murder have be commit for which have be apprehend and be in custody . when he tell we that a large reward be offer by for the murderer 's apprehension , I do not in my first consternation understand why ; but a few more word explain to I that the murdered person be 's lawyer , and immediately my mother 's dread of he rush into my remembrance . this unforeseen and violent removal of one whom she have long watch and distrust and who have long watch and distrust she , one for whom she could have have few interval of kindness , always dread in he a dangerous and secret enemy , appear so awful that my first thought be of she . how appal to hear of such a death and be able to feel no pity ! how dreadful to remember , perhaps , that she have sometimes even wish the old man away who be so swiftly hurrie out of life ! such crowding reflection , increase the distress and fear I always feel when the name be mention , make I so agitate that I could scarcely hold my place at the table . I be quite unable to follow the conversation until I have have a little time to recover . but when I come to myself and see how shocked my guardian be and find that they be earnestly speak of the suspect man and recalle every favourable impression we have form of he out of the good we have know of he , my interest and my fear be so strongly arouse in he behalf that I be quite set up again . " guardian , you do not think it possible that he be justly accuse ? " " my dear , I can not think so . this man whom we have see so open - hear and compassionate , who with the might of a giant have the gentleness of a child , who look as brave a fellow as ever liv and be so simple and quiet with it , this man justly accuse of such a crime ? I can not believe it . it be not that I do not or I will not . I can not ! " " and I can not , " say . " , whatever we
we believe or know of he , we have better not forget that some appearance be against he . he bear a animosity towards the decease gentleman . he have openly mention it in many place . he be say to have express himself violently towards he , and he certainly do about he , to my knowledge . he admit that he be alone on the scene of the murder within a few minute of its commission . I sincerely believe he to be as innocent of any participation in it as I be , but these be all reason for suspicion fal upon he . " " true , " say my guardian . and he add , turn to I , " it would be do he a very bad service , my dear , to shut we eye to the truth in any of these respects . " I feel , of course , that we must admit , not only to ourselves but to other , the full force of the circumstance against he . yet I know withal ( I could not help say ) that they weight would not induce we to desert he in he need . " heaven forbid ! " return my guardian . " we will stand by he , as he himself stand by the two poor creature who be go . " he mean and the boy , to both of whom have give shelter . then tell we that the trooper 's man have be with he before day , after wander about the street all night like a distract creature . that one of the trooper 's first anxiety be that we should not suppose he guilty . that he have charge he messenger to represent he perfect innocence with every solemn assurance be could send we . that have only quiet the man by undertaking to come to we house very early in the morning with these representation . he add that he be now upon he way to see the prisoner himself . my guardian say directly he would go too . now , besides that I like the retired soldier very much and that he like I , I have that secret interest in what have happen which be only know to my guardian . I feel as if it come close and near to I . it seem to become personally important to myself that the truth should be discover and that no innocent people should be suspect , for suspicion , once run wild , might run wilder . in a word , I feel as if it be my duty and obligation to go with they . my guardian do not seek to dissuade I , and I go . it be a large prison with many court and passage so like one another and so uniformly pave that I seem to gain a new comprehension , as I pass along , of the fondness that solitary prisoner , shut up among the same staring wall from year to year , have have -- as I have read -- for a weed or a stray blade of grass . in a arch room by himself , like a cellar upstairs , with wall so glaringly white that they make the massive iron window - bar and iron - bound door even more profoundly black than they be , we find the trooper stand in a corner . he have be sit on a bench there and have risen when he hear the lock and bolt turn . when he see we , he come forward a step with he usual heavy tread , and there stop and make a slight bow . but as I still advanc , put out my hand to he , he understand we in a moment . " this be a load off my mind , I do assure you , miss and gentleman , " say he , salut we with great heartiness and draw a long breath . " and now I do not so much care how it end . " he scarcely seem to be the prisoner . what with he coolness and he soldierly bear , he look far more like the prison guard . " this be even a rougher place than my gallery to receive a lady in , " say , " but I know will make the best of it . " as he hand I to the bench on which he have be sit , I sit down , which seem to give he great satisfaction . " I thank you , miss , " say he . " now , , " observ my guardian , " as we require no new assurance on you part , so I believe we need give you none on ours . " " not at all , sir . I thank you with all my heart . if I be not innocent of this crime , I could not look at you and keep my secret to myself under the condescension of the present visit . I feel the present visit very much . I be not one of the eloquent sort , but I feel it , and gentlemen , deeply . " he lay he hand for a moment on he broad chest and bend he head to we . although he square himself again directly , he express a great amount of natural emotion by these simple means . " first , " say my guardian , " can we do anything for you personal comfort , ? " " for which , sir ? " he inquire , clear he throat . " for you personal comfort . be there anything you want that would lessen the hardship of this confinement ? " " well , sir , " reply , after a
a little cogitation , " I be equally oblige to you , but tobacco be against the rule , I can not say that there be . " " you will think of many little thing perhaps , by and by . whenever you do , , let we know . " " thank you , sir . Howsoever , " observ with one of he sunbur not smile , " a man who have be knock about the world in a vagabond kind of a way as long as I have get on well enough in a place like the present , so far as that go . " " next , as to you case , " observ my guardian . " exactly so , sir , " return , fold he arm upon he breast with perfect self - possession and a little curiosity . " how do it stand now ? " " why , sir , it be under remand at present . give I to understand that he will probably apply for a series of remand from time to time until the case be more complete . how it be to be make more complete I do not myself see , but I dare say will manage it somehow . " " why , heaven save we , man , " exclaim my guardian , surprise into he old oddity and vehemence , " you talk of yourself as if you be somebody else ! " " no offence , sir , " say . " I be very sensible of you kindness . but I do not see how a innocent man be to make up he mind to this kind of thing without knock he head against the wall unless he take it in that point of view . " that be true enough to a certain extent , " return my guardian , soften . " but my good fellow , even a innocent man must take ordinary precaution to defend himself . " " certainly , sir . and I have do so . I have state to the magistrate , ' gentlemen , I be as innocent of this charge as yourselves ; what have be state against I in the way of fact be perfectly true ; I know no more about it . ' I intend to continue state that , sir . what more can I do ? it be the truth . " " but the mere truth will not do , " rejoin my guardian . " will not it indeed , sir ? rather a bad look - out for I ! " good -humouredly observ . " you must have a lawyer , " pursue my guardian . " we must engage a good one for you . " " I ask you pardon , sir , " say with a step backward . " I be equally oblige . but I must decidedly beg to be excuse from anything of that sort . " " you will not have a lawyer ? " " no , sir . " shook he head in the most emphatic manner . " I thank you all the same , sir , but -- no lawyer ! " " why not ? " " I do not take kindly to the breed , " say . " do not . and -- if you will excuse my say so much -- I should hardly have think you do yourself , sir . " " that be equity , " my guardian explain , a little at a loss ; " that be equity , . " " be it , indeed , sir ? " return the trooper in he off - hand manner . " I be not acquaint with those shade of name myself , but in a general way I object to the breed . " Unfold he arm and change he position , he stand with one massive hand upon the table and the other on he hip , as complete a picture of a man who be not to be move from a fix purpose as ever I see . it be in vain that we all three talk to he and endeavoure to persuade he ; he listen with that gentleness which go so well with he bluff bear , but be evidently no more shaken by we representation that he place of confinement be . " pray think , once more , , " say I . " have you no wish in reference to you case ? " " I certainly could wish it to be try , miss , " he return , " by court - martial ; but that be out of the question , as I be well aware . if you will be so good as to favour I with you attention for a couple of minute , miss , not more , I will endeaavor to explain myself as clearly as I can . " he look at we all three in turn , shook he head a little as if he be adjust it in the stock and collar of a tight uniform , and after a moment 's reflection go on . " you see , miss , I have be handcuff and take into custody and bring here . I be a mark and disgrac man , and here I be . my shooting gallery be rummage , high and low , by ; such property as I have --'tis small -- be turn this way and that till it do not know itself ; and ( as aforesaid ) here I be ! I do not particular complain of that . though I be in these present quarter through no immediately precede fault of mine , I can very well understand that if I have not go into
into the vagabond way in my youth , this would not have happen . it have happen . then come the question how to meet it " he rub he swarthy forehead for a moment with a good - humoured look and say apologetically , " I be such a short - win talker that I must think a bit . " have think a bit , he look up again and resume . " how to meet it . now , the unfortunate decease be himself a lawyer and have a pretty tight hold of I . I do not wish to rake up he ash , but he have , what I should call if he be liive , a devil of a tight hold of I . I do not like he trade the better for that . if I have keep clear of he trade , I should have keep outside this place . but that be not what I mean . now , suppose I have kill he . suppose I really have dischar into he body any one of those pistol recently fire off that have find at my place , and dear I , might have find there any day since it have be my place . what should I have do as soon as I be hard and fast here ? get a lawyer . " he stop on hear some one at the lock and bolt and do not resume until the door have be open and be shut again . for what purpose open , I will mention presently . " I should have get a lawyer , and he would have say ( as I have often read in the newspaper ) , ' my client say nothing , my client reserve he defence ': my client this , that , and t'other . well , ' tis not the custom of that breed to go straight , accord to my opinion , or to think that other man do . say I be innocent and I get a lawyer . he would be as likely to believe I guilty as not ; perhaps more . what would he do , whether or not ? act as if I be -- shut my mouth up , tell I not to commit myself , keep circumstance back , chop the evidence small , quibble , and get I off perhaps ! but , , do I care for get off in that way ; or would I rather be hang in my own way -- if you will excuse my mention anything so disagreeable to a lady ? " he have warm into he subject now , and be under no further necessity to wait a bit . " I would rather be hang in my own way . and I mean to be ! I do not intend to say , " look round upon we with he powerful arm akimbo and he dark eyebrow raise , " that I be more partial to be hang than another man . what I say be , I must come off clear and full or not at all . therefore , when I hear state against I what be true , I say it be true ; and when they tell I , ' whatever you say will be use ,' I tell they I do not mind that ; I mean it to be use . if they can not make I innocent out of the whole truth , they be not likely to do it out of anything less , or anything else . and if they be , it be worth nothing to I . " take a pace or two over the stone floor , he come back to the table and finish what he have to say . " I thank you , miss and gentleman both , many time for you attention , and many time more for you interest . that be the plain state of the matter as it point itself out to a mere trooper with a blunt broadsword kind of a mind . I have never do well in life beyond my duty as a soldier , and if the worst come after all , I shall reap pretty much as I have sow . when I get over the first crash of be seize as a murderer -- it do not take a rover who have knock about so much as myself so very long to recover from a crash -- I work my way round to what you find I now . as such I shall remain . no relation will be disgrace by I or make unhappy for I , and -- and that be all I have get to say . " the door have be open to admit another soldier - look man of less prepossessing appearance at first sight and a weather - tan , bright - eye wholesome woman with a basket , who , from she entrance , have be exceedingly attentive to all have say . have receive they with a familiar nod and a friendly look , but without any more particular greeting in the midst of he address . he now shook they cordially by the hand and say , " and gentlemen , this be a old comrade of mine , . and this be he wife , . " make we a stiff military bow , and drop we a curtsy . " real good friend of mine , they be , " sald . " it be at they house I be take . " " with a second - hand wiolinceller , " put in , twitch he head angrily . " of a good tone . for a friend . that money be no object to . " " , " say , " you have
have hear pretty well all I have be say to this lady and these two gentleman . I know it meet you approval ? " , after consider , refer the point to he wife . " old girl , " say he . " tell he . whether or not . it meet my approval . " " why , , " exclaim , who have be unpack she basket , in which there be a piece of cold pick pork , a little tea and sugar , and a brown loaf , " you ought to know it do not . you ought to know it be enough to drive a person wild to hear you . you will not be get off this way , and you will not be get off that way -- what do you mean by such picking and choose ? it be stuff and nonsense , . " " do not be severe upon I in my misfortune , , " say the trooper lightly . " oh ! bother you misfortune , " cry , " if they do not make you more reasonable than that come to . I never be so asham in my life to hear a man talk folly as I have be to hear you talk this day to the present company . lawyer ? why , what but too many cooks should hinder you from have a dozen lawyer if the gentleman recommend they to you " " this be a very sensible woman , " say my guardian . " I hope you will persuade he , . " " persuade he , sir ? " she return . " bless you , no . you do not know . now , there ! " leave she basket to point he out with both she bare brown hand . " there he stand ! as self - will and as determine a man , in the wrong way , as ever put a human creature under heaven out of patience ! you could have soon take up and shoulder a eight and forty pounder by you own strength as turn that man when he have get a thing into he head and fix it there . why , do not I know he ! " cry . " do not I know you , ! you do not mean to set up for a new character with I after all these year , I hope ? " she friendly indignation have a exemplary effect upon she husband , who shook he head at the trooper several time as a silent recommendation to he to yield . between while , look at I ; and I understand from the play of she eye that she wish I to do something , though I do not comprehend what . " but I have give up talk to you , old fellow , year and year , " say as she blow a little dust off the pickle pork , look at I again ; " and when lady and gentleman know you as well as I do , they will give up talking to you too . if you be not too headstrong to accept of a bit of dinner , here it be . " " I accept it with many thanks , " return the trooper . " do you though , indeed ? " say , continue to grumble on good - humouredly . " I be sure I be surprise at that . I wonder you do not starve in you own way also . it would only be like you . perhaps you will set you mind upon that next . " here she again look at I , and I now perceive from she glance at the door and at I , by turn , that she wish we to retire and to await she follow we outside the prison . communicate this by similar means to my guardian and , I rise . " we hope you will think better of it , , " say I , " and we shall come to see you again , trust to find you more reasonable . " " more grateful , , you can not find I , " he return . " but more persuadable we can , I hope , " say I . " and let I entreat you to consider that the clearing up of this mystery and the discovery of the real perpetrator of this deed may be of the last importance to other besides yourself . " he hear I respectfully but without much heeding these word , which I speak a little turn from he , already on my way to the door ; he be observe ( this they afterwards tell I ) my height and figure , which seem to catch he attention all at once . " ' Tis curious , " say he . " and yet I think so at the time ! " my guardian ask he what he mean . " why , sir , " he answer , " when my ill fortune take I to the dead man 's staircase on the night of he murder , I see a shape so like 's go by I in the dark that I have half a mind to speak to it . " for a instant I feel such a shudder as I never feel before or since and hope I shall never feel again . " it come downstairs as I go up , " say the trooper , " and cross the moonlighted window with a loose black mantle on ; I notice a deep fringe to it . however , it have nothing to do with the present subject , except that look so like it at the moment that it come into
into my head . " I can not separate and define the feeling that arise in I after this ; it be enough that the vague duty and obligation I have feel upon I from the first of follow the investigation be , without my distinctly daring to ask myself any question , increase , and that I be indignantly sure of there be no possibility of a reason for my be afraid . we three go out of the prison and walk up and down at some short distance from the gate , which be in a retired place . we have not wait long when and come out too and quickly join we . there be a tear in each of 's eye , and she face be flush and hurrie . " I do not let see what I think about it , you know , miss , " be she first remark when she come up , " but he be in a bad way , poor old fellow ! " " not with care and prudence and good help , " say my guardian . " a gentleman like you ought to know best , sir , " return , hurriedly dry she eye on the hem of she grey cloak , " but I be uneasy for he . he have be so careless and say so much that he never meant . the gentleman of the juries might not understand he as and I do . and then such a number of circumstance have happen bad for he , and such a number of people will be bring forward to speak against he , and be so deep . " " with a second - hand wiolinceller . and say he play the fife . when a boy , " add with great solemnity . " now , I tell you , miss , " say ; " and when I say miss , I mean all ! just come into the corner of the wall and I will tell you ! " hurry we into a more secluded place and be at first too breathless to proceed , occasion to say , " old girl ! tell th'ey ! " " why , then , miss , " the old girl proceed , unty the string of she bonnet for more air , " you could as soon move Dover Castle as move on this point unless you have get a new power to move he with . and I have get it ! " " you be a jewel of a woman , " say my guardian . " go on ! " " now , I tell you , miss , " she proceed , clapp she hand in she hurry and agitation a dozen time in every sentence , " that what he say concern no relation be all bosh . they do not know of he , but he do know of they . he have say more to I at odd time than to anybody else , and it war not for nothing that he once speak to my about whitening and wrinkl mother ' head . for fifty pound he have see he mother that day . she be alive and must be bring here straight ! " instantly put some pin into she mouth and begin pin up she skirt all round a little higher than the level of she grey cloak , which she accomplish with surpassing dispatch and dexterity . " , " say , " you take care of the child , old man , and give I the umbrella ! I be away to to bring that old lady here . " " but , bless the woman , " cry my guardian with he hand in he pocket , " how be she go ? what money have she get ? " make another application to she skirt and bring forth a leathern purse in which she hastily count over a few shilling and which she then shut up with perfect satisfaction . " never you mind for I , miss . I be a soldier 's wife and accustom to travel my own way . , old boy , " kiss he , " one for yourself , three for the child . now I be away into after 's mother ! " and she actually set off while we three stood look at one another lost in amazement . she actually trudge away in she grey cloak at a sturdy pace , and turn the corner , and be gone . " , " say my guardian . " do you mean to let she go in that way ? " " can not help it , " he return . " make she way home once from another quarter of the world . with the same grey cloak . and same umbrella . whatever the old girl say , do . do it ! whenever the old girl say , I will do it . she do it . " " then she be as honest and genuine as she look , " rejoin my guardian , " and it be impossible to say more for she . " " she be - of the battalion , " say , look at we over he shoulder as he go he way also . " and there be not such another . but I never own to it before she . must be maintain . " the and he fat forefinger be much in consultation together under exist circumstance . when have a matter of this pressing interest under he consideration , the fat forefinger seem to rise , to the dignity of a familiar demon . he put it to he ear , and it whisper information ; he put it to he lip , and it enjoin
enjoin he to secrecy ; he rub it over he nose , and it sharpen he scent ; he shake it before a guilty man , and it charm he to he destruction . the Augurs of the invariably predict that when and that finger be in much conference , a terrible avenger will be hear of before long . otherwise mildly studious in he observation of human nature , on the whole a benignant philosopher not dispose to be severe upon the folly of mankind , pervade a vast number of house and stroll about a infinity of street , to outward appearance rather languishing for want of a object . he be in the friendliest condition towards he species and will drink with most of they . he be free with he money , affable in he manners , innocent in he conversation -- but through the placid stream of he life there glide a under - current of forefinger . time and place can not bind . like man in the abstract , he be here to - day and go to - morrow -- but , very unlike man indeed , he be here again the next day . this evening he will be casually look into the iron extinguisher at the door of 's house in town ; and to - morrow morning he will be walk on the lead at , where erst the old man walk whose ghost be propitiate with a hundred guinea . drawer , desk , pockets , all thing belong to he , examine . a few hour afterwards , he and the will be alone together compare forefinger . it be likely that these occupation be irreconcilable with home enjoyment , but it be certain that at do not go home . through in general he highly appreciate the society of -- a lady of a natural detective genius , which if it have be improve by professional exercise , might have do great thing , but which have pause at the level of a clever amateur -- he hold himself aloon from that dear solace . be dependent on they lodger ( fortunately a amiable lady in whom she take a interest ) for companionship and conversation . a great crowd assemble in 's on the day of the funeral . attend the ceremony in person ; strictly speak , there be only three other human followers , that be to say , , , and the debilitate cousin ( throw in as a make - weight ) , but the amount of inconsolable carriage be immense . the peerage contribute more four -wheeled affliction than have ever be see in that neighbourhood . be the assemblage of armorial bearing on coach panel that the 's college might be suppose to have lose its father and mother at a blow . the of send a splendid pile of dust and ash , with silver wheel - box , patent axle , all the last improvement , and three bereaved worm , six foot high , hold on behind , in a bunch of woe . all the state coachman in plunge into mourning ; and if that dead old man of the rusty garb be not beyond a taste in horseflesh ( which appear impossible ) , it must be highly gratify this day . quiet among the undertaker and the equipage and the calf of so many leg all steep in grief , sit conceal in one of the inconsolable carriage and at he ease survey the crowd through the lattice blind . he have a keen eye for a crowd -- as for what not ?-- and look here and there , now from this side of the carriage , now from the other , now up at the house window , now along the people 's head , nothing escape he . " and there you be , my partner , eh ? " say to himself , apostrophize , station , by he favour , on the step of the decease 's house . " and so you be . and so you be ! and very well indeed you be look , ! " the procession have not start yet , but be wait for the cause of its assemblage to be bring out . , in the foremost emblazoned carriage , use he two fat forefinger to hold the lattice a hair 's breadth open while he look . and it say a great deal for he attachment , as a husband , that he be still occupy with . . " there you be , my partner , eh ? " he murmuringly repeat . " and we lodger with you . I be take notice of you , ; I hope you be all right in you health , my dear ! " not another word do say , but sit with most attentive eye until the sack depository of noble secret be bring down -- where be all those secret now ? do he keep they yet ? do they fly with he on that sudden journey ?-- and until the procession move , and 's view be change . after which he compose himself for a easy ride and take note of the fitting of the carriage in case he should ever find such knowledge useful . enough between shut up in he dark carriage and shut up in he . between the immeasurable track of space beyond the little wound that have throw the one into the fix sleep which jolt so heavily over the stone of the street , and the narrow track of blood which keep the other in the watchful state express in every hair of he head ! but it be all one to both ; neither be troublead about that . sit out the procession in he own easy manner and glide
glide from the carriage when the opportunity he have settle with himself arrive . he make for 's , which be at present a sort of home to he , where he come and go as he like at all hour , where he be always welcome and make much of , where he know the whole establishment , and walk in a atmosphere of mysterious greatness . no knock or ring for . he have cause himself to be provide with a key and can pass in at he pleasure . as he be cross the hall , inform he , " here be another letter for you , , come by post , " and give it he . " another one , eh ? " say . if should chance to be possess by any lingering curiosity as to 's letter , that wary person be not the man to gratify it . look at he as if he face be a vista of some mile in length and he be leisurely contemplate the same . " do you happen to carry a box ? " say . unfortunately be no snuff - taker . " could you fetch I a pinch from anywhere ? " say . " Thankee . it do not matter what it be ; I be not particular as to the kind . ! " have leisurely help himself from a canister borrowed from somebody downstair for the purpose , and have make a considerable show of taste it , first with one side of he nose and then with the other , , with much deliberation , pronounce it of the right sort and go on , letter in hand . now although walk upstairs to the little library within the larger one with the face of a man who receive some score of letter every day , it happen that much correspondence be not incidental to he life . he be no great scribe , rather handle he pen like the pocket - staff he carry about with he always convenient to he grasp , and discourage correspondence with himself in other as be too artless and direct a way of do delicate business . further , he often see damaging letter produce in evidence and have occasion to reflect that it be a green thing to write they . for these reason he have very little to do with letter , either as sender or receiver . and yet he have receive a round half - dozen within the last twenty - four hour . " and this , " say , spread it out on the table , " be in the same hand , and consist of the same two word . " what two word ? he turn the key in the door , ungirdle he black pocket - book ( book of fate to many ) , lay another letter by it , and read , boldly write in each , " . " " yes , yes , " say . " but I could have make the money without this anonymous information . " have put the letter in he book of fate and girdle it up again , he unlock the door just in time to admit he dinner , which be bring upon a goodly tray with a decanter of sherry . frequently observe , in friendly circle where there be no restraint , that he like a toothful of you fine old brown sherry better than anything you can offer he . consequently he fill and empty he glass with a smack of he lip and be proceed with he refreshment when a idea enter he mind . softly open the door of communication between that room and the next and look in . the library be desert , and the fire be sinke low . 's eye , after take a pigeon - flight round the room , alight upon a table where letter be usually put as they arrive . several letter for be upon it . draw near and examine the direction . " no , " he say , " there be none in that hand . it be only I as be write to . I can break it to , , to - morrow . " with that he return to finish he dinner with a good appetite , and after a light nap , be summon into the drawing - room . have receive he there these several evening past to know whether he have anything to report . the debilitated cousin ( much exhaust by the funeral ) and be in attendance . make three distinctly different bow to these three people . a bow of homage to , a bow of gallantry to , and a bow of recognition to the debilitate cousin , to whom it airily say , " you be a swell about town , and you know I , and I know you . " have distribute these little specimen of he tact , rub he hand . " have you anything new to communicate , officer ? " inquire . " do you wish to hold any conversation with I in private ? " " why -- not to - night , , . " " because my time , " pursue , " be wholly at you disposal with a view to the vindication of the outraged majesty of the law . " cough and glance at , rouge and necklace , as though he would respectfully observe , " I do assure you , you be a pretty creetur . I have see hundred worse look at you time of life , I have indeed . " the fair Volumnia , not quite unconscious perhaps of the humanizing influence of she charms , pause in the writing of cock - hat note and meditatively adjust
adjust the pearl necklace . bucket price that decoration in he mind and think it as likely as not that be write poetry . " if I have not , " pursue , " in the most emphatic manner , adjure you , officer , to exercise you utmost skill in this atrocious case , I particularly desire to take the present opportunity of rectify any omission I may have make . let no expense be a consideration . I be prepare to defray all charge . you can incur none in pursuit of the object you have undertake that I shall hesitate for a moment to bear . " make 's bow again as a response to this liberality . " my mind , " add with a generous warmth , " have not , as may be easily suppose , recover it be tone since the late diabolical occurrence . it be not likely ever to recover it be tone . but it be full of indignation to - night after undergo the ordeal of consign to the tomb the remains of a faithful , a zealous , a devoted adherent . " 's voice tremble and he grey hair stir upon he head . Tears be in he eyes ; the best part of he nature be arouse . " I declare , " he say , " I solemnly declare that until this crime be discover and , in the course of justice , punish , I almost feel as if there be a stain upon my name . a gentleman who have devote a large portion of he life to I , a gentleman who have devote the last day of he life to I , a gentleman who have constantly sit at my table and sleep under my roof , go from my house to he own , and be strike down within a hour of he leave my house . I can not say but that he may have be follow from my house , watch at my house , even first mark because of he association with my house -- which may have suggest he possessing greater wealth and be altogether of greater importance than he own retiring demeanou would have indicate . if I can not with my mean and influence and my position bring all the perpetrator of such a crime to light , I fail in the assertion of my respect for that gentleman 's memory and of my fidelity towards one who be ever faithful to I . " while he make this protestation with great emotion and earnestness , look round the room as if he be address a assembly , glance at he with a observant gravity in which there might be , but for the audacity of the think , a touch of compassion . " the ceremony of to - day , " continue , " strikingly illustrative of the respect in which my decease friend " -- he lay a stress upon the word , for death level all distinction --" be hold by the flower of the land , have , I say , aggravate the shock I have receive from this most horrible and audacious crime . if it be my brother who have commit it , I would not spare he . " look very grave . Volumnia remark of the decease that he be the trustiest and dearest person ! " you must feel it as a deprivation to you , miss , " reply soothingly , " no doubt . he be calculate to be a deprivation , I be sure he be . " give to understand , in reply , that she sensitive mind be fully make up never to get the better of it as long as she life , that she nerve be unstrung for ever , and that she have not the least expectation of ever smile again . meanwhile she fold up a cocked hat for that redoubtable old general at , descriptive of she melancholy condition . " it give a start to a delicate female , " say sympathetically , " but it will wear off . " Volumnia wish of all thing to know what be do ? whether they be go to convict , or whatever it be , that dreadful soldier ? whether he have any accomplice , or whatever the thing be call in the law ? and a great deal more to the like artless purpose . " why you see , miss , " return , bring the finger into persuasive action -- and such be he natural gallantry that he have almost say " my dear " --" it be not easy to answer those question at the present moment . not at the present moment . I have keep myself on this case , , , " whom take into the conversation in right of he importance , " morning , noon , and night . but for a glass or two of sherry , I do not think I could have have my mind so much upon the stretch as it have be . I could answer you question , miss , but duty forbid it . , , will very soon be make acquainted with all that have be trace . and I hope that he may find it " -- again look grave --" to he satisfaction . " the debilitate cousin only hope some fler will be execute -- zample . think more interest 's want -- get man hang presentime -- than get man place ten thousand a year . have not a doubt -- zample -- far better hang wrong fler than no fler . " you know life , you know , sir , " say with a complimentary twinkle of he eye and crook of he finger , " and you can confirm what I
I have mention to this lady . you do not want to be tell that from information I have receive I have go to work . you be up to what a lady can not be expect to be up to . ! especially in you elevated station of society , miss , " say , quite redden at another narrow escape from " my dear . " " the officer , , " observe , " be faithful to he duty , and perfectly right . " murmur , " to have the honour of you approbation , , . " " in fact , , " proceed , " it be not hold up a good model for imitation to ask the officer any such question as you have put to he . he be the best judge of he own responsibility ; he act upon he responsibility . and it do not become we , who assist in make the law , to impede or interfere with those who carry they into execution . or , " say somewhat sternly , for be go to cut in before he have round he sentence , " or who vindicate they outraged majesty . " Volumnia with all humility explain that she have not merely the plea of curiosity to urge ( in common with the giddy youth of she sex in general ) but that she be perfectly die with regret and interest for the darling man whose lose they all deplore . " very well , , " return . " then you can not be too discreet . " take the opportunity of a pause to be hear again . " , , I have no objection to tell this lady , with you leave and among ourselves , that I look upon the case as pretty well complete . it be a beautiful case -- a beautiful case -- and what little be want to complete it , I expect to be able to supply in a few hour . " " I be very glad indeed to hear it , " say . " highly creditable to you . " " , , " return very seriously , " I hope it may at one and the same time do I credit and prove satisfactory to all . when I depict it as a beautiful case , you see , miss , " go on , glance gravely at , " I mean from my point of view . as consider from other point of view , such case will always involve more or less unpleasantness . very strange thing come to we knowledge in family , miss ; bless you heart , what you would think to be phenomenon , quite . " , with she innocent little scream , suppose so . " aye , and even in gen - teel familie , in high family , in great family , " say , again gravely eye aside . " I have have the honour of be employ in high family before , and you have no idea -- come , I will go so far as to say not even you have any idea , sir , " this to the debilitated cousin , " what game go on ! " the cousin , who have be cast sofa-pillows on he head , in a prostration of boredom yawn , " , " be the use - up for " very likely . " , deem it time to dismiss the officer , here majestically interpose with the word , " very good . thank you ! " and also with a wave of he hand , imply not only that there be a end of the discourse , but that if high family fall into low habit they must take the consequence . " you will not forget , officer , " he add with condescension , " that I be at you disposal when you please . " ( still grave ) inquire if to - morrow morning , now , would suit , in case he should be as for 'ard as he expect to be . reply , " all time be alike to I . " make he three bow and be withdraw when a forgotten point occurs to he . " might I ask , by the by , " he say in a low voice , cautiously return , " who post the reward - bill on the staircase . " " I order it to be put up there , " reply . " would it be consider a liberty , , , if I be to ask you why ? " " not at all . I choose it as a conspicuous part of the house . I think it can not be too prominently keep before the whole establishment . I wish my people to be impress with the enormity of the crime , the determination to punish it , and the hopelessness of escape . at the same time , officer , if you in you better knowledge of the subject see any objection -- " see none now ; the bill have be put up , have better not be take down . repeat he three bow he withdraw , close the door on 's little scream , which be a preliminary to she remark that that charmingly horrible person be a perfect . in he fondness for society and he adaptability to all grade , be presently stand before the hall - fire -- bright and warm on the early winter night -- admir . " why , you be six foot two , I suppose ? " say . " , " say . " be you so much ? but then , you see , you be broad in proportion and do not look it . you
you be not one of the weak - leg one , you be not . be you ever model now ? " ask , convey the expression of a artist into the turn of he eye and head . never be modell . " then you ought to be , you know , " say ; " and a friend of mine that you will hear of one day as a sculptor would stand something handsome to make a drawing of you proportion for the marble . my Lady 's out , be not she ? " " out to dinner . " " go out pretty well every day , do not she ? " " yes . " " not to be wonder at ! " say . " such a fine woman as she , so handsome and so graceful and so elegant , be like a fresh lemon on a dinner - table , ornamental wherever she go . be you father in the same way of life as yourself ? " answer in the negative . " mine be , " say . " my father be first a page , then a footman , then a butler , then a steward , then a inn -keeper . live universally respecte , and die lamented . say with he last breath that he consider service the most honourable part of he career , and so it be . I have a brother in service , and a brother - in - law . my Lady a good temper ? " reply , " as good as you can expect . " " ah ! " say . " a little spoilt ? a little capricious ? ! what can you anticipate when they be so handsome as that ? and we like th'ey all the better for it , do not we ? " , with he hand in the pockets of he bright peach - blossom small - clothes , stretch he symmetrical silk leg with the air of a man of gallantry and can not deny it . come the roll of wheel and a violent ringing at the bell . " talk of the angel , " say . " here she be ! " the door be thrown open , and she pass through the hall . still very pale , she be dress in slight mourning and wear two beautiful bracelet . either they beauty or the beauty of she arm be particularly attractive to . he look at they with a eager eye and rattle something in he pocket -- halfpence perhaps . notice he at he distance , she turn a inquiring look on the other who have bring she home . " , my . " make a leg and come forward , pass he familiar demon over the region of he mouth . " be you wait to see ? " " no , my , I have see he ! " " have you anything to say to I ? " " not just at present , my . " " have you make any new discoveries ? " " a few , my . " this be merely in passing . she scarcely make a stop , and sweep upstairs alone . , move towards the staircase - foot , watch she as she go up the step the old man come down to he grave , past murderous group of statuary repeat with they shadowy weapon on the wall , past the print bill , which she look at go by , out of view . " she be a lovely woman , too , she really be , " say , come back to . " do not look quite healthy though . " be not quite healthy , inform he . suffer much from headach . really ? that be a pity ! , would recommend for that . well , she try walk , rejoin . walk sometimes for two hour when she have they bad . by night , too . " be you sure you be quite so much as six foot three ? " ask . " Begge you pardon for interrupt you a moment ? " not a doubt about it . " you be so well put together that I should not have think it . but the household troops , though consider fine man , be buill so straggling . walk by night , do she ? when it be moonlight , though ? " oh , yes . when it be moonlight ! of course . oh , of course ! Conversational and acquiescent on both side . " I suppose you be not in the habit of walk yourself ? " say . " not much time for it , I should say ? " besides which , do not like it . Prefer carriage exercise . " to be sure , " say . " that make a difference . now I think of it , " say bucket , war he hand and look pleasantly at the blaze , " she go out walk the very night of this business . " " to be sure she do ! I let she into the garden over the way . " " and leave she there . certainly you do . I see you do it . " " I do not see you , " say . " I be rather in a hurry , " return , " for I be go to visit a aunt of mine that life at -- next door but two to the old original -- ninety year old the old lady be , a single woman , and get a little property . yes , I chance to be pass at the time . let 's see . what time might it be ?
? it be not ten . " " half - past nine . " " you be right . so it be . and if I do not deceive myself , my be muff in a loose black mantle , with a deep fringe to it ? " " of course she be . " of course she be . must return to a little work he have to get on with upstairs , but he must shake hand with in acknowledgment of he agreeable conversation , and will he -- this be all he ask -- will he , when he have a leisure half - hour , think of bestow it on that sculptor , for the advantage of both party ? Spring a Refresh by sleep , rise betime in the morning and prepare for a field - day . Smarten up by the aid of a clean shirt and a wet hairbrush , with which instrument , on occasion of ceremony , he lubricate such thin lock as remain to he after he life of severe study , lay in a breakfast of two mutton chop as a foundation to work upon , together with tea , egg , toast , and marmalay on a corresponding scale . have much enjoy these strengthen matter and have hold subtle conference with he familiar demon , he confidently instruct " just to mention quietly to , , that whenever he be ready for I , I be ready for he . " a gracious message be return that will expedite he dressing and join in the library within ten minute , repair to that apartment and stand before the fire with he finger on he ching , look at the blazing coal . be , as a man may be with weighty work to do , but compose , sure , confident . from the expression of he face he might be a famous whist - player for a large stake -- say a hundred guinea certain -- with the game in he hand , but with a high reputation involved in he play he hand out to the last card in a masterly way . not in the least anxious or disturbed be when appear , but he eye the baronet aside as he come slowly to he easy - chair with that observant gravity of yesterday in which there might have be yesterday , but for the audacity of the idea , a touch of compassion . " I be sorry to have keep you wait , officer , but I be rather later than my usual hour this morning . I be not well . the agitation and the indignation from which I have recently suffer have be too much for I . I be subject to -- gout " -- be go to say indisposition and would have say it to anybody else , but palpably know all about it -- " and recent circumstance have bring it on . " as he take he seat with some difficulty and with a air of pain , draw a little nearer , stand with one of he large hand on the library - table . " I be not aware , officer , " obserf ; raise he eye to he face , " whether you wish we to be alone , but that be entirely as you please . if you do , well and good . if not , would be interested -- " " why , , , " return with he head persuasively on one side and he forefinger pendant at one ear like a earring , " we can not be too private just at present . you will presently see that we can not be too private . a lady , under the circumstance , and especially in 's elevate station of society , can not but be agreeable to I , but speak without a view to myself , I will take the liberty of assure you that I know we can not be too private . " " that be enough . " " so much so , , , " resume , " that I be on the point of ask you permission to turn the key in the door . " " by all mean . " skilfully and softly take that precaution , stoop on he knee for a moment from mere force of habit so to adjust the key in the lock as that no one shall peep in from the outerside . " , , I mention yesterday evening that I want but a very little to complete this case . I have now complete it and collect proof against the person who do this crime . " " against the soldier ? " " no , ; not the soldier . " look astounded and inquire , " be the man in custody ? " tell he , after a pause , " it be a woman . " lean back in he chair , and breathlessly ejaculate , " good heaven ! " " now , , , " begin , stand over he with one hand spread out on the library - table and the forefinger of the other in impressive use , " it be my duty to prepare you for a train of circumstance that may , and I go so far as to say that will , give you a shock . but , , you be a gentleman , and I know what a gentleman be and what a gentleman be capable of . a gentleman can bear a shock when it must come , boldly and steadily . a gentleman can make up he mind to stand up against almost any blow . why , take yourself , , . if there be a blow to be inflict on you , you naturally think of
of you family . you ask yourself , how would all they ancestor of yours , away to -- not to go beyond he at present -- have borne that blow ; you remember score of they that would have borne it well ; and you bear it well on they account , and to maintain the family credit . that be the way you argue , and that be the way you act , , . " , lean back in he chair and grasp the elbow , sits look at he with a stony face . " now , , " proceed , " thus prepare you , let I beg of you not to trouble you mind for a moment as to anything have come to my knowledge . I know so much about so many character , high and low , that a piece of information more or less do not signify a straw . I do not suppose there be a move on the board that would surprise I , and as to this or that move have take place , why my know it be no odd at all , any possible move whatever ( provide it be in a wrong direction ) be a probable move accord to my experience . therefore , what I say to you , , , be , do not you go and let yourself be put out of the way because of my know anything of you family affair . " " I thank you for you preparation , " return after a silence , without move hand , foot , or feature , " which I hope be not necessary ; though I give it credit for be well intend . be so good as to go on . also " -- seem to shrink in the shadow of he figure -- " also , to take a seat , if you have no objection . " none at all . bring a chair and diminish he shadow . " now , , , with this short preface I come to the point . -- " raise himself in he seat and stare at he fiercely . bring the finger into play as a emollient . " , you see she be universally admire . that be what she ladyship be ; she be universally admire , " say . " I would greatly prefer , officer , " return stifinitely , " my 's name be entirely omit from this discussion . " " so would I , , , but -- it be impossible . " " impossible ? " shake he relentless head . " , , it be altogether impossible . what I have get to say be about she ladyship . she be the pivot it all turn on . " " Officer , " retort with a fiery eye and a quivering lip , " you know you duty . do you duty , but be careful not to overstep it . I would not suffer it . I would not endure it . you bring my 's name into this communication upon you responsibility -- upon you responsibility . my Lady 's name be not a name for common person to trifle with ! " " , , I say what I must say , and no more . " " I hope it may prove so . very well . go on . go on , sir ! " Glance at the angry eye which now avoid he and at the angry figure trembling from head to foot , yet strive to be still , feel he way with he forefinger and in a low voice proceed . " , , it become my duty to tell you that the decease long entertaine mistrust and suspicion of . " " if he have da to breathe they to I , sir -- which he never do -- I would have kill he myself ! " exclaim , strike he hand upon the table . but in the very heat and fury of the act he stop , fix by the know eye of , whose forefinger be slowly go and who , with mingled confidence and patience , shake he head . " , the decease be deep and close , and what he fully have in he mind in the very beginning I can not quite take upon myself to say . but I know from he lip that he long ago suspect Lady Dedlock of have discover , through the sight of some handwriting -- in this very house , and when you yourself , , be present -- the existence , in great poverty , of a certain person who have be she lover before you court she and who ought to have be she husband . " stop and deliberately repeat , " ink to have be she husband , not a doubt about it . I know from he lip that when that person soon afterwards die , he suspect of visit he wretched lodging and he wretch grave , alone and in secret . I know from my own inquiry and through my eye and ears that do make such visit in the dress of she own maid , for the deceased employ I to reckon up she ladyship -- if you will excuse my make use of the term we commonly employ -- and I reckon she up , so far , completely . I confront the maid in the chamber in 's with a witness who have be 's guide , and there could not be the shadow of a doubt that she have wear the young woman 's dress , unknown to she . , , I do endeaavor to pave the way a little towards these unpleasant disclosure yesterday by say that very strange thing happen even in high
high family sometimes . all this , and more , have happen in you own family , and to and through you own . it be my belief that the decease follow up these inquirie to the hour of he death and that he and even have bad blood between they upon the matter that very night . now , only you put that to , , , and ask she ladyship whether , even after he have leave here , she do not go down to he chamber with the intention of say something further to he , dress in a loose black mantle with a deep fringe to it . " sit like a statue , gaze at the cruel finger that be probe the life - blood of he heart . " you put that to she ladyship , , , from I , inspector bucket of the detective . and if she ladyship make any difficulty about admit of it , you tell she that it be no use , that know it and know that she pass the soldier as you call he ( though he be not in the army now ) and know that she know she pass he on the staircase . now , , , why do I relate all this ? " , who have cover he face with he hand , uttere a single groan , request he to pause for a moment . by and by he take he hand away , and so preserve he dignity and outward calmness , though there be no more colour in he face than in he white hair , that be a little aw by he . something freeze and fix be upon he manner , over and above its usual shell of haughtiness , and soon detect a unusual slowness in he speech , with now and then a curious trouble in beginning , which occasion he to utter inarticulate sound . with such sound he now break silence , soon , however , control himself to say that he do not comprehend why a gentleman so faithful and zealous as the late should have communicate to he nothing of this painful , this distressing , this unlooked - for , this overwhelm , this incredible intelligence . " again , , , " return , " put it to she ladyship to clear that up . put it to she ladyship , if you think it right , from of the detective . you will find , or I be much mistaken , that the decease have the intention of communicate the whole to you as soon as he consider it ripe , and further , that he have give she ladyship so to understand . why , he might have be go to reveal it the very morning when I examine the body ! you do not know what i be go to say and do five minute from this present time , , ; and suppose I be to be pick off now , you might wonder why I have not do it , do not you see ? " true . , avoid , with some trouble those obtrusive sound , say , " true . " at this juncture a considerable noise of voice be hear in the hall . , after listen , go to the library - door , softly unlock and open it , and listen again . then he draw in he head and whisper hurriedly but composedly , " , , this unfortunate family affair have take air , as I expect it might , the decease be cut down so sudden . the chance to hush it be to let in these people now in a wrangle with you footman . would you mind sit quiet -- on the family account -- while I reckon th'ey up ? and would you just throw in a nod when I seem to ask you for it ? " indistinctly answer , " officer . the best you can , the best you can ! " and , with a nod and a sagacious crook of the forefinger , slip down into the hall , where the voice quickly die away . he be not long in return ; a few pace ahead of and a brother deity also powder and in peach - blossom smalls , who bear between they a chair in which be a incapable old man . another man and two woman come behind . direct the pitching of the chair in a affable and easy manner , dismiss the Mercuries and lock the door again . look on at this invasion of the sacred precinct with a icy stare . " now , perhaps you may know I , lady and gentleman , " say in a confidential voice . " I be of the detective , I be ; and this , " produce the tip of he convenient little staff from he breast - pocket , " be my authority . now , you want to see , . well ! you do see he , and mind you , it be not every one as be admit to that honour . you name , old gentleman , be Smallweed ; that be what you name be ; I know it well . " " well , and you never hear any harm of it ! " cry Smallweed in a shrill loud voice . " you do not happen to know why they kill the pig , do you ? " retort with a steadfast look , but without loss of temper . " no ! " " why , they kill he , " say , " on account of he have so much cheek . do not you get into the same position , because it be not worthy of you . you
you be not in the habit of converse with a deaf person , be you ? " " yes , " snarl , " my wife 's deaf . " " that account for you pitch you voice so high . but as she be not here ; just pitch it a octave or two lower , will you , and I will not only be oblige to you , but it will do you more credit , " say . " this other gentleman be in the preaching line , I think ? " " name of , " put in , speak henceforth in a much lower key . " once have a friend and brother serjeant of the same name , " say , offer he hand , " and consequently feel a liking for it . , no doubt ? " " and , " introduce . " husband a law - stationer and a friend of my own , " say . " love he like a brother ! now , what be up ? " " do you mean what business have we come upon ? " , a little dashed by the suddenness of this turn . " ah ! you know what i mean . let we hear what it be all about in presence of , . come . " Smallweed , beckon , take a moment 's counsel with he in a whisper . , express a considerable amount of oil from the pore of he forehead and the palm of he hand , say aloud , " yes . you first ! " and retire to he former place . " I be the client and friend of , " pipe then ; " I do business with he . I be useful to he , and he be useful to I . , dead and gone , be my brother - in - law . he be own brother to a brimstone magpie -- leastways . I come into 's property . I examine all he papers and all he effect . they be all dug out under my eyes . there be a bundle of letter belong to a dead and gone lodger as be hide away at the back of a shelf in the side of 's bed -- he cat 's bed . he hide all manner of thing away , everywhere . want th'ey and get th'ey , but I look th'ey over first . I be a man of business , and I take a squint at 'em . they be letter from the lodger 's sweetheart , and she sign . dear I , that be not a common name , , be it ? there be no lady in this house that sign be there ? oh , no , I do not think so ! oh , no , I do not think so ! and not in the same hand , perhaps ? oh , no , I do not think so ! " here , seize with a fit of coughing in the midst of he triumph , break off to ejaculate , " oh , dear I ! oh , ! I be shake all to piece ! " " now , when you be ready , " say after await he recovery , " to come to anything that concern , , here the gentleman sit , you know . " " have not I come to it , ? " cry . " be not the gentleman concerned yet ? not with , and he ever affectionate , and they child into the bargain ? come , then , I want to know where those letter be . that concern I , if it do not concern . I will know where they be . I will not have 'em disappear so quietly . I hand th'ey over to my friend and solicitor , , not to anybody else . " " why , he pay you for they , you know , and handsome too , " say . " I do not care for that . I want to know who be get th'ey . and I tell you what we want -- what we all here want , . we want more painstaking and search - make into this murder . we know where the interest and the motive be , and you have not do enough . if the vagabond dragoon have any hand in it , he be only a accomplice , and be set on . you know what i mean as well as any man . " " now I tell you what , " say , instantaneously alte he manner , come close to he , and communicate a extraordinary fascination to the forefinger , " I be damn if I be a - go to have my case spoilt , or interfere with , or anticipate by so much as half a second of time by any human be in creation . you want more painstaking and search - making ! you do ? do you see this hand , and do you think that I do not know the right time to stretch it out and put it on the arm that fire that shot ? " be the dread power of the man , and so terribly evident it be that he make no idle boast , that begin to apologize . , dismiss he sudden anger , check he . " the advice I give you be , do not you trouble you head about the murder . that be my affair . you keep half a eye on the newspaper , and I should not wonder if you be to read something about it before long , if you look sharp . I know my business , and that be all I have
have get to say to you on that subject . now about those letter . you want to know who be get th'ey . I do not mind tell you . I have get th'ey . be that the packet ? " Smallweed look , with greedy eye , at the little bundle produce from a mysterious part of he coat , and identify it as the same . " what have you get to say next ? " ask . " now , do not open you mouth too wide , because you do not look handsome when you do it . " " I want five hundred pound . " " no , you do not ; you mean fifty , " say humorously . it appear , however , that mean five hundred . " that be , I be depute by , , to consider ( without admit or promise anything ) this bit of business , " say mechanically bow he head -- " and you ask I to consider a proposal of five hundred pound . why , it be a unreasonable proposal ! two fifty would be bad enough , but better than that . have not you better say two fifty ? " be quite clear that he have better not . " then , " say , " let 's hear . ! many a time I have hear my old fellow - serjeant of that name ; and a moderate man he be in all respects , as ever I come across ! " thus invite , step forth , and after a little sleek smiling and a little oil - grinding with the palm of he hand , deliver himself as follow , " my friend , we be now -- , my wife , and I -- in the mansion of the rich and great . why be we now in the mansion of the rich and great , my friend ? be it because we be invite ? because we be bidden to feast with they , because we be bidden to rejoice with they , because we be bidden to play the lute with they , because we be bidden to dance with they ? no . then why be we here , my friend ? air we in possession of a sinful secret , and do we require corn , and wine , and oil , or what be much the same thing , money , for the keeping thereof ? probably so , my friend . " " you be a man of business , you be , " return , very attentive , " and consequently you be go on to mention what the nature of you secret be . you be right . you could not do better . " " let we then , my brother , in a spirit of love , " say with a cunning eye , " proceed unto it . , my wife , advance ! " , more than ready , so advance as to jostle she husband into the background and confront with a hard , frown smile . " since you want to know what we know , " say she , " I will tell you . I help to bring up , she ladyship 's daughter . I be in the service of she ladyship 's sister , who be very sensitive to the disgrace she ladyship bring upon she , and give out , even to she ladyship , that the child be dead -- she be very nearly so -- when she be bear . but she be alive , and I know she . " with these word , and a laugh , and lay a bitter stress on the word " ladyship , " fold she arm and look implacably at . " I suppose now , " return that officer , " you will he expect a twenty - pound note or a present of about that figure ? " merely laugh and contemptuously tell he he can " offer " twenty pence . " my friend the law - stationer 's good lady , over there , " say , lur . Snagsby forward with the finger . " what may you game be , ma 'am ? " be at first prevent , by tear and lamentation , from state the nature of she game , but by degree it confusedly come to light that she be a woman overwhelm with injury and wrong , whom have habitually deceive , abandon , and seek to keep in darkness , and whose chief comfort , under she affliction , have be the sympathy of the late , who show so much commiseration for she on one occasion of he call in 's in the absence of she perjured husband that she have of late habitually carry to he all she woe . everybody it appear , the present company accept , have plot against 's peace . there be , clerk to and , who be at first as open as the sun at noon , but who suddenly shut up as close as midnight , under the influence -- no doubt -- of 's suborning and tampering . there be , friend of , who liv mysteriously up a court , owe to the like coherent cause . there be , decease ; there be , decease ; and there be , decease ; and they be " all in it . " in what , . do not with particularity express , but she know that be 's son , " as well as if a trumpet have speak it , " and she follow when he go on he last visit to the boy , and if he be not he son why do he go ? the one occupation of she life
life have be , for some time back , to follow to and fro , and up and down , and to piece suspicious circumstance together -- and every circumstance that have happen have be most suspicious ; and in this way she have pursue she object of detecting and confound she false husband , night and day . thus do it come to pass that she bring the Chadbands and together , and confer with on the change in , and help to turn up the circumstance in which the present company be interested , casually , by the wayside , be still and ever on the great high road that be to terminate in 's full exposure and a matrimonial separation . all this , , as a injured woman , and the friend of , and the follower of , and the mourner of the late , be here to certify under the seal of confidence , with every possible confusion and involvement possible and impossible , have no pecuniary motive whatever , no scheme or project but the one mention , and bring here , and take everywhere , she own dense atmosphere of dust , arise from the ceaseless working of she mill of jealousy . while this exordium be in hand -- and it take some time -- , who have see through the transparency of . 's vinegar at a glance , confer with he familiar demon and bestow he shrewd attention on the Chadbands and . remain immovable , with the same icy surface upon he , except that he once or twice look towards , as rely on that officer alone of all mankind . " very good , " say . " now I understand you , you know , and be depute by , , to look into this little matter , " again mechanically bow in confirmation of the statement , " can give it my fair and full attention . now I will not allude to conspir to extort money or anything of that sort , because we be man and woman of the world here , and we object be to make thing pleasant . but I tell you what I do wonder at ; I be surprised that you should think of make a noise below in the hall . it be so opposed to you interest . that be what I look at . " " we want to get in , " plead . " why , of course you want to get in , " assert with cheerfulness ; " but for a old gentleman at you time of life -- what I call truly venerable , mind you !-- with he wit sharpen , as I have no doubt they be , by the loss of the use of he limb , which occasion all he animation to mount up into he head , not to consider that if he do not keep such a business as the present as close as possible it can not be worth a mag to he , be so curious ! you see you temper get the better of you ; that be where you lose ground , " say in a argumentative and friendly way . " I only say I would not go without one of the servants come up to , " return . " that be it ! that be where you temper get the better of you . now , you keep it under another time and you will make money by it . shall I ring for they to carry you down ? " " when be we to hear more of this ? " sternly demand . " bless you heart for a true woman ! always curious , you delightful sex be ! " reply with gallantry . " I shall have the pleasure of give you a call to - morrow or next day -- not forget and he proposal of two fifty . " " five hundr ! " exclaim . " all right ! Nominally five hundr . " have he hand on the bell - rope . " shall I wish you good day for the present on the part of myself and the gentleman of the house ? " he ask in a insinuating tone . nobody have the hardihood to object to he do so , he do it , and the party retire as they come up . follow they to the door , and return , say with a air of serious business , " , , it be for you to consider whether or not to buy this up . I should recommend , on the whole , it be be buy up myself ; and I think it may be buy pretty cheap . you see , that little pick cowcumber of a have be use by all side of the speculation and have do a deal more harm in bring odds and end together than if she have mean it . , decease , he hold all these horse in he hand and could have drive them he own way , I have not a doubt ; but he be fetch off the box head - foremost , and now they have get they leg over the trace , and be all drag and pull they own way . so it be , and such be life . the cat 's away , and the mouse they play ; the frost break up , and the water run . now , with regard to the party to be apprehend . " seem to wake , though he eye have be wide open , and he look intently at as refer to he watch . " the party to be apprehend be now in this house , " proceed , put up he watch with a steady hand
hand and with rising spirit , " and I be about to take she into custody in you presence . , , do not you say a word nor yet stir . there will be no noise and no disturbance at all . I will come back in the course of the evening , if agreeable to you , and endeavou to meet you wish respect this unfortunate family matter and the nobbiest way of keep it quiet . now , , , do not you be nervous on account of the apprehension at present come off . you shall see the whole case clear , from first to last . " ring , go to the door , brieinitely whisper , shut be the door , and stand behind it with he arm fold . after a suspense of a minute or two the door slowly open and a Frenchwoman enter . Mademoiselle Hortense . the moment she be in the room clap the door to and put he back against it . the suddenness of the noise occasion she to turn , and then for the first time she see in he chair . " I ask you pardon , " she mutter hurriedly . " they tell I there be no one here . " she step towards the door bring she front to frond with . suddenly a spasm shoot across she face and she turn deadly pale . " this be my lodger , , " say , nodd at she . " this foreign young woman have be my lodger for some week back . " " what do care for that , you think , my angel ? " return mademoiselle in a jocular strain . " why , my angel , " return , " we shall see . " Hortense eye he with a scowl upon she tight face , which gradually change into a smile of scorn , " you be very mysterieuse . be you drink ? " " tolerable sober , my angel , " return . " I come from arrive at this so detestable house with you wife . you wife have leave I since some minute . they tell I downstair that you wife be here . I come here , and you wife be not here . what be the intention of this fool 's play , say then ? " mademoiselle demand , with she arm composedly cross , but with something in she dark cheek beat like a clock . merely shake the finger at she . " ah , my , you be a unhappy idiot ! " cry mademoiselle with a toss of she head and a laugh . " leave I to pass downstairs , great pig . " with a stamp of she foot and a menace . " now , mademoiselle , " say in a cool determined way , " you go and sit down upon that sofy . " " I will not sit down upon nothing , " she reply with a shower of nod . " now , mademoiselle , " repeat , make no demonstration except with the finger , " you sit down upon that sofy . " " why ? " " because I take you into custody on a charge of murder , and you do not need to be tell it . now , I want to be polite to one of you sex and a foreigner if I can . if I can not , I must be rough , and there be rougher one outside . what I be to be depend on you . so I recommend you , as a friend , afore another half a bless moment have pass over you head , to go and sit down upon that sofy . " Mademoiselle comply , say in a concentrated voice while that something in she cheek beat fast and hard , " you be a devil . " " now , you see , " proceed approvingly , " you be comfortable and conduct yourself as I should expect a foreign young woman of you sense to do . so I will give you a piece of advice , and it be this , do not you talk too much . you be not expect to say anything here , and you can not keep too quiet a tongue in you head . in short , the less you PARLAY , the better , you know . " be very complacent over this french explanation . , with that tigerish expansion of the mouth and she black eye dart fire upon he , sit upright on the sofa in a rigid state , with she hand clench -- and she foot too , one might suppose -- mutter , " oh , you , you be a devil ! " " now , , , " say , and from this time forth the finger never rest , " this young woman , my lodger , be she ladyship 's maid at the time I have mention to you ; and this young woman , besides be extraordinary vehement and passionate against she ladyship after be discharge -- " " lie ! " cry mademoiselle . " I discharge myself . " " now , why do not you take my advice ? " return in a impressive , almost in a imploring , tone . " I be surprised at the indiscreetness you commit . you will say something that will be use against you , you know . you be sure to come to it . never you mind what I say till it be give in evidence . it be not address to you . " " discharge , too , " cry mademoiselle furiously , " by she ladyship ! Eh , my faith , a pretty ladyship !
! why , I r-r - r-ruin my character by remain with a ladyship so infame ! " " upon my soul I wonder at you ! " remonstrate . " I think the french be a polite nation , I do , really . yet to hear a female go on like that before , ! " " he be a poor abuse ! " cry mademoiselle . " I spit upon he house , upon he name , upon he imbecility , " all of which she make the carpet represent . " oh , that he be a great man ! oh , yes , superb ! oh , heaven ! ! " " well , , " proceed , " this intemperate foreigner also angrily take it into she head that she have establish a claim upon , decease , by attend on the occasion I tell you of at he chamber , though she be liberally pay for she time and trouble . " " lie ! " cry mademoiselle . " I ref -use he money all togezzer . " " if you will Parlay , you know , " say parenthetically , " you must take the consequence . now , whether she become my lodger , , with any deliberate intention then of do this deed and blind I , I give no opinion on ; but she live in my house in that capacity at the time that she be hover about the chamber of the decease with a view to a wrangle , and likewise persecut and half frighten the life out of a unfortunate stationer . " " lie ! " cry mademoiselle . " all lie ! " " the murder be commit , , , and you know under what circumstance . now , I beg of you to follow I close with you attention for a minute or two . I be send for , and the case be entrust to I . I examine the place , and the body , and the papers , and everything . from information I receive ( from a clerk in the same house ) I take into custody as have be see hang about there on the night , and at very nigh the time of the murder , also as have be overhear in high word with the decease on former occasion -- even threaten he , as the witness make out . if you ask I , , whether from the first I believe to be the murderer , I tell you candidly no , but he might be , notwithstand , and there be enough against he to make it my duty to take he and get he keep under remand . now , observe ! " as bend forward in some excitement -- for he -- and inaugurate what he be go to say with one ghostly beat of he forefinger in the air , fix she black eye upon he with a dark frown and set she dry lip closely and firmly together . " I go home , , , at night and find this young woman have supper with my wife , . she have make a mighty show of be fond of from she first offer herself as we lodger , but that night she make more than ever -- in fact , overdo it . likewise she overdo she respect , and all that , for the lamented memory of the decease . by the live it flash upon I , as I sit opposite to she at the table and see she with a knife in she hand , that she have do it ! " be hardly audible in straine through she tooth and lip the word , " you be a devil . " " now where , " pursue , " have she be on the night of the murder ? she have be to the theayter . ( she really be there , I have since find , both before the deed and after it . ) I know I have a artful customer to deal with and that proof would be very difficult ; and I lay a trap for she -- such a trap as I never lay yet , and such a venture as I never make yet . I work it out in my mind while I be talk to she at supper . when I go upstairs to bed , we house be small and this young woman 's ears sharp , I stuff the sheet into 's mouth that she should not say a word of surprise and tell she all about it . my dear , do not you give you mind to that again , or I shall link you foot together at the ankle . " , break off , have make a noiseless descent upon mademoiselle and lay he heavy hand upon she shoulder . " what be the matter with you now ? " she ask he . " do not you think any more , " return with admonitory finger , " of throw yourself out of window . that be what be the matter with I . come ! just take my arm . you need not get up ; I will sit down by you . now take my arm , will you ? I be a married man , you know ; you be acquaint with my wife . just take my arm . " Vainly endeavour to moisten those dry lip , with a painful sound she struggle with herself and comply . " now we be all right again . , , this case could never have be the case it be but for , who be a woman in fifty thousand -- in a hundred and fifty thousand ! to throw this young woman off she guard
guard , I have never set foot in we house since , though I have communicate with in the baker 's loave and in the milk as often as require . my whisper word to when she have the sheet in she mouth be , ' my dear , can you throw she off continually with natural account of my suspicion against , and this , and that , and t'other ? can you do without rest and keep watch upon she night and day ? can you undertake to say , ' she shall do nothing without my knowledge , she shall be my prisoner without suspect it , she shall no more escape from I than from death , and she life shall be my life , and she soul my soul , till I have get she , if she do this murder ? ' say to I , as well as she could speak on account of the sheet , ' bucket , I can ! ' and she have act up to it glorious ! " " lie ! " mademoiselle interpose . " all lie , my friend ! " " , , how do my calculation come out under these circumstance ? when I calculate that this impetuous young woman would overdo it in new direction , be I wrong or right ? I be right . what do she try to do ? do not let it give you a turn ? to throw the murder on she ladyship . " rise from he chair and stagger down again . " and she get encouragement in it from hearing that I be always here , which be do a - purpose . now , open that pocket - book of mine , , if I may take the liberty of throw it towards you , and look at the letter send to I , each with the two word ' ' in it . open the one direct to yourself , which I stop this very morning , and read the three word ' , ' in it . these letter have be fall about like a shower of lady - bird . what do you say now to , from she spy - place have see they all ' write by this young woman ? what do you say to have , within this half - hour , secure the corresponding ink and paper , fellow half - sheet and what not ? what do you say to have watch the posting of th'ey every one by this young woman , , ? " , triumphant in he admiration of he lady 's genius . two thing be especially observable as proceed to a conclusion . first , that he seem imperceptibly to establish a dreadful right of property in mademoiselle . secondly , that the very atmosphere she breathe seem to narrow and contract about she as if a close net or a pall be be draw nearer and yet nearer around she breathless figure . " there be no doubt that she ladyship be on the spot at the eventful period , " say , " and my foreign friend here see she , I believe , from the upper part of the staircase . she ladyship and and my foreign friend be all pretty close on one another 's heel . but that do not signify any more , so I will not go into it . I find the wadding of the pistol with which the decease be shot . it be a bit of the print description of you house at . not much in that , you will say , , . no . but when my foreign friend here be so thoroughly off she guard as to think it a safe time to tear up the rest of that leaf , and when put the piece together and find the wadding want , it begin to look like . " " these be very long lie , " mademoiselle interpose . " you prise great deal . be it that you have almost all finished , or be you speak always ? " " , , " proceed , who delight in a full title and do violence to himself when he dispense with any fragment of it , " the last point in the case which I be now go to mention show the necessity of patience in we business , and never do a thing in a hurry . I watch this young woman yesterday without she knowledge when she be look at the funeral , in company with my wife , who plan to take she there ; and I have so much to convict she , and I see such a expression in she face , and my mind so rise against she malice towards she ladyship , and the time be altogether such a time for bring down what you may call retribution upon she , that if I have be a younger hand with less experience , I should have take she , certain . equally , last night , when she ladyship , as be so universally admire I be sure , come home look -- why , , a man might almost say like rise from the ocean -- it be so unpleasant and inconsistent to think of she be charge with a murder of which she be innocent that I feel quite to want to put a end to the job . what should I have lose ? , , I should have lose the weapon . my prisoner here propose to , after the departure of the funeral , that they should go per bus a little way into the country and take tea at a very decent house of entertainment . now , near that house of entertainment there be a piece of water
water . at tea , my prisoner get up to fetch she pocket handkercher from the bedroom where the bonnet be ; she be rather a long time go and come back a little out of wind . as soon as they come home this be report to I by , along with she observation and suspicion . I have the piece of water drag by moonlight , in presence of a couple of we man , and the pocket pistol be bring up before it have be there half - a - dozen hour . now , my dear , put you arm a little further through mine , and hold it steady , and I sha not hurt you ! " in a trice snap a handcuff on she wrist . " that be one , " say . " now the other , darling . two , and all tell ! " he rise ; she rise too . " where , " she ask he , darken she large eye until they droop lid almost conceal they -- and yet they stare , " where be you false , you treacherous , and curse wife ? " " she have go forrard to the , " return . " you will see she there , my dear . " " I would like to kiss she ! " exclaim Mademoiselle Hortense , pante tigress - like . " you would bite she , I suspect , " say . " I would ! " make she eye very large . " I would love to tear she limb from limb . " " bless you , darl , " say with the greatest composure , " I be fully prepared to hear that . you sex have such a surprising animosity against one another when you do differ . you do not mind I half so much , do you ? " " no . though you be a devil still . " " and by turn , eh ? " cry . " but I be in my regular employment , you must consider . let I put you shawl tidy . I have be lady have maid to a good many before now . anything want to the bonnet ? there be a cab at the door . " Mademoiselle Hortense , cast a indignant eye at the glass , shake herself perfectly neat in one shake and look , to do she justice , uncommonly genteel . " listen then , my angel , " say she after several sarcastic nod . " you be very spiritual . but can you restore he back to life ? " answer , " not exactly . " " that be droll . listen yet one time . you be very spiritual . can you make a honourable lady of she ? " " do not be so malicious , " say . " or a haughty gentleman of ? " cry mademoiselle , refer to with ineffable disdain . " Eh ! oh , then regard he ! the poor infant ! ! ! ! " " come , come , why this be worse Parlaying than the other , " say . " come along ! " " you can not do these thing ? then you can do as you please with I . it be but the death , it be all the same . let we go , my angel . , you old man , grey . I pity you , and I despise you ! " with these last word she snap she tooth together as if she mouth close with a spring . it be impossible to describe how get she out , but he accomplish that feat in a manner so peculiar to himself , enfold and pervad she like a cloud , and hover away with she as if he be a and she the object of he affections . , leave alone , remain in the same attitude , as though he be still listen and he attention be still occupi . at length he gaze round the empty room , and find it desert , rise unsteadily to he foot , push back he chair , and walk a few step , support himself by the table . then he stop , and with more of those inarticulate sound , lift up he eye and seem to stare at something . know what he see . the green , green woods of Wold , the noble house , the picture of he forefather , strangers deface they , officer of police coarsely handle he most precious heirloom , thousand of finger point at he , thousand of face sneering at he . but if such shadow flight before he to he bewilderment , there be one other shadow which he can name with something like distinctness even yet and to which alone he address he tearing of he white hair and he extend arm . it be she in association with whom , save that she have be for year a main fibre of the root of he dignity and pride , he have never have a selfish thought . it be she whom he have love , admire , honoure , and set up for the world to respect . it be she who , at the core of all the constrain formality and conventionality of he life , have be a stock of living tenderness and love , susceptible as nothing else be of be strike with the agony he feel . he see she , almost to the exclusion of himself , and can not bear to look upon she cast down from the high place she have grac so well . and even to the point of he sinking on the ground , oblivious of he suffering , he can yet
yet pronounce she name with something like distinctness in the midst of those intrusive sound , and in a tone of mourning and compassion rather than reproach . of the have not yet struck he great blow , as just now chronicle , but be yet refresh himself with sleep preparatory to he field - day , when through the night and along the freezing wintry roads a chaise and pair come out of , make its way towards . Railroad shall soon traverse all this country , and with a rattle and a glare the engine and train shall shoot like a meteor over the wide night - landscape , turn the moon paler ; but as yet such thing be non-existent in these part , though not wholly unexpected . preparation be afoot , measurement be make , ground be stak out . bridge be begin , and they not yet unite pier desolately look at one another over roads and stream like brick and mortar couple with a obstacle to they union ; fragment of embankment be throw up and leave as precipice with torrent of rusty cart and barrow tumbl over they ; tripod of tall pole appear on hilltop , where there be rumour of tunnel ; everything look chaotic and abandon in full hopelessness . along the freezing roads , and through the night , the post-chaise make its way without a railroad on its mind . , so many year housekeeper at , sit within the chaise ; and by she side sit with she grey cloak and umbrella . the old girl would prefer the bar in front , as be expose to the weather and a primitive sort of perch more in accordance with she usual course of travelling , but . be too thoughtful of she comfort to admit of she propose it . the old lady can not make enough of the old girl . she sit , in she stately manner , hold she hand , and regardless of its roughness , put it often to she lip . " you be a mother , my dear soul , " say she many time , " and you find out my 's mother ! " " why , , " return , " be always free with I , ma 'am , and when he say at we house to my Woolwich that of all the thing my Woolwich could have to think of when he grow to be a man , the comfortablest would be that he have never bring a sorrowful line into he mother 's face or turn a hair of she head grey , then I feel sure , from he way , that something fresh have bring he own mother into he mind . I have often know he say to I , in past time , that he have behave bad to she . " " never , my dear ! " return , burst into tear . " my bless on he , never ! he be always fond of I , and love to I , be my ! but he have a bold spirit , and he run a little wild and go for a soldier . and I know he wait at first , in let we know about himself , till he should rise to be a officer ; and when he do not rise , I know he consider himself beneath we , and would not be a disgrace to we . for he have a lion heart , have my , always from a baby ! " the old lady 's hand stray about she as of yore , while she recall , all in a tremble , what a likely lad , what a fine lad , what a gay good - humoured clever lad he be ; how they all take to he down at ; how take to he when he be a young gentleman ; how the dog take to he ; how even the people who have be angry with he forgave he the moment he be gone , poor boy . and now to see he after all , and in a prison too ! and the broad stomacher heafe , and the quaint upright old - fashioned figure bend under its load of affectionate distress . , with the instinctive skill of a good warm heart , leave the old housekeeper to she emotion for a little while -- not without pass the back of she hand across she own motherly eye -- and presently chirp up in she cheery manner , " so I say to when I go to call he in to tea ( he pretend to be smoke he pipe outside ) , ' what ail you this afternoon , , for gracious sake ? I have see all sort , and I have see you pretty often in season and out of season , abroad and at home , and I never see you so melancholy penitent . ' ' why , , ' say , ' it be because I be melancholy and penitent both , this afternoon , that you see I so . ' ' what have you do , old fellow ? ' I say . ' why , , ' say , shak he head , ' what I have do have be do this many a long year , and be best not try to be undone now . if I ever get to heave it will not be for be a good son to a widow mother ; I say no more . ' now , ma 'am , when say to I that it be best not try to be undone now , I have my thought as I have often have before , and I draw it out of how he come to have such
such thing on he that afternoon . then tell I that he have see by chance , at the lawyer 's office , a fine old lady that have bring he mother plain before he , and he run on about that old lady till he quite forget himself and paint she picture to I as she use to be , year upon year back . so I say to when he have do , who be this old lady he have see ? and tell I it be Rouncewell , housekeeper for more than half a century to the family down at in . have frequently tell I before that he be a man , and I say to my old that night , ' Lignum , that be he mother for five and for - ty pound ! ' " all this . now relate for the twentieth time at least within the last four hour . Trill it out like a kind of bird , with a pretty high note , that it may be audible to the old lady above the hum of the wheel . " bless you , and thank you , " say . " bless you , and thank you , my worthy soul ! " " dear heart ! " cry in the most natural manner . " no thanks to I , I be sure . thanks to yourself , ma 'am , for be so ready to pay th'ey ! and mind once more , ma'am , what you have best do on find to be you own son be to make he -- for you sake -- have every sort of help to put himself in the right and clear himself of a charge of which he be as innocent as you or I . it will not do to have truth and justice on he side ; he must have law and lawyer , " exclaim the old girl , apparently persuade that the latter form a separate establishment and have dissolve partnership with truth and justice for ever and a day . " he shall have , " say , " all the help that can be get for he in the world , my dear . I will spend all I have , and thankfully , to procure it . will do he best , the whole family will do they best . I -- I know something , my dear ; and will make my own appeal , as he mother part from he all these year , and find he in a jail at last . " the extreme disquietude of the old housekeeper 's manner in say this , she break word , and she wringe of she hand make a powerful impression on and would astonish she but that she refer they all to she sorrow for she son 's condition . and yet Bagnet wonder too why . should yomurmu so distractedly , " my , my , my lady ! " over and over again . the frosty night wear away , and the dawn break , and the post - chaise come roll on through the early mist like the ghost of a chaise depart . it have plenty of spectral company in ghost of tree and hedge , slowly vanishing and give place to the reality of day . reach , the traveller alight , the old housekeeper in great tribulation and confusion , Bagnet quite fresh and collect -- as she would be if she next point , with no new equipage and outfit , be the cape of , the of , , or any other military station . but when they set out for the prison where the trooper be confin , the old lady have manage to draw about she , with she lavender - colou dress , much of the staid calmness which be its usual accompaniment . a wonderfully grave , precise , and handsome piece of old china she look , though she heart beat fast and she stomacher be ruffle more than even the remembrance of this wayward son have ruffle it these many year . Approach the cell , they find the door open and a warder in the act of come out . the old girl promptly make a sign of entreaty to he to say nothing ; assent with a nod , he suffer they to enter as he shut the door . so , who be write at he table , suppose himself to be alone , do not raise he eye , but remains absorb . the old housekeeper look at he , and those wander hand of hers be quite enough for 's confirmation , even if she could see the mother and the son together , know what she know , and doubt they relationship . not a rustle of the housekeeper 's dress , not a gesture , not a word betray she . she stand look at he as he write on , all unconscious , and only she flutter hand give utterance to she emotion . but they be very eloquent , very , very eloquent . understand they . they speak of gratitude , of joy , of grief , of hope ; of inextinguishable affection , cherish with no return since this stalwart man be a stripling ; of a better son love less , and this son love so fondly and so proudly ; and they speak in such touching language that 's eye brim up with tear and they run glisten down she sun - brown face . " ! oh , my dear child , turn and look at I ! " the trooper start up , clasp he mother round the neck , and fall down on he knee before she . whether in a late repentance , whether in the first association that
that come back upon he , he put he hand together as a child do when it say its prayer , and raise they towards she breast , bow down he head , and cry . " my , my dearest son ! always my favourite , and my favourite still , where have you be these cruel year and year ? such a man too , grow such a fine strong man . grow so like what I know he must be , if it please he be alive ! " she can ask , and he can answer , nothing connect for a time . all that time the old girl , turn away , lean one arm against the whitened wall , lean she honest forehead upon it , wipe she eye with she serviceable grey cloak , and quite enjoy herself like the best of old girl as she be . " mother , " say the trooper when they be more composed , " forgive I first of all , for I know my need of it . " forgive he ! she do it with all she heart and soul . she always have do it . she tell he how she have have it write in she will , these many year , that he be she beloved son . she have never believe any ill of he , never . if she have die without this happiness -- and she be a old woman now and can not look to live very long -- she would have bless he with she last breath , if she have have she sense , as she belove son . " mother , I have be a undutiful trouble to you , and I have my reward ; but of late year I have have a kind of glimmering of a purpose in I too . when I leave home I do not care much , mother -- I be afraid not a great deal -- for leave ; and go away and ' list , harum -scarum , make believe to think that I care for nobody , no not I , and that nobody care for I . " the trooper have dry he eye and put away he handkerchief , but there be a extraordinary contrast between he habitual manner of express himself and carry himself and the soften tone in which he speak , interrupt occasionally by a half - stifle sob . " so I write a line home , mother , as you too well know , to say i have ' list under another name , and I go abroad . abroad , at one time I think I would write home next year , when I might be better off ; and when that year be out , I think I would write home next year , when I might be better off ; and when that year be out again , perhaps I do not think much about it . so on , from year to year , through a service of ten year , till I begin to get older , and to ask myself why should I ever write . " " I do not find any fault , child -- but not to ease my mind , ? not a word to you loving mother , who be grow older too ? " this almost overturn the trooper afresh , but he set himself up with a great , rough , sound clearance of he throat . " forgive I , mother , but I think there would be small consolation then in hear anything about I . there be you , respect and esteem . there be my brother , as I read in chance country papers now and then , rise to be prosperous and famous . there be I a dragoon , rove , unsettled , not self - make like he , but self - unmade -- all my earlier advantage throw away , all my little learn unlearnt , nothing pick up but what unfit I for most thing that I could think of . what business have I to make myself know ? after let all that time go by I , what good could come of it ? the worst be past with you , mother . I know by that time ( be a man ) how you have mourn for I , and weep for I , and pray for I ; and the pain be over , or be soften down , and I be better in you mind as it be . " the old lady sorrowfully shake she head , and take one of he powerful hand , lay it lovingly upon she shoulder . " no , I do not say that it be so , mother , but that i make it out to be so . I say just now , what good could come of it ? well , my dear mother , some good might have come of it to myself -- and there be the meanness of it . you would have seek I out ; you would have purchase my discharge ; you would have take I down to ; you would have bring I and my brother and my brother 's family together ; you would all have consider anxiously how to do something for I and set I up as a respectable civilian . but how could any of you feel sure of I when I could not so much as feel sure of myself ? how could you help regard as a incumbrance and a discredit to you a idle dragooning chap who be a incumbrance and a discredit to himself , except under discipline ? how could I look my brother 's child in the face and pretend to set they a
a example -- I , the vagabond boy who have run away from home and be the grief and unhappiness of my mother 's life ? , . ' such be my word , mother , when I pass this in review before I : ' you have make you bed . now , lie upon it . ' " , draw up she stately form , shake she head at the old girl with a swell pride upon she , as much as to say , " I tell you so ! " the old girl relieve she feeling and testify she interest in the conversation by give the trooper a great poke between the shoulders with she umbrella ; this action she afterwards repeat , at interval , in a species of affectionate lunacy , never fail , after the administration of each of these remonstrance , to resort to the whitened wall and the grey cloak again . " this be the way I bring myself to think , mother , that my best amend be to lie upon that be I have make , and die upon it . and I should have do it ( though I have be to see you more than once down at , when you little thought of I ) but for my old comrade 's wife here , who I find have be too many for I . but I thank she for it . I thank you for it , , with all my heart and might . " to which respond with two poke . and now the old lady impress upon she son , she own dear recover boy , she joy and pride , the light of she eye , the happy close of she life , and every fond name she can think of , that he must be govern by the best advice obtainable by money and influence , that he must yield up he case to the greatest lawyer that can be get , that he must act in this serious plight as he shall be advise to act and must not be self - willed , however right , but must promise to think only of he poor old mother 's anxiety and suffer until he be release , or he will break she heart . " mother , ' ti little enough to consent to , " return the trooper , stop she with a kiss ; " tell I what I shall do , and I will make a late beginning and do it . , you will take care of my mother , I know ? " a very hard poke from the old girl 's umbrella . " if you will bring she acquaint with and , she will find they of she way of think , and they will give she the best advice and assistance . " " and , , " say the old lady , " we must send with all haste for you brother . he be a sensible sound man as they tell I -- out in the world beyond Wold , my dear , though I do not know much of it myself -- and will be of great service . " " mother , " return the trooper , " be it too soon to ask a favour ? " " surely not , my dear . " " then grant I this one great favour . do not let my brother know . " " not know what , my dear ? " " not know of I . in fact , mother , I can not bear it ; I can not make up my mind to it . he have prove himself so different from I and have do so much to raise himself while I have be soldier that I have not brass enough in my composition to see he in this place and under this charge . how could a man like he be expect to have any pleasure in such a discovery ? it be impossible . no , keep my secret from he , mother ; do I a greater kindness than I deserve and keep my secret from my brother , of all man . " " but not always , dear ? " " why , mother , perhaps not for good and all -- though I may come to ask that too -- but keep it now , I do entreat you . if it be ever break to he that he rip of a brother have turn up , I could wish , " say the trooper , shak he head very doubtfully , " to break it myself and be governed as to advance or retreat by the way in which he seem to take it . " as he evidently have a rooted feeling on this point , and as the depth of it be recognize in 's face , he mother yield she implicit assent to what he ask . for this he thank she kindly . " in all other respects , my dear mother , I will be as tractable and obedient as you can wish ; on this one alone , I stand out . so now I be ready even for the lawyer . I have be draw up , " he glance at he writing on the table , " a exact account of what I know of the deceased and how I come to be involved in this unfortunate affair . it be enter , plain and regular , like a orderly - book ; not a word in it but what be wante for the fact . I do intend to read it , straight on end , whensoever I be call upon to say anything in my defence . I hope I may be let to do it
it still ; but I have no longer a will of my own in this case , and whatever be say or do , I give my promise not to have any . " matter be brotch to this so far satisfactory pass , and time be on the wane , propose a departure . again and again the old lady hang upon she son 's neck , and again and again the trooper hold she to he broad chest . " where be you go to take my mother , ? " " I be go to the town house , my dear , the family house . I have some business there that must be look to directly , " answer . " will you see my mother safe there in a coach , ? but of course I know you will . why should I ask it ! " why indeed , express with the umbrella . " take she , my old friend , and take my gratitude along with you . Kiss to and , love to my godson , a hearty shake of the hand to , and this for yourself , and I wish it be ten thousand pound in gold , my dear ! " so say , the trooper put he lip to the old girl 's tan forehead , and the door shut upon he in he cell . no entreaty on the part of the good old housekeeper will induce to retain the coach for she own conveyance home . jump out cheerfully at the door of the mansion and hand Mrs . Rouncewell up the step , the old girl shakes hand and trudge off , arrive soon afterwards in the bosom of the family and fall to wash the green as if nothing have happen . my Lady be in that room in which she hold she last conference with the murdered man , and be sit where she sit that night , and be look at the spot where he stand upon the hearth study she so leisurely , when a tap come at the door . who be it ? Rouncewell . what have bring . Rouncewell to town so unexpectedly ? " trouble , my . sad trouble . oh , my , may I beg a word with you ? " what new occurrence be it that make this tranquil old woman tremble so ? far happier than she Lady , as she have often thought , why do she falter in this manner and look at she with such strange mistrust ? " what be the matter ? sit down and take you breath . " " oh , my , my . I have find my son -- my youngest , who go away for a soldier so long ago . and he be in prison . " " for debt ? " " oh , no , my ; I would have pay any debt , and joyful . " " for what be he in prison then ? " " charge with a murder , my , of which he be as innocent as -- as I be . accuse of the murder of . " what do she mean by this look and this imploring gesture ? why do she come so close ? what be the letter that she hold ? " , my dear , my good , my kind ! you must have a heart to feel for I , you must have a heart to forgive I . I be in this family before you be bear . I be devote to it . but think of my dear son wrongfully accuse . " " I do not accuse he . " " no , my , no . but other do , and he be in prison and in danger . oh , , if you can say but a word to help to clear he , say it ! " what delusion can this be ? what power do she suppose be in the person she petition to avert this unjust suspicion , if it be unjust ? she 's handsome eye regard she with astonishment , almost with fear . " my , I come away last night from to find my son in my old age , and the step upon the Ghost 's walk be so constant and so solemn that I never hear the like in all these year . night after night , as it have fall dark , the sound have echo through you room , but last night it be awfullest . and as it fall dark last night , my , I get this letter . " " what letter be it ? " " Hush ! Hush ! " the housekeeper look round and answer in a frightened whisper , " my , I have not breathe a word of it , I do not believe what be write in it , I know it can not be true , I be sure and certain that it be not true . but my son be in danger , and you must have a heart to pity I . if you know of anything that be not know to other , if you have any suspicion , if you have any clue at all , and any reason for keep it in you own breast , oh , my dear lady , think of I , and conquer that reason , and let it be know ! this be the most I consider possible . I know you be not a hard lady , but you go you own way always without help , and you be not familiar with you friend ; and all who admire you -- and all do -- as a beautiful and elegant lady , know you to be one
one far away from themselves who can not be approach close . my lady , you may have some proud or angry reasons for disdaining to utter something that you know ; if so , pray , oh , pray , think of a faithful servant whose whole life have be pass in this family which she dearly love , and relent , and help to clear my son ! my lady , my good , " the old housekeeper plead with genuine simplicity , " I be so humble in my place and you be by nature so high and distant that you may not think what I feel for my child , but I feel so much that I have come here to make so bold as to beg and pray you not to be scornful of we if you can do we any right or justice at this fearful time ! " raise she without one word , until she take the letter from she hand . " be I to read this ? " " when I be go , my , if you please , and then remember the most that I consider possible . " " I know of nothing I can do . I know of nothing I reserve that can affect you son . I have never accuse he . " " my , you may pity he the more under a false accusation after read the letter . " the old housekeeper leave she with the letter in she hand . in truth she be not a hard lady naturally , and the time have be when the sight of the venerable figure sue to she with such strong earnestness would have move she to great compassion . but so long accustom to suppress emotion and keep down reality , so long schoole for she own purpose in that destructive school which shut up the natural feeling of the heart like fly in amber and spread one uniform and dreary gloss over the good and bad , the feeling and the unfeeling , the sensible and the senseless , she have subdue even she wonder until now . she open the letter . spread out upon the paper be a printed account of the discovery of the body as it lay face downward on the floor , shoot through the heart ; and underneath be write she own name , with the word " murderess " attach . it fall out of she hand . how long it may have lain upon the ground she know not , but it lie where it fall when a servant stand before she announce the young man of the name of . the word have probably be repeat several time , for they be ring in she head before she begin to understand they . " let he come in ! " he come in . hold the letter in she hand , which she have take from the floor , she try to collect she thought . in the eyes of she be the same , hold the same prepare , proud , chilling state . " you ladyship may not be at first dispose to excuse this visit from one who have never be welcome to you ladyship " -- which he do not complain of , for he be bound to confess that there never have be any particular reason on the face of thing why he should be -- " but I hope when I mention my motives to you ladyship you will not find fault with I , " say . " do so . " " thank you ladyship . I ought first to explain to you ladyship , " sit on the edge of a chair and put he hat on the carpet at he foot , " that , whose image , as I formerly mention to you ladyship , be at one period of my life imprint on my ' eart until erase by circumstance over which i have no control , communicate to I , after I have the pleasure of waiting on you ladyship last , that she particularly wish I to take no step whatever in any manner at all relate to she . and 's wish be to I a law ( except as connect with circumstance over which I have no control ) , I consequently never expect to have the distinguished honour of waiting on you ladyship again . " and yet he be here now , moodily remind he . " and yet I be here now , " admit . " my object be to communicate to you ladyship , under the seal of confidence , why I be here . " he can not do so , she tell he , too plainly or too briefly . " can I , " return with a sense of injury upon he , " too particularly request you ladyship to take particular notice that it be no personal affair of mine that bring I here . I have no interested view of my own to serve in come here . if it be not for my promise to and my keeping of it sacr -- I , in point of fact , should not have darken these door again , but should have see th'ey further first . " consider this a favourable moment for stick up he hair with both hand . " you ladyship will remember when I mention it that the last time I be here I run against a party very eminent in we profession and whose lose we all deplore . that party certainly do from that time apply himself to cut in against I in a way that I will call sharp practice , and do make it , at every turn and point , extremely difficult for I to be sure that
that I have not inadvertently lead up to something contrary to 's wish . self -praise be no recommendation , but I may say for myself that I be not so bad a man of business neither . " look at he in stern inquiry . immediately withdraw he eye from she face and look anywhere else . " indeed , it have be make so hard , " he go on , " to have any idea what that party be up to in combination with other that until the loss which we all deplore I be gravell -- a expression which you ladyship , move in the higher circle , will be so good as to consider tantamount to knock over . small likewise -- a name by which I refer to another party , a friend of mine that you ladyship be not acquaint with -- get to be so close and double - face that at time it be not easy to keep one 's hand off he ' ead . however , what with the exertion of my humble abilitie , and what with the help of a mutual friend by the name of ( who be of a high aristocratic turn and have you ladyship 's portrait always hang up in he room ) , I have now reasons for a apprehension as to which I come to put you ladyship upon you guard . first , will you ladyship allow I to ask you whether you have have any strange visitor this morning ? I do not mean fashionable visitor , but such visitor , for instance , as 's old servant , or as a person without the use of he lower extremity , carry upstairs similarly to a guy ? " " no ! " " then I assure you ladyship that such visitor have be here and have be receive here . because I see they at the door , and wait at the corner of the square till they come out , and take half a hour 's turn afterwards to avoid they . " " what have I to do with that , or what have you ? I do not understand you . what do you mean ? " " you ladyship , I come to put you on you guard . there may be no occasion for it . very well . then I have only do my best to keep my promise to . I strongly suspect ( from what have drop , and from what we have corkscrew out of he ) that those letter I be to have bring to you ladyship be not destroy when I suppose they be . that if there be anything to be blow upon , it be blow upon . that the visitor I have allude to have be here this morning to make money of it . and that the money be make , or make . " pick up he hat and rise . " you ladyship , you know best whether there be anything in what I say or whether there be nothing . something or nothing , I have act up to 's wish in let thing alone and in undo what I have begin to do , as far as possible ; that be sufficient for I . in case I should be take a liberty in put you ladyship on you guard when there be no necessity for it , you will endeaavor , I should hope , to outlive my presumption , and I shall endeaavor to outlive you disapprobation . I now take my farewell of you ladyship , and assure you that there be no danger of you ever be wait on by I again . " she scarcely acknowledge these parting word by any look , but when he have be go a little while , she ring she bell . " where be ? " report that he be at present shut up in the library alone . " have have any visitor this morning ? " several , on business . proceed to a description of they , which have be anticipate by . enough ; he may go . so ! all be break down . she name be in these many mouth , she husband know he wrongs , she shame will be publish -- may be spread while she think about it -- and in addition to the thunderbolt so long foresee by she , so unforeseen by he , she be denounce by a invisible accuser as the murderess of she enemy . she enemy he be , and she have often , often , often wish he dead . she enemy he be , even in he grave . this dreadful accusation come upon she like a new torment at he lifeless hand . and when she recall how she be secretly at he door that night , and how she may be represent to have send she favourite girl away so soon before merely to release herself from observation , she shudder as if the hangman 's hand be at she neck . she have throw herself upon the floor and lie with she hair all wildly scattered and she face bury in the cushion of a couch . she rise up , hurries to and fro , fling herself down again , and rock and moan . the horror that be upon she be unutterable . if she really be the murderess , it could hardly be , for the moment , more intense . for as she murderous perspective , before the doing of the deed , however subtle the precaution for its commission , would have be close up by a gigantic dilatation of the hateful figure , prevent she from see any consequence beyond it ; and as those consequence would have rush in , in
in a unimagined flood , the moment the figure be laid low -- which always happen when a murder be do ; so , now she see that when he use to be on the watch before she , and she use to think , " if some mortal stroke would but fall on this old man and take he from my way ! " it be but wish that all he hold against she in he hand might be flng to the wind and chance - sow in many place . so , too , with the wicked relief she have feel in he death . what be he death but the key - stone of a gloomy arch remove , and now the arch begin to fall in a thousand fragment , each crush and mang piecemeal ! thus , a terrible impression steal upon and overshadow she that from this pursuer , living or dead -- obdurate and imperturbable before she in he well - remember shape , or not more obdurate and imperturbable in he coffin - bed -- there be no escape but in death . , she fly . the complication of she shame , she dread , remorse , and misery , overwhelm she at its height ; and even she strength of self - reliance be overturn and whir away like a leaf before a mighty wind . she hurriedly address these line to she husband , seal , and leave they on she table : if I be seek for , or accuse of , he murder , believe that I be wholly innocent . believe no other good of I , for I be innocent of nothing else that you have hear , or will hear , laid to my charge . he prepare I , on that fatal night , for he disclosure of my guilt to you . after he have leave I , I go out on pretence of walking in the garden where I sometimes walk , but really to follow he and make one last petition that he would not protract the dreadful suspense on which I have be rack by he , you do not know how long , but would mercifully strike next morning . I find he house dark and silent . I ring twice at he door , but there be no reply , and I come home . I have no home left . I will encumber you no more . may you , in you just resentment , be able to forget the unworthy woman on whom you have waste a most generous devotion -- who avoid you only with a deeper shame than that with which she hurrie from herself -- and who write this last adieu . she veil and dress quickly , leave all she jewel and she money , listen , go downstairs at a moment when the hall be empty , opend and shut be the great door , flutter away in the shrill frosty wind . , as behove its high breeding , the Dedlock town house stare at the other house in the street of dismal grandeur and give no outward sign of anything go wrong withing . Carriage rattle , door be batter at , the world exchange call ; ancient charmer with skeleton throat and peachy cheek that have a rather ghastly bloom upon they see by daylight , when indeed these fascinating creature look like and the fuse together , dazzle the eye of man . forth from the frigid mew come easily swing carriage guide by short - leg coachman in flaxen wig , deep sunk into downy hammercloth , and up behind mount luscious Mercuries bear stick of state and wear cocked hat broadwise , a spectacle for the angel . the Dedlock town house change not externally , and hour pass before its exalt dullness be disturb within . but the fair , be subject to the prevalent complaint of boredom and find that disorder attack she spirits with some virulence , venture at length to repair to the library for change of scene . she gentle tapping at the door produce no response , she open it and peep in ; see no one there , take possession . the sprightly Dedlock be repute , in that grass - grow city of the ancient , , to be stimulate by a urgent curiosity which impel she on all convenient and inconvenient occasion to sidle about with a golden glass at she eye , pee into object of every description . certain it be that she avail herself of the present opportunity of hovering over she kinsman 's letter and papers like a bird , take a short peck at this document and a blink with she head on one side at that document , and hoppe about from table to table with she glass at she eye in a inquisitive and restless manner . in the course of these researches she stumble over something , and turn she glass in that direction , see she kinsman lie on the ground like a felled tree . 's pet little scream acquire a considerable augmentation of reality from this surprise , and the house be quickly in commotion . Servants tear up and down stair , bell be violently rung , doctor be send for , and be seek in all direction , but not find . nobody have see or hear she since she last rang she bell . she letter to be discover on she table , but it be doubtful yet whether he have not receive another missive from another world require to be personally answer , and all the living language , and all the dead , be as one to he . they lay he down upon he bed , and chafe , and rub , and fan , and put ice to
to he head , and try every means of restoration . , the day have eb away , and it be night in he room before he stertorous breathing lull or he fix eye show any consciousness of the candle that be occasionally pass before they . but when this change begin , it go on ; and by and by he nod or move he eye or even he hand in teak that he hear and comprehend . he fall down , this morning , a handsome stately gentleman , somewhat infirm , but of a fine presence , and with a well - fill face . he lie upon he bed , a aged man with sunken cheek , the decrepit shadow of himself . he voice be rich and mellow and he have so long be thoroughly persuade of the weight and import to mankind of any word he say that he word really have come to sound as if there be something in they . but now he can only whisper , and what he whisper sound like what it be -- mere jumble and jargon . he favourite and faithful housekeeper stand at he bedside . it be the first act he notice , and he clearly derive pleasure from it . after vainly try to make himself understand in speech , he make sign for a pencil . so inexpressively that they can not at first understand he ; it be he old housekeeper who make out what he want and bring in a slate . after pause for some time , he slowly scrawl upon it in a hand that be not he , " ? " no , she tell he ; he be in . he be take ill in the library this morning . right thankful she be that she happen to come to and be able to attend upon he . " it be not a illness of any serious consequence , . you will be much better to - morrow , . all the gentleman say so . " this , with the tear course down she fair old face . after make a survey of the room and look with particular attention all round the bed where the doctor stand , he write , " my . " " my go out , , before you be take ill , and do not know of you illness yet . " he point again , in great agitation , at the two word . they all try to quiet he , but he point again with increase agitation . on they look at one another , not know what to say , he take the slate once more and write " my . for 's sake , where ? " and make a imploring moan . it be think better that he old housekeeper should give he 's letter , the contents of which no one know or can surmise . she open it for he and put it out for he perusal . have read it twice by a great effort , he turn it down so that it shall not be see and lie moaning . he pass into a kind of relapse or into a swoon , and it be a hour before he open he eye , recline on he faithful and attach old servant 's arm . the doctor know that he be best with she , and when not actively engage about he , stand aloon . the slate come into requisition again , but the word he want to write he can not remember . he anxiety , he eagerness , and affliction at this pass be pitiable to behold . it seem as if he must go mad in the necessity he feel for haste and the inability under which he labour of expressing to do what or to fetch whom . he have write the letter b , and there stop . of a sudden , in the height of he misery , he put before it . the old housekeeper suggest . thank heaven ! that be he meaning . be find to be downstairs , by appointment . shall he come up ? there be no possibility of misconstrue 's burn wish to see he or the desire he signify to have the room clear of every one but the housekeeper . it be speedily do , and appear . of all man upon , seem fall from he high estate to place he sole trust and reliance upon this man . " , , I be sorry to see you like this . I hope you will cheer up . I be sure you will , on account of the family credit . " put she letter in he hand and look intently in he face while he read it . a new intelligence come into 's eye as he read on ; with one hook of he finger , while that eye be still glance over the word , he indicate , " , , I understand you . " write upon the slate . " full forgiveness . find -- " stop he hand . " , , I will find she . but my search after she must be begin out of hand . not a minute must be lose . " with the quickness of thought , he follow 's look towards a little box upon a table . " bring it here , , ? certainly . open it with one of these here key ? certainly . the littlest key ? to be sure . take the note out ? so I will . count 'em ? that be soon done . twenty and thirty be fifty , and twenty 's seventy , and fifty be one twenty , and be one sixty . take th'ey for expense ? that I
I will do , and render a account of course . do not spare money ? no I will not . " the velocity and certainty of 's interpretation on all these head be little short of miraculous . , who hold the light , be giddy with the swiftness of he eye and hand as he start up , furnish for he journey . " you be 's mother , old lady ; that be about what you be , I believe ? " say aside , with he hat already on and button he coat . " yes , sir , I be he distress mother . " " so I think , accord to what he mention to I just now . well , then , I will tell you something . you need not be distress no more . you son be all right . now , do not you begin a - crying , because what you have get to do be to take care of , , and you will not do that by crying . as to you son , he be all right , I tell you ; and he send he loving duty , and hope you be the same . he be discharge honourable ; that be about what he be ; with no more imputation on he character than there be on yours , and yours be a tidy one , I will bet a pound . you may trust I , for I take you son . he conduct himself in a game way , too , on that occasion ; and he be a fine - make man , and you be a fine - make old lady , and you be a mother and son , the pair of you , as might be show for model in a caravan . , , what you have trust to I I will go through with . do not you be afraid of my turn out of my way , right or leave , or take a sleep , or a wash , or a shave till I have find what I go in search of . say everything as be kind and forgive on you part ? , , I will . and I wish you better , and these family affair smoothe over --a , , many other family affair equally have be , and equally will be , to the end of time . " with this peroration , , buttone up , go quietly out , look steadily before he as if he be already pierce the night in quest of the fugitive . he first step be to take himself to 's room and look all over they for any trifling indication that may help he . the room be in darkness now ; and to see with a wax - light in he hand , hold it above he head and take a sharp mental inventory of the many delicate object so curiously at variance with himself , would be to see a sight -- which nobody do see , as he be particular to lock himself in . " a spicy boudoir , this , " say , who feel in a manner furbish up in he by the blow of the morning . " must have cost a sight of money . Rum article to cut away from , these ; she must have be hard put to it ! " open and shutt table - drawer and look into casket and jewel - case , he see the reflection of himself in various mirror , and moralize thereon . " one might suppose I be a - move in the fashionable circle and get myself up for almac 's , " say . " I begin to think I must be a swell in the without know it . " ever look about , he have open a dainty little chest in a inner drawer . he great hand , turn over some glove which it can scarcely feel , they be so light and soft within it , come upon a white handkerchief . " Hum ! let 's have a look at , " say , put down the light . " what should you be keep by yourself for ? what be you motive ? be you she ladyship 's property , or somebody else 's ? you have get a mark upon you somewhere or another , I suppose ? " he find it as he speak , " . " " oh ! " say , pausing , with he finger at he ear . " come , I will take you . " he complete he observation as quietly and carefully as he have carry they on , leave everything else precisely as he find it , glide away after some five minute in all , and pass into the street . with a glance upward at the dimly lighted window of 's room , he set off , full - swing , to the nearest coach - stand , pick out the horse for he money , and direct to be drive to the shooting gallery . do not claim to be a scientific judge of horse , but he lay out a little money on the principal event in that line , and generally sum up he knowledge of the subject in the remark that when he see a horse as can go , he know he . he knowledge be not at fault in the present instance . Clatter over the stone at a dangerous pace , yet thoughtfully bring he keen eye to bear on every slink creature whom he pass in the midnight street , and even on the light in upper window where people be go or go to bed , and on all the turnings that he
he rattle by , and alike on the heavy sky , and on the earth where the snow lie thin -- for something may present itself to assist he , anywhere -- he dash to he destination at such a speed that when he stop the horse half smother he in a cloud of steam . " Unbear he half a moment to freshan he up , and I will be back . " he run up the long wooden entry and find the trooper smoke he pipe . " I think I should , , after what you have go through , my lad . I have not a word to spare . now , honou ! all to save a woman . that be here when die -- that be the name , I know -- all right -- where do she live ? " the trooper have just come from there and give he the address , near . " you will not repent it , . good night ! " he be off again , with a impression of have see sit by the frosty fire star at he open - mouthed , and gallop away again , and get out in a cloud of steam again . , the only person up in the house , be just go to bed , rise from he book on hear the rapid ring at the bell , and come down to the door in he dressing - gown . " do not be alarm , sy . " in a moment he visitor be confidential with he in the hall , have shut the door , and stand with he hand upon the lock . " I have have the pleasure of see you before . . look at that handkerchief , sir , 's . find it myself put away in a drawer of 's , quarter of a hour ago . not a moment to lose . matter of life or death . you know ? " " yes . " " there have be a discovery there to - day . family affair have come out . , , have have a fit -- apoplexy or paralysis -- and could not be bring to , and precious time have be lose . disappear this afternoon and leave a letter for he that look bad . run you eye over it . here it be ! " , have read it , ask he what he think . " I do not know . it look like suicide . anyways , there be more and more danger , every minute , of its draw to that . I would give a hundred pound a hour to have get the start of the present time . now , , I be employ by , , to follow she and find she , to save she and take she he forgiveness . I have money and full power , but I want something else . I want . " in a troubled voice repeat , " ? " " now , " -- have read he face with the greatest attention all along -- " I speak to you as a gentleman of a humane heart , and under such pressing circumstance as do not often happen . if ever delay be dangerous , it be dangerous now ; and if ever you could not afterwards forgive yourself for cause it , this be the time . or ten hour , worth , as I tell you , a hundred pound apiece at least , have be lose since disappear . I be charge to find she . I be . besides all the rest that be heavy on she , she have upon she , as she believe , suspicion of murder . if I follow she alone , she , be in ignorance of what , , have communicate to I , may be drive to desperation . but if I follow she in company with a young lady , answer to the description of a young lady that she have a tenderness for -- I ask no question , and I say no more than that -- she will give I credit for be friendly . let I come up with she and be able to have the hold upon she of putting that young lady for , and I will save she and prevail with she if she be alive . let I come up with she alone -- a hard matter -- and I will do my best , but I do not answer for what the best may be . time fly ; it be get on for one o'clock . when one strike , there be another hour go , and it be worth a thousand pound now instead of a hundred . " this be all true , and the pressing nature of the case can not be question . beg he to remain there while he speak to . say he will , but act on he usual principle , do no such thing , follow upstairs instead and keep he man in sight . so he remain , dodge and lurk about in the gloom of the staircase while they confer . in a very little time come down and tell he that will join he directly and place herself under he protection to accompany he where he please . , satisfied , express high approval and await she come at the door . there he mount a high tower in he mind and look out far and wide . many solitary figure he perceive creepe through the street ; many solitary figure out on heat , and roads , and lie under haystack . but the figure that he seek be not among they . other solitary he perceive , in nook of bridge , look over
over ; and in shadowed place down by the river 's level ; and a dark , dark , shapeless object drifting with the tide , more solitary than all , cling with a drowning hold on he attention . where be she ? or dead , where be she ? if , as he fold the handkerchief and carefully put it up , it be able with a enchant power to bring before he the place where she find it and the night - landscape near the cottage where it cover the little child , would he descry she there ? on the waste where the brick - kiln be burn with a pale blue flare , where the straw - roof of the wretch hut in which the brick be make be be scatter by the wind , where the clay and water be hard freeze and the mill in which the gaunt blind horse go round all day look like a instrument of human torture -- traverse this desert , blight spot there be a lonely figure with the sad world to itself , pelt by the snow and drive by the wind , and cast out , it would seem , from all companionship . it be the figure of a woman , too ; but it be miserably dress , and no such clothes ever come through the hall and out at the great door of the mansion . 's Narrative I have go to bed and fall asleep when my guardian knock at the door of my room and beg I to get up directly . on my hurrying to speak to he and learn what have happen , he tell I , after a word or two of preparation , that there have be a discovery at 's . that my mother have fle , that a person be now at we door who be empower to convey to she the fullest assurance of affectionate protection and forgiveness if he could possibly find she , and that I be seek for to accompany he in the hope that my entreaty might prevail upon she if he fail . something to this general purpose i make out , but I be throw into such a tumult of alarm , and hurry and distress , that in spite of every effort I could make to subdue my agitation , I do not seem , to myself , fully to recover my right mind until hour have pass . but I dress and wrap up expeditiously without wake or any one and go down to , who be the person entrust with the secret . in take I to he my guardian tell I this , and also explain how it be that he have come to think of I . , in a low voice , by the light of my guardian 's candle , read to I in the hall a letter that my mother have leave upon she table ; and I suppose within ten minute of my have be arouse I be sit beside he , roll swiftly through the street . he manner be very keen , and yet considerate when he explain to I that a great deal might depend on my be able to answer , without confusion , a few question that he wish to ask I . these be , chiefly , whether I have have much communication with my mother ( to whom he only refer as ) , when and where I have speak with she last , and how she have become possessed of my handkerchief . when I have satisfy he on these point , he ask I particularly to consider -- take time to think -- whether within my knowledge there be any one , no matter where , in whom she might be at all likely to confide under circumstance of the last necessity . I could think of no one but my guardian . but by and by I mention . he come into my mind as connect with he old chivalrous manner of mention my mother 's name and with what my guardian have inform I of he engagement to she sister and he unconscious connexion with she unhappy story . my companion have stop the driver while we hold this conversation , that we might the better hear each other . he now tell he to go on again and say to I , after consider within himself for a few moment , that he have make up he mind how to proceed . he be quite willing to tell I what he plan be , but I do not feel clear enough to understand it . we have not drive very far from we lodging when we stop in a by - street at a public - look place light up with gas . take I in and sit I in a arm -chair by a bright fire . it be now past one , as I see by the clock against the wall . two police officer , look in they perfectly neat uniform not at all like people who be up all night , be quietly write at a desk ; and the place seem very quiet altogether , except for some beat and call out at distant door underground , to which nobody pay any attention . a third man in uniform , whom call and to whom he whisper he instruction , go out ; and then the two other advise together while one write from 's subdued dictation . it be a description of my mother that they be busy with , for bring it to I when it be do and read it in a whisper . it be very accurate indeed . the second officer , who have attend to it closely , then copy it out and call in another
another man in uniform ( there be several in a outer room ) , who take it up and go away with it . all this be done with the greatest dispatch and without the waste of a moment ; yet nobody be at all hurry . as soon as the paper be send out upon its travels , the two officer resume they former quiet work of writing with neatness and care . thoughtfully come and warme the soles of he boot , first one and then the other , at the fire . " be you well wrap up , ? " he ask I as he eye meet mine . " it be a desperate sharp night for a young lady to be out in . " I tell he I care for no weather and be warmly clothed . " it may be a long job , " he observ ; " but so that it end well , never mind , miss . " " I pray to heave it may end well ! " say I . he nod comfortingly . " you see , whatever you do , do not you go and fret yourself . you keep yourself cool and equal for anything that may happen , and it will be the better for you , the better for I , the better for , and the better for , . " he be really very kind and gentle , and as he stand before the fire warm he boot and rub he face with he forefinger , I feel a confidence in he sagacity which reassure I . it be not yet a quarter to two when I hear horse ' foot and wheel outside . " now , , " say he , " we be off , if you please ! " he give I he arm , and the two officer courteously bow I out , and we find at the door a phaeton or barouche with a postilion and post horse . hand I in and take he own seat on the box . the man in uniform whom he have send to fetch this equipage then hand he up a dark lantern at he request , and when he have give a few direction to the driver , we rattle away . I be far from sure that I be not in a dream . we rattle with great rapidity through such a labyrinth of street that I soon lose all idea where we be , except that we have cross and re-cross the river , and still seem to be traverse a low - lie , waterside , dense neighbourhood of narrow thoroughfare cheque by dock and basin , high pile of warehouse , swing - bridge , and mast of ship . at length we stop at the corner of a little slimy turn , which the wind from the river , rush up it , do not purify ; and I see my companion , by the light of he lantern , in conference with several man who look like a mixture of police and sailor . against the mouldering wall by which they stand , there be a bill , on which I could discern the word , " " ; and this and a inscription about drag possess I with the awful suspicion shadow forth in we visit to that place . I have no need to remind myself that I be not there by the indulgence of any feeling of mine to increase the difficulty of the search , or to lessen its hope , or enhance its delay . I remain quiet , but what I suffer in that dreadful spot I never can forget . and still it be like the horror of a dream . a man yet dark and muddy , in long swollen sodden boot and a hat like they , be call out of a boat and whisper with , who go away with he down some slippery step -- as if to look at something secret that he have to show . they come back , wip they hand upon they coat , after turn over something wet ; but thank it be not what I fear ! after some further conference , ( whom everybody seem to know and defer to ) go in with the other at a door and leave I in the carriage , while the driver walk up and down by he horse to warm himself . the tide be come in , as I judge from the sound it make , and I could hear it break at the end of the alley with a little rush towards I . it never do so -- and I think it do so , hundred of time , in what can have be at the most a quarter of a hour , and probably be less -- but the thought shudder through I that it would cast my mother at the horse 's foot . come out again , exhort the other to be vigilant , darken he lantern , and once more take he seat . " do not you be alarm , , on account of we come down here , " he say , turn to I . " I only want to have everything in train and to know that it be in train by look after it myself . get on , my lad ! " we appear to retrace the way we have come . not that I have take note of any particular object in my perturbed state of mind , but judge from the general character of the street . we call at another office or station for a minute and cross the river again . during the whole of this time , and during the whole search , my companion ,
, wrap up on the box , never relaxed in he vigilance a single moment ; but when we cross the bridge he seem , if possible , to be more on the alert than before . he stand up to look over the parapet , he alight and go back after a shadowy female figure that flit past we , and he gaze into the profound black pit of water with a face that make my heart die within I . the river have a fearful look , so overcast and secret , creep away so fast between the low flat line of shore -- so heavy with indistinct and awful shape , both of substance and shadow ; so death - like and mysterious . I have see it many time since then , by sunlight and by moonlight , but never free from the impressions of that journey . in my memory the light upon the bridge be always burn dim , the cutting wind be eddy round the homeless woman whom we pass , the monotonous wheel be whir on , and the light of the carriage - lamps reflect back look palely in upon I -- a face rise out of the dread water . Clatter and clatter through the empty street , we come at length from the pavement on to dark smooth roads and begin to leave the house behind we . after a while I recognize the familiar way to . at Barnet fresh horse be ready for we , and we change and go on . it be very cold indeed , and the open country be white with snow , though none be fall then . " a old acquaintance of yours , this road , , " say cheerfully . " yes , " I return . " have you gather any intelligence ? " " none that can be quite depend on as yet , " he answer , " but it be early time as yet . " he have go into every late or early public - house where there be a light ( they be not a few at that time , the road be then much frequent by drover ) and have get down to talk to the turnpike - keeper . I have hear he order drink , and chink money , and make himself agreeable and merry everywhere ; but whenever he take he seat upon the box again , he face resume its watchful steady look , and he always say to the driver in the same business tone , " get on , my lad ! " with all these stoppage , it be between five and six o'clock and we be yet a few miles short of when he come out of one of these house and hand I in a cup of tea . " drink it , , it will do you good . you be begin to get more yourself now , be not you ? " I thank he and say I hope so . " you be what you may call stun at first , " he return ; " and , no wonder ! do not speak loud , my dear . it be all right . she be on ahead . " I do not know what joyful exclamation i make or be go to make , but he put up he finger and I stop myself . " pass through here on foot this evening about eight or nine . I hear of she first at the archway toll , over at , but could not make quite sure . trace she all along , on and off . pick she up at one place , and drop she at another ; but she be before we now , safe . take hold of this cup and saucer , ostler . now , if you be not bring up to the butter trade , look out and see if you can catch half a crown in you t'other hand . one , two , three , and there you be ! now , my lad , try a gallop ! " we be soon in and alight a little before day , when I be just begin to arrange and comprehend the occurrence of the night and really to believe that they be not a dream . leave the carriage at the posting - house and order fresh horsis to be ready , my companion give I he arm , and we go towards home . " as this be you regular abode , , you see , " he observe , " I should like to know whether you have be ask for by any stranger answer the description , or whether have . I do not much expect it , but it might be . " as we ascend the hill , he look about he with a sharp eye -- the day be now break -- and remind I that I have come down it one night , as I have reason for remembering , with my little servant and poor , whom he call . I wonder how he know that . " when you pass a man upon the road , just yonder , you know , " say . yes , I remembe that too , very well . " that be I , " say . see my surprise , he go on , " I drive down in a gig that afternoon to look after that boy . you might have hear my wheel when you come out to look after he yourself , for I be aware of you and you little may go up when I be walk the horse down . make a inquiry or two about he in the town , I soon hear what company he be in and
and be come among the brick - field to look for he when I observe you bring he home here . " " have he commit any crime ? " I ask . " none be charge against he , " say , coolly lift off he hat , " but I suppose he be not over-particular . no . what I want he for be in connexion with keep this very matter of quiet . he have be make he tongue more free than welcome as to a small accidental service he have be pay for by the decease ; and it would not do , at any sort of price , to have he play those game . so have warn he out of , I make a afternoon of it to warn he to keep out of it now he be away , and go farther from it , and maintain a bright look - out that I do not catch he come back again . " " poor creature ! " say I . " poor enough , " assent , " and trouble enough , and well enough away from , or anywhere else . I be regularly turn on my back when I find he take up by you establishment , I do assure you . " I ask he why . " why , my dear ? " say . " naturally there be no end to he tongue then . he might as well have be bear with a yard and a half of it , and a remnant over . " although I remember this conversation now , my head be in confusion at the time , and my power of attention hardly do more than enable I to understand that he enter into these particular to divert I . with the same kind intention , manifestly , he often speak to I of indifferent thing , while he face be busy with the one object that we have in view . he still pursue this subject as we turn in at the garden - gate . " ah ! " say . " here we be , and a nice retired place it be . put a man in mind of the country house in the Woodpecker - tapping , that be know by the smoke which so gracefully curl . they be early with the kitchen fire , and that denote good servants . but what you have always get to be careful of with servants be who come to see them ; you never know what they be up to if you do not know that . and another thing , my dear . whenever you find a young man behind the kitchen - door , you give that young man in charge on suspicion of be secret in a dwelling - house with a unlawful purpose . " we be now in front of the house ; he look attentively and closely at the gravel for footprint before he raise he eye to the window . " do you generally put that elderly young gentleman in the same room when he be on a visit here , ? " he inquire , glance at 's usual chamber . " you know ! " say I . " what do you call he again ? " return , bend down he ear . " Skimpole , be it ? I have often wonder what he name might be . . not , I should say , nor yet ? " " Harold , " I tell he . " Harold . yes . he be a queer bird be Harold , " say , eye I with great expression . " he be a singular character , " say I . " no idea of money , " observ . " he take it , though ! " I involuntarily return for answer that I perceive kknow he . " why , now I will tell you , , " he reply . " you mind will be all the better for not run on one point too continually , and I will tell you for a change . it be he as point out to I where Toughey be . I make up my mind that night to come to the door and ask for , if that be all ; but willing to try a move or so first , if any such be on the board , I just pitch up a morsel of gravel at that window where I see a shadow . as soon as open it and I have have a look at he , think I , you be the man for I . so I smoothe he down a bit about not want to disturb the family after they be go to bed and about it be be a thing to be regret that charitable young lady should harbour vagrant ; and then , when I pretty well understand he way , I say I should consider a fypunnote well bestow if I could relieve the premise of without cause any noise or trouble . then say he , lift up he eyebrow in the gayest way , ' it be no use mention a fypunnote to I , my friend , because I be a mere child in such matter and have no idea of money . ' of course I understand what he take it so easy mean ; and be now quite sure he be the man for I , I wrap the note round a little stone and throw it up to he . well ! he laugh and beam , and look as innocent as you like , and say , ' but I do not know the value of these thing . what be I to do with this ? ' ' spend it ,
, sir , ' say I . ' but I shall be take in ,' he say , ' they will not give I the right change , I shall lose it , it be no use to I . ' , you never see such a face as he carry it with ! of course he tell I where to find , and I find he . " I regard this as very treacherous on the part of towards my guardian and as pass the usual bounds of he childish innocence . " bound , my dear ? " return . " bound ? now , , I will give you a piece of advice that you husband will find useful when you be happily marry and have get a family about you . whenever a person say to you that they be as innocent as can be in all concerning money , look well after you own money , for they be dead certain to collar it if they can . whenever a person proclaim to you ' in worldly matter I be a child , ' you consider that that person be only a - cry off from be hold accountable and that you have get that person 's number , and it be . now , I be not a poetical man myself , except in a vocal way when it go round a company , but I be a practical one , and that be my experience . so be this rule . fast and loose in one thing , fast and loose in everything . I never know it fail . no more will you . nor no one . with which caution to the unwary , my dear , I take the liberty of pull this here bell , and so go back to we business . " I believe it have not be for a moment out of he mind , any more than it have be out of my mind , or out of he face . the whole household be amaze to see I , without any notice , at that time in the morning , and so accompany ; and they surprise be not diminish by my inquiry . no one , however , have be there . it could not be doubt that this be the truth . " then , , " say my companion , " we can not be too soon at the cottage where those brickmaker be to be find . most inquiry there I leave to you , if you will be so good as to make th'ey . the naturalest way be the best way , and the naturalest way be you own way . " we set off again immediately . on arrive at the cottage , we find it shut up and apparently desert , but one of the neighbour who know I and who come out when I be try to make some one hear inform I that the two woman and they husband now liv together in another house , make of loose rough brick , which stand on the margin of the piece of ground where the kiln be and where the long row of brick be dry . we lose no time in repairing to this place , which be within a few hundr yard ; and as the door stood ajar , I push it open . there be only three of they sit at breakfast , the child lie asleep on a bed in the corner . it be , the mother of the dead child , who be absent . the other woman rise on see I ; and the man , though they be , as usual , sulky and silent , each give I a morose nod of recognition . a look pass between they when follow I in , and I be surprised to see that the woman evidently know he . I have ask leave to enter of course . ( the only name by which I know she ) rise to give I she own chair , but I sit down on a stool near the fire , and take a corner of the bedstead . now that I have to speak and be among people with whom I be not familiar , I become conscious of be hurried and giddy . it be very difficult to begin , and I could not help burst into tear . " , " say I , " I have come a long way in the night and through the snow to inquire after a lady -- " " who have be here , you know , " struck in , address the whole group with a compose propitiatory face ; " that be the lady the young lady mean . the lady that be here last night , you know . " " and who tell you as there be anybody here ? " inquire 's husband , who have make a surly stop in he eating to listen and now measure he with he eye . " a person of the name of , with a blue welveteen waistcoat with a double row of mother of pearl button , " immediately answer . " he have as good mind he own business , whoever he be , " grow the man . " he be out of employment , I believe , " say apologetically for , " and so get talk . " the woman have not resume she chair , but stood falter with she hand upon its break back , look at I . I think she would have speak to I privately if she have da . she be still in this attitude of uncertainty when she husband , who be eat with a lump of bread and fat in one hand and he clasp -
- knife in the other , strike the handle of he knife violently on the table and tell she with a oath to mind she own business at any rate and sit down . " I should like to have see very much , " say I , " for I be sure she would have tell I all she could about this lady , whom I be very anxious indeed -- you can not think how anxious -- to overtake . will be here soon ? where be she ? " the woman have a great desire to answer , but the man , with another oath , openly kick at she foot with he heavy boot . he leave it to 's husband to say what he choose , and after a dog silence the latter turn he shaggy head towards I . " I be not partial to gentlefolk come into my place , as you have heered I say afore now , I think , miss . I let they place be , and it be curiious they can not let my place be . there would be a pretty shine make if I be to go a - wisitin THEm , I think . Howsoever , I do not so much complain of you as of some other , and I be agreeable to make you a civil answer , though I give notice that I be not a - go to be draw like a badger . will be here soon ? no she will not . where be she ? she be go up to . " " do she go last night ? " I ask . " do she go last night ? ah ! she go last night , " he answer with a sulky jerk of he head . " but be she here when the lady come ? and what do the lady say to she ? and where be the lady go ? I beg and pray you to be so kind as to tell I , " say I , " for I be in great distress to know . " " if my master would let I speak , and not say a word of harm -- " the woman timidly begin . " you master , " say she husband , mutter a imprecation with slow emphasis , " will break you neck if you meddle with wot do not concern you . " after another silence , the husband of the absent woman , turn to I again , answer I with he usual grumbling unwillingness . " here when the lady come ? yes , she wo here when the lady come . Wot do the lady say to she ? well , I will tell you wot the lady say to she . she say , ' you remember I as come one time to talk to you about the young lady as have be a -wisiting of you ? you remember I as give you somethink handsome for a handkercher wot she have leave ? ' ah , she remembe . so we all do . well , then , wo that young lady up at the house now ? no , she war not up at the house now . well , then , lookee here . the lady be upon a journey all alone , strange as we might think it , and could she rest herself where you be a setten for a hour or so . yes she could , and so she do . then she go -- it might be at twenty minute past eleven , and it might be at twenty minute past twelve ; we be not get no watch here to know the time by , nor yet clock . where do she go ? I do not know where she go ' . she go one way , and go another ; one go right to , and t'other go right from it . that be all about it . ask this man . he heered it all , and see it all . he know . " the other man repeat , " that be all about it . " " be the lady cry ? " I inquire . " Devil a bit , " return the first man . " she shoe be the worse , and she clothes be the worse , but she war not -- not as I see . " the woman sit with she arm cross and she eye upon the ground . she husband have turn he seat a little so as to face she and keep he hammer - like hand upon the table as if it be in readiness to execute he threat if she disobey he . " I hope you will not object to my ask you wife , " say I , " how the lady look . " " come , then ! " he grufinitely cry to she . " you hear what she say . cut it short and tell she . " " bad , " reply the woman . " pale and exhaust . very bad . " " do she speak much ? " " not much , but she voice be hoarse . " she answer , look all the while at she husband for leave . " be she faint ? " say I . " do she eat or drink here ? " " go on ! " say the husband in answer to she look . " tell she and cut it short . " " she have a little water , miss , and fetch she some bread and tea . but she hardly touche it . " " and when she go from here , " I be proceed , when 's husband impatiently take
take I up . " when she go from here , she go right away nor 'ard by the high road . ask on the road if you doubt I , and see if it war not so . now , there be the end . that be all about it . " I glance at my companion , and find that he have already risen and be ready to depart , thanke they for what they have tell I , and take my leave . the woman look full at as he go out , and he look full at she . " now , , " he say to I as we walk quickly away . " they have get she ladyship 's watch among th'ey . that be a positive fact . " " you see it ? " I exclaim . " just as good as see it , " he return . " else why should he talk about he ' twenty minute past ' and about he have no watch to tell the time by ? twenty minute ! he do not usually cut he time so fine as that . if he come to half - hour , it be as much as he do . now , you see , either she ladyship give he that watch or he take it . I think she give it he . now , what should she give it he for ? what should she give it he for ? " he repeat this question to himself several time as we hurrie on , appear to balance between a variety of answer that arise in he mind . " if time could be spare , " say , " which be the only thing that can not be spare in this case , I might get it out of that woman ; but it be too doubtful a chance to trust to under present circumstance . they be up to keep a close eye upon she , and any fool know that a poor creetur like she , beat and kick and scarr and bruise from head to foot , will stand by the husband that ill use she through thick and thing . there be something keep back . it be a pity but what we have see the other woman . " I regrett it exceedingly , for she be very grateful , and I feel sure would have resist no entreaty of mine . " it be possible , , " say , ponder on it , " that she ladyship send she up to with some word for you , and it be possible that she husband get the watch to let she go . it do not come out altogether so plain as to please I , but it be on the card . now , I do not take kindly to lay out the money of , , on these rough , and I do not see my way to the usefulness of it at present . no ! so far we road , , be for 'ard -- straight ahead -- and keep everything quiet ! " we call at home once more that I might send a hasty note to my guardian , and then we hurrie back to where we have leave the carriage . the horse be bring out as soon as we be see come , and we be on the road again in a few minute . it have set in snowing at daybreak , and it now snow hard . the air be so thick with the darkness of the day and the density of the fall that we could see but a very little way in any direction . although it be extremely cold , the snow be but partially freeze , and it churn -- with a sound as if it be a beach of small shell -- under the hoof of the horse into mire and water . they sometimes slip and flounder for a mile together , and we be oblige to come to a standstill to rest they . one horse fall three time in this first stage , and tremble so and be so shaken that the driver have to dismount from he saddle and lead he at last . I could eat nothing and could not sleep , and I grow so nervous under those delay and the slow pace at which we travel that I have a unreasonable desire upon I to get out and walk . Yield to my companion 's better sense , however , I remain where I be . all this time , keep fresh by a certain enjoyment of the work in which he be engage , he be up and down at every house we come to , address people whom he have never beheld before as old acquaintance , run in to warm himself at every fire he see , talk and drink and shake hand at every bar and tap , friendly with every waggoner , wheelwright , blacksmith , and toll - taker , yet never seem to lose time , and always mount to the box again with he watchful , steady face and he business - like " get on , my lad ! " when we be change horse the next time , he come from the stable - yard , with the wet snow encrust upon he and drop off he -- plash and crash through it to he wet knee as he have be do frequently since we leave -- and speak to I at the carriage side . " keep up you spirit . it be certainly true that she come on here , . there be not a doubt of the dress by this time , and the dress have be see here . " " still on foot
foot ? " say I . " still on foot . I think the gentleman you mention must be the point she be aim at , and yet I do not like he live down in she own part of the country neither . " " I know so little , " say I . " there may be some one else nearer here , of whom I never hear . " " that be true . but whatever you do , do not you fall a - crying , my dear ; and do not you worry yourself no more than you can help . get on , my lad ! " the sleet fall all that day unceasingly , a thick mist come on early , and it never rise or lighten for a moment . such roads I have never see . I sometimes fear we have miss the way and get into the ploughed grounds or the marsh . if I ever think of the time I have be out , it present itself as a indefinite period of great duration , and I seem , in a strange way , never to have be free from the anxiety under which I then laboure . as we advance , I begin to feel misgiving that my companion lose confidence . he be the same as before with all the roadside people , but he look graver when he sit by himself on the box . I see he finger uneasily go across and across he mouth during the whole of one long weary stage . I overhear that he begin to ask the drivers of coach and other vehicle come towards we what passenger they have see in other coach and vehicle that be in advance . they reply do not encourage he . he always give I a reassure beck of he finger and lift of he eyelid as he get upon the box again , but he seem perplex now when he say , " get on , my lad ! " at last , when we be change , he tell I that he have lose the track of the dress so long that he begin to be surprised . it be nothing , he say , to lose such a track for one while , and to take it up for another while , and so on ; but it have disappear here in a unaccountable manner , and we have not come upon it since . this corroborate the apprehension I have form , when he begin to look at direction - post , and to leave the carriage at cross roads for a quarter of a hour at a time while he explore they . but I be not to be down - hear , he tell I , for it be as likely as not that the next stage might set we right again . the next stage , however , end as that one end ; we have no new clue . there be a spacious inn here , solitary , but a comfortable substantial building , and as we drive in under a large gateway before I know it , where a landlady and she pretty daughter come to the carriage - door , entreat I to alight and refresh myself while the horse be make ready , I think it would be uncharitable to refuse . they take I upstairs to a warm room and leave I there . it be at the corner of the house , I remember , look two way . on one side to a stable - yard open to a by - road , where the ostler be unharnesse the splashed and tired horse from the muddy carriage , and beyond that to the by - road itself , across which the sign be heavily swing ; on the other side to a wood of dark pine - tree . they branch be encumber with snow , and it silently drop off in wet heap while I stand at the window . night be set in , and its bleakness be enhance by the contrast of the picture fire glow and gleam in the window - pane . as I look among the stem of the tree and follow the discoloured mark in the snow where the thaw be sinke into it and undermine it , I think of the motherly face brightly set off by daughter that have just now welcome I and of my mother lie down in such a wood to die . I be frightene when I find they all about I , but I remember that before I faint I try very hard not to do it ; and that be some little comfort . they cushion I up on a large sofa by the fire , and then the comely landlady tell I that I must travel no further to - night , but must go to bed . but this put I into such a tremble lest they should detain I there that she soon recal she word and compromise for a rest of half a hour . a good endear creature she be . she and she three fair girl , all so busy about I . I be to take hot soup and broil fowl , while dry himself and dine elsewhere ; but I could not do it when a snug round table be presently spread by the fireside , though I be very unwilling to disappoint they . however , I could take some toast and some hot negus , and as I really enjoy that refreshment , it make some recompense . punctual to the time , at the half - hour 's end the carriage come rumbl under the gateway , and they take I down , warm , refresh , comfort by kindness , and safe (
( I assure they ) not to faint any more . after I have get in and have take a grateful leave of they all , the youngest daughter -- a blooming girl of nineteen , who be to be the first marry , they have tell I -- get upon the carriage step , reach in , and kiss I . I have never see she , from that hour , but I think of she to this hour as my friend . the transparent window with the fire and light , look so bright and warm from the cold darkness out of door , be soon gone , and again we be crush and churn the loose snow . we go on with toil enough , but the dismal road be not much worse than they have be , and the stage be only nine mile . my companion smoke on the box -- I have think at the last inn of begge he to do so when I see he stand at a great fire in a comfortable cloud of tobacco --was as vigilant as ever and as quickly down and up again when we come to any human abode or any human creature . he have lighte he little dark lantern , which seem to be a favourite with he , for we have lamps to the carriage ; and every now and then he turn it upon I to see that I be do well . there be a folding - window to the carriage - head , but I never close it , for it see like shut out hope . we come to the end of the stage , and still the lost trace be not recover . I look at he anxiously when we stop to change , but I know by he yet graver face as he stand watch the ostler that he have hear nothing . almost in a instant afterwards , as I lean back in my seat , he look in , with he lighted lantern in he hand , a excited and quite different man . " what be it ? " say I , start . " be she here ? " " no , no . do not deceive yourself , my dear . nobody be here . but I have get it ! " the crystallized snow be in he eyelash , in he hair , lie in ridge on he dress . he have to shake it from he face and get he breath before he speak to I . " now , , " say he , beat he finger on the apron , " do not you be disappoint at what I be a - go to do . you know I . I be , and you can trust I . we have come a long way ; never mind . four horse out there for the next stage up ! quick ! " there be a commotion in the yard , and a man come run out of the stable to know if he mean up or down . " up , I tell you ! ! not it ? up ! " " ? " say I , astonished . " to ! be we go back ? " " , " he answer , " back . straight back as a die . you know I . do not be afraid . I will follow the other , by g -- " " the other ? " I repeat . " who ? " " you call she , do not you ? I will follow she . bring those two pair out here for a crown a man . wake up , some of you ! " " you will not desert this lady we be in search of ; you will not abandon she on such a night and in such a state of mind as I know she to be in ! " say I , in a agony , and grasp he hand . " you be right , my dear , I will not . but I will follow the other . look alive here with they horse . send a man for 'ard in the saddle to the next stage , and let he send another for 'ard again , and order four on , up , right through . my darling , do not you be afraid ! " these order and the way in which he run about the yard urge they cause a general excitement that be scarcely less bewilder to I than the sudden change . but in the height of the confusion , a mount man gallop away to order the relay , and we horse be put to with great speed . " my dear , " say , jump to he seat and look in again , " -- you will excuse I if I be too familiar -- do not you fret and worry yourself no more than you can help . I say nothing else at present ; but you know I , my dear ; now , do not you ? " I endeavoure to say that I know he be far more capable than I of decide what we ought to do , but be he sure that this be right ? could I not go forward by myself in search of -- I grasp he hand again in my distress and whisper it to he -- of my own mother . " my dear , " he answer , " I know , I know , and would I put you wrong , do you think ? . now you know I , do not you ? " what could I say but yes ! " then you keep up as good a heart as you can , and you
you rely upon I for stand by you , no less than by , . now , be you right there ? " " all right , sir ! " " off she go , then . and get on , my lad ! " we be again upon the melancholy road by which we have come , tear up the miry sleet and thaw snow as if they be tear up by a waterwheel . and impassive , as behove its breed , the Dedlock town house carry itself as usual towards the street of dismal grandeur . there be powder head from time to time in the little window of the hall , look out at the untaxed powder fall all day from the sky ; and in the same conservatory there be peach blossom turn itself exotically to the great hall fire from the nipping weather out of door . it be give out that my have go down into , but be expect to return presently . Rumour , busy overmuch , however , will not go down into . it persist in flitting and chatter about town . it know that that poor unfortunate man , , have be sadly use . it hear , my dear child , all sort of shocking thing . it make the world of five mile round quite merry . not to know that there be something wrong at the Dedlock ' be to augur yourself unknown . one of the peachy - cheek charmer with the skeleton throat be already apprise of all the principal circumstance that will come out before the Lord on 's application for a bill of divorce . at and be the jeweller and at and be the mercer , it be and will be for several hour the topic of the age , the feature of the century . the patroness of those establishments , albeit so loftily inscrutable , be as nicly weigh and measure there as any other article of the stock - in - trade , be perfectly understand in this new fashion by the rawest hand behind the counter . " we people , , " say and to the hand in question on engage he , " we people , sir , be sheep -- mere sheep . where two or three mark one go , all the rest follow . keep those two or three in you eye , , and you have the flock . " so , likewise , and to , in reference to know where to have the fashionable people and how to bring what they ( and ) choose into fashion . on similar unerring principles , the librarian , and indeed the great farmer of gorgeous sheep , admit this very day , " why yes , sir , there certainly be report concern , very current indeed among my high connexion , sir . you see , my high connexion must talk about something , sir ; and it be only to get a subject into vogue with one or two lady I could name to make it go down with the whole . just what I should have do with those ladie , sir , in the case of any novelty you have leave to I to bring in , they have do of themselves in this case through know and be perhaps a little innocently jealous of she too , sir . you will find , sir , that this topic will be very popular among my high connexion . if it have be a speculation , sir , it would have bring money . and when I say so , you may trust to my be right , sir , for I have make it my business to study my high connexion and to be able to wind it up like a clock , sir . " thus rumour thrive in the capital , and will not go down into . by half - past five , post meridian , horse Guard ' time , it have even elicit a new remark from the , which bid fair to outshine the old one , on which he have so long rest he colloquial reputation . this sparkling sally be to the effect that although he always know she be the best -groomed woman in the stud , he have no idea she be a bolter . it be immensely receive in turf - circle . at feast and festival also , in firmament she have often graced , and among constellation she outshone but yesterday , she be still the prevalent subject . what be it ? who be it ? when be it ? where be it ? how be it ? she be discuss by she dear friend with all the genteelest slang in vogue , with the last new word , the last new manner , the last new drawl , and the perfection of polite indifference . a remarkable feature of the theme be that it be find to be so inspiring that several people come out upon it who never come out before -- positively say thing ! carry one of these smartness from the place where he dine down to the house , where the Whip for he party hand it about with he snuff - box to keep man together who want to be off , with such effect that the speaker ( who have have it privately insinuate into he own ear under the corner of he wig ) cry , " order at the bar ! " three time without make a impression . and not the least amazing circumstance connect with she be vaguly the town talk be that people hover on the confines of 's high connexion , people who know nothing and ever do know nothing about she , think it essential to they reputation to
to pretend that she be they topic too , and to retail she at second - hand with the last new word and the last new manner , and the last new drawl , and the last new polite indifference , and all the rest of it , all at second - hand but consider equal to know in inferior system and to fainter star . if there be any man of letter , art , or science among these little dealers , how noble in he to support the feeble sister on such majestic crutch ! so go the wintry day outside the Dedlock mansion . how within it ? , lie in he bed , can speak a little , though with difficulty and indistinctness . he be enjoin to silence and to rest , and they have give he some opiate to lull he pain , for he old enemy be very hard with he . he be never asleep , though sometimes he seem to fall into a dull waking doze . he cause he bedstead to be move out nearer to the window when he hear it be such inclement weather , and he head to be so adjust that he could see the drive snow and sleet . he watch it as it fall , throughout the whole wintry day . upon the least noise in the house , which be keep hush , he hand be at the pencil . the old housekeeper , sit by he , know what he would write and whisper , " no , he have not come back yet , . it be late last night when he go . he have be but a little time go yet . " he withdraw he hand and fall to look at the sleet and snow again until they seem , by be long look at , to fall so thick and fast that he be oblige to close he eye for a minute on the giddy whirl of white flake and icy blot . he begin to look at they as soon as it be light . the day be not yet far spend when he conceive it to be necessary that she room should be prepare for she . it be very cold and wet . let there be good fire . let they know that she be expect . please see to it yourself . he write to this purpose on he slate , and . Rouncewell with a heavy heart obey . " for I dread , , " the old lady say to she son , who wait below to keep she company when she have a little leisure , " I dread , my dear , that my will never more set foot within these wall . " " that be a bad presentiment , mother . " " yet within the walls of , my dear . " " that be worse . but why , mother ? " " when I see my Lady yesterday , , she look to I -- and I may say at I too -- as if the step on the Ghost 's walk have almost walk she down . " " come , come ! you alarm yourself with old - story fear , mother . " " no I do not , my dear . no I do not . it be go on for sixty year that I have be in this family , and I never have any fear for it before . but it be break up , my dear ; the great old Dedlock family be break up . " " I hope not , mother . " " I be thankful I have liv long enough to be with in this illness and trouble , for I know I be not too old nor too useless to be a welcomer sight to he than anybody else in my place would be . but the step on the Ghost 's Walk will walk my Lady down , ; it have be many a day behind she , and now it will pass she and go on . " " well , mother dear , I say again , I hope not . " " ah , so do I , , " the old lady return , shak she head and part she fold hand . " but if my fear come true , and he have to know it , who will tell he ! " " be these she room ? " " these be my 's room , just as she leave they . " " why , now , " say the trooper , glance round he and speak in a lower voice , " I begin to understand how you come to think as you do think , mother . room get a awful look about they when they be fitte up , like these , for one person you be use to see in they , and that person be away under any shadow , let alone be know where . " he be not far out . as all parting foreshadow the great final one , so , empty room , bereft of a familiar presence , mournfully whisper what you room and what mine must one day be . my Lady 's state have a hollow look , thus gloomy and abandoned ; and in the inner apartment , where last night make he secret perquisition , the trace of she dress and she ornament , even the mirror accustom to reflect they when they be a portion of herself , have a desolate and vacant air . and cold as the wintry day be , it be darker and colder in these desert chamber than in many a hut that will barely exclude the weather ; and though the servants heap fire
fire in the grate and set the couch and the chair within the warm glass screen that let they ruddy light shoot through to the furthest corner , there be a heavy cloud upon the room which no light will dispel . the old housekeeper and she son remain until the preparation be complete , and then she return upstairs . have take 's place in the meantime , though pearl necklace and rouge pots , however calculate to embellish , be but indifferent comforts to the invalid under present circumstance . Volumnia , not be suppose to know ( and indeed not know ) what be the matter , have find it a ticklish task to offer appropriate observation and consequently have supply they place with distracting smoothing of the bed - linen , elaborate locomotion on tiptoe , vigilant peeping at she kinsman 's eye , and one exasperat whisper to herself of , " he be asleep . " in disproof of which superfluous remark have indignantly write on the slate , " I be not . " Yield , therefore , the chair at the bedside to the quaint old housekeeper , sit at a table a little remove , sympathetically sigh . watch the sleet and snow and listen for the return step that he expect . in the ears of he old servant , look as if she have step out of a old picture - frame to attend a summon Dedlock to another world , the silence be fraught with echoe of she own word , " who will tell he ! " he have be under he valet 's hand this morning to be make presentable and be as well get up as the circumstance will allow . he be prop with pillow , he grey hair be brush in its usual manner , he linen be arrange to a nicety , and he be wrap in a responsible dressing - gown . he eye - glass and he watch be ready to he hand . it be necessary -- less to he own dignity now perhaps than for she sake -- that he should be see as little disturbed and as much himself as may be . woman will talk , and , though a Dedlock , be no exceptional case . he keep she here , there be little doubt , to prevent she talk somewhere else . he be very ill , but he make he present stand against distress of mind and body most courageously . the fair Volumnia , be one of those sprightly girl who can not long continue silent without imminent peril of seizure by the dragon Boredom , soon indicate the approach of that monster with a series of undisguisable yawn . find it impossible to suppress those yawn by any other process than conversation , she compliment . on she son , declare that he positively be one of the finest figure she ever see and as soldierly a look person , she should think , as what be he name , she favourite life -- the man she dote on , the dearest of creature -- who be kill at . hear this tribute with so much surprise and stare about he in such a confused way that feel it necessary to explain . " miss Dedlock do not speak of my eldest son , , but my youngest . I have find he . he have come home . " break silence with a harsh cry . " ? you son come home , ? " the old housekeeper wipe she eye . " thank . yes , . " do this discovery of some one lost , this return of some one so long gone , come upon he as a strong confirmation of he hope ? do he think , " shall I not , with the aid I have , recall she safely after this , there be fewer hour in she case than there be year in he ? " it be of no use entreat he ; he be determined to speak now , and he do . in a thick crowd of sound , but still intelligibly enough to be understand . " why do you not tell I , ? " " it happen only yesterday , , and I doubt you be well enough to be talk to of such thing . " besides , the giddy now remember with she little scream that nobody be to have know of he be 's son and that she be not to have tell . but , with warmth enough to swell the stomacher , that of course she would have tell as soon as he get better . " where be you son , ? " ask , , not a little alarmed by he disregard of the doctor 's injunction , reply , in . " where in ? " be constrain to admit that he be in the house . " bring he here to my room . bring he directly . " the old lady can do nothing but go in search of he . , with such power of movement as he have , arrange himself a little to receive he . when he have do so , he look out again at the falling sleet and snow and listen again for the returning step . a quantity of straw have be tumble down in the street to deae the noise there , and she might be drive to the door perhaps without he hearing wheel . he be lie thus , apparently forgetful of he newer and minor surprise , when the housekeeper return , accompany by she trooper son . approach softly to the bedside , make he bow , square he chest , and stand , with he face flush , very heartily asham of himself . "
" good heaven , and it be really ! " exclaim . " do you remember I , ? " the trooper need to look at he and to separate this sound from that sound before he know what he have say , but do this and be a little help by he mother , he reply , " I must have a very bad memory , indeed , , if I fail to remember you . " " when I look at you , , " observe with difficulty , " I see something of a boy at -- I remember well -- very well . " he look at the trooper until tear come into he eye , and then he look at the sleet and snow again . " I ask you pardon , , " say the trooper , " but would you accept of my arm to raise you up ? you would lie easier , , if you would allow I to move you . " " if you please , ; if you will be so good . " the trooper take he in he arm like a child , lightly raise he , and turn he with he face more towards the window . " thank you . you have you mother 's gentleness , " return , " and you own strength . thank you . " he sign to he with he hand not to go away . quietly remain at the bedside , wait to be speak to . " why do you wish for secrecy ? " it take some time to ask this . " truly I be not much to boast of , , and I -- I should still , , if you be not so indispose -- which I hope you will not be long -- I should still hope for the favour of be allow to remain unknown in general . that involve explanation not very hard to be guess at , not very well ti here , and not very creditable to myself . however opinion may differ on a variety of subject , I should think it would be universally agree , , that I be not much to boast off . " " you have be a soldier , " observe , " and a faithful one . " make he military bow . " as far as that go , , I have do my duty under discipline , and it be the least I could do . " " you find I , " say , whose eye be much attract towards he , " far from well , . " " I be very sorry both to hear it and to see it , . " " I be sure you be . no . in addition to my older malady , I have have a sudden and bad attack . someth that deaden , " make a endeavour to pass one hand down one side , " and confusis , " touch he lip . , with a look of assent and sympathy , make another bow . the different time when they be both young man ( the trooper much the younger of the two ) and look at one another down at arise before they both and soften both . , evidently with a great determination to say , in he own manner , something that be on he mind before relapse into silence , try to raise himself among he pillow a little more . , observant of the action , take he in he arm again and place he as he desire to be . " thank you , . you be another self to I . you have often carry my spare gun at , . you be familiar to I in these strange circumstance , very familiar . " he have put 's sounder arm over he shoulder in lift he up , and be slow in draw it away again as he say these word . " I be about to add , " he presently go on , " I be about to add , respecte this attack , that it be unfortunately simultaneous with a slight misunderstanding between my and myself . I do not mean that there be any difference between we ( for there have been none ) , but that there be a misunderstanding of certain circumstance important only to ourselve , which deprive I , for a little while , of my 's society . she have find it necessary to make a journey -- I trust will shortly return . , do I make myself intelligible ? the word be not quite under my command in the manner of pronounce they . " understand he perfectly , and in truth he deliver himself with far greater plainness than could have be suppose possible a minute ago . the effort by which he do so be write in the anxious and labour expression of he face . nothing but the strength of he purpose enable he to make it . " therefore , , I desire to say in you presence -- and in the presence of my old retainer and friend , . Rouncewell , whose truth and fidelity no one can question , and in the presence of she son , who come back like a familiar recollection of my youth in the home of my ancestor at -- in case I should relapse , in case I should not recover , in case I should lose both my speech and the power of writing , though I hope for better thing -- " the old housekeeper weep silently ; in the greatest agitation , with the freshest bloom on she cheek ; the trooper with he arm fold and he head a little bent , respectfully attentive . " therefore I
I desire to say , and to call you all to witness -- begin , , with yourself , most solemnly -- that I be on unaltered term with . that I assert no cause whatever of complaint against she . that I have ever have the strongest affection for she , and that I retain it undiminished . say this to herself , and to every one . if you ever say less than this , you will be guilty of deliberate falsehood to I . " tremblingly protest that she will observe he injunction to the letter . " my be too high in position , too handsome , too accomplished , too superior in most respects to the best of those by whom she be surround , not to have she enemy and traducer , I dare say . let it be know to they , as I make it know to you , that be of sound mind , memory , and understanding , I revoke no disposition I have make in she favour . I abridge nothing I have ever bestow upon she . I be on unaltered term with she , and I recall -- have the full power to do it if I be so disposed , as you see -- no act I have do for she advantage and happiness . " he formal array of word might have at any other time , as it have often have , something ludicrous in it , but at this time it be serious and affect . he noble earnestness , he fidelity , he gallant shielding of she , he generous conquest of he own wrong and he own pride for she sake , be simply honourable , manly , and true . nothing less worthy can be see through the lustre of such quality in the commonest mechanic , nothing less worthy can be see in the best - bear gentleman . in such a light both aspire alike , both rise alike , both child of the dust shine equally . Overpower by he exertion , he lay he head back on he pillow and close he eye for not more than a minute , when he again resume he watch of the weather and he attention to the muffle sound . in the rendering of those little service , and in the manner of they acceptance , the trooper have become installed as necessary to he . nothing have be say , but it be quite understood . he fall a step or two backward to be out of sight and mount guard a little behind he mother 's chair . the day be now begin to decline . the mist and the sleet into which the snow have all resolve itself be darker , and the blaze begin to tell more vividly upon the room wall and furniture . the gloom augment ; the bright gas spring up in the street ; and the pertinacious oil lamp which yet hold they ground there , with they source of life half frozen and half thaw , twinkle gaspingly like fiery fish out of water -- as they be . the world , which have be rumbl over the straw and pull at the bell , " to inquire , " begin to go home , begin to dress , to dine , to discuss its dear friend with all the last new modes , as already mention . now do become worse , restless , uneasy , and in great pain . , ligh a candle ( with a predestined aptitude for do something objectionable ) , be bidden to put it out again , for it be not yet dark enough . yet it be very dark too , as dark as it will be all night . by and by she try again . no ! put it out . it be not dark enough yet . he old housekeeper be the first to understand that he be strive to uphold the fiction with himself that it be not grow late . " dear , my honoured master , " she softly whisper , " I must , for you own good , and my duty , take the freedom of begge and pray that you will not lie here in the lone darkness watch and wait and drag through the time . let I draw the curtain , and light the candle , and make thing more comfortable about you . the church - clock will strike the hour just the same , , and the night will pass away just the same . my lady will come back , just the same . " " I know it , , but I be weak -- and he have be so long gone . " " not so very long , . not twenty - four hour yet . " " but that be a long time . oh , it be a long time ! " he say it with a groan that wring she heart . she know that this be not a period for bring the rough light upon he ; she think he tear too sacr to be see , even by she . therefore she sit in the darkness for a while without a word , then gently begin to move about , now stirr the fire , now stand at the dark window look out . finally he tell she , with recover self - command , " as you say , , it be no worse for be confess . it be get late , and they be not come . light the room ! " when it be lighted and the weather shut out , it be only left to he to listen . but they find that however deject and ill he be , he brighten when a quiet
quiet pretence be make of look at the fire in she room and be sure that everything be ready to receive she . poor pretence as it be , these allusion to she be expect keep up hope within he . come , and with it the same blank . the carriage in the street be few , and other late sound in that neighbourhood there be none , unless a man so very nomadically drunk as to stray into the frigid zone go brawl and bellow along the pavement . upon this wintry night it be so still that listen to the intense silence be like look at intense darkness . if any distant sound be audible in this case , it depart through the gloom like a feeble light in that , and all be heavier than before . the corporation of servant be dismiss to be ( not unwilling to go , for they be up all last night ) , and only and keep watch in 's room . as the night lag tardily on -- or rather when it seem to stop altogether , at between two and three o'clock -- they find a restless craving on he to know more about the weather , now he can not see it . , patroll regularly every half - hour to the room so carefully look after , extend he march to the hall - door , look about he , and bring back the best report he can make of the worst of night , the sleet still fall and even the stone footway lie ankle - deep in icy sludge . , in she room up a retire landing on the staircase -- the second turn past the end of the carving and gilding , a cousinly room contain a fearful abortion of a portrait of banish for its crime , and command in the day a solemn yard plan with dry - up shrub like antediluvian specimen of black tea -- be a prey to horror of many kind . not last nor least among they , possibly , be a horror of what may befall she little income in the event , as she express it , " of anything happen " to . anything , in this sense , mean one thing only ; and that the last thing that can happen to the consciousness of any baronet in the known world . a effect of these horror be that find she can not go to be in she own room or sit by the fire in she own room , but must come forth with she fair head tie up in a profusion of shawl , and she fair form enro in drapery , and parade the mansion like a ghost , particularly haunt the room , warm and luxurious , prepare for one who still do not return . Solitude under such circumstance be not to be think of , be attend by she maid , who , impress from she own bed for that purpose , extremely cold , very sleepy , and generally a injured maid as condemn by circumstance to take office with a cousin , when she have resolve to be maid to nothing less than ten thousand a year , have not a sweet expression of countenance . the periodical visit of the trooper to these room , however , in the course of he patrolling be a assurance of protection and company both to mistress and maid , which render they very acceptable in the small hour of the night . whenever he be hear advancing , they both make some little decorative preparation to receive he ; at other time they divide they watch into short scrap of oblivion and dialogue not wholly free from acerbity , as to whether , sit with she foot upon the fender , be or be not fall into the fire when rescue ( to she great displeasure ) by she guardian genius the maid . " how be now , ? " inquire , adjust she cowl over she head . " why , be much the same , miss . he be very low and ill , and he even wander a little sometimes . " " have he ask for I ? " inquire tenderly . " why , no , I can not say he have , miss . not within my hearing , that be to say . " " this be a truly sad time , . " " it be indeed , miss . have not you better go to bed ? " " you have a deal better go to bed , , " quoth the maid sharply . but answer no ! no ! she may be ask for , she may be want at a moment 's notice . she never should forgive herself " if anything be to happen " and she be not on the spot . she decline to enter on the question , moo by the maid , how the spot come to be there , and not in she room ( which be nearer to 's ) , but staunchly declare that on the spot she will remain . further make a merit of not have " close a eye " -- as if she have twenty or thirty -- though it be hard to reconcile this statement with she have most indisputably open two within five minute . but when it come to four o'clock , and still the same blank , 's constancy begin to fail she , or rather it begin to strengthen , for she now consider that it be she duty to be ready for the morrow , when much may be expect of she , that , in fact , howsoever anxious to remain upon the spot , it may be require of she , as
as a act of self - devotion , to desert the spot . so when the trooper reappear with he , " have not you better go to bed , miss ? " and when the maid protest , more sharply than before , " you have a deal better go to bed , ! " she meekly rise and say , " do with I what you think best ! " undoubtedly think it best to escort she on he arm to the door of she cousinly chamber , and the maid as undoubtedly think it best to hustle she into bed with mighty little ceremony . accordingly , these step be take ; and now the trooper , in he round , have the house to himself . there be no improvement in the weather . from the portico , from the eave , from the parapet , from every ledge and post and pillar , drip the thawed snow . it have crept , as if for shelter , into the lintel of the great door -- under it , into the corner of the window , into every chink and crevice of retreat , and there waste and die . it be fall still ; upon the roof , upon the skylight , even through the skylight , and drip , drip , drip , with the regularity of the Ghost 's , on the stone floor below . the trooper , he old recollection awaken by the solitary grandeur of a great house -- no novelty to he once at -- go up the stair and through the chief room , hold up he light at arm 's length . think of he varied fortune within the last few week , and of he rustic boyhood , and of the two period of he life so strangely bring together across the wide intermediate space ; think of the murdered man whose image be fresh in he mind ; think of the lady who have disappear from these very room and the token of whose recent presence be all here ; think of the master of the house upstairs and of the foreboding , " who will tell he ! " he look here and look there , and reflect how he might see something now , which it would tax he boldness to walk up to , lay he hand upon , and prove to be a fancy . but it be all blank , blank as the darkness above and below , while he go up the great staircase again , blank as the oppressive silence . " all be still in readiness , ? " " quite orderly and right , . " " no word of any kind ? " the trooper shake he head . " no letter that can possibly have be overlook ? " but he know there be no such hope as that and lay he head down without look for a answer . very familiar to he , as he say himself some hour ago , lift he into easier position through the long remainder of the blank wintry night , and equally familiar with he unexpressed wish , extinguish the light and undraw the curtain at the first late break of day . the day come like a phantom . cold , colourless , and vague , it send a warning streak before it of a deathlike hue , as if it cry out , " look what I be bring you who watch there ! who will tell he ! " 's it be three o'clock in the morning when the house outside do at last begin to exclude the country and to close we in with street . we have make we way along road in a far worse condition than when we have traverse they by daylight , both the fall and the thaw have last ever since ; but the energy of my companion never slacken . it have only be , as I think , of less assistance than the horse in get we on , and it have often aide they . they have stop exhaust half - way up hill , they have be drive through stream of turbulent water , they have slipp down and become entangled with the harness ; but he and he little lantern have be always ready , and when the mishap be set right , I have never hear any variation in he cool , " get on , my lad ! " the steadiness and confidence with which he have direct we journey back I could not account for . never waver , he never even stop to make a inquiry until we be within a few mile of . a very few word , here and there , be then enough for he ; and thus we come , at between three and four o'clock in the morning , into . I will not dwell on the suspense and anxiety with which I reflect all this time that we be leave my mother farther and farther behind every minute . I think I have some strong hope that he must be right and could not fail to have a satisfactory object in follow this woman , but I torment myself with question it and discuss it during the whole journey . what be to ensue when we find she and what could compensate we for this loss of time be question also that I could not possibly dismiss ; my mind be quite torture by long dwelling on such reflection when we stop . we stop in a high - street where there be a coach - stand . my companion pay we two drivers , who be as completely cover with splash as if they have be drag along the roads like the carriage itself , and give they some brief
brief direction where to take it , lift I out of it and into a hackney - coach he have choose from the rest . " why , my dear ! " he say as he do this . " how wet you be ! " I have not be conscious of it . but the melted snow have find its way into the carriage , and I have get out two or three time when a fallen horse be plunge and have to be get up , and the wet have penetrat my dress . I assure he it be no matter , but the driver , who know he , would not be dissuad by I from run down the street to he stable , whence he bring a armful of clean dry straw . they shook it out and strew it well about I , and I find it warm and comfortable . " now , my dear , " say , with he head in at the window after I be shut up . " we be a - go to mark this person down . it may take a little time , but you do not mind that . you be pretty sure that I have get a motive . be not you ? " I little think what it be , little thought in how short a time I should understand it better , but I assure he that I have confidence in he . " so you may have , my dear , " he return . " and I tell you what ! if you only repose half as much confidence in I as I repose in you after what I have experience of you , that will do . ! you be no trouble at all . I never see a young woman in any station of society -- and I have see many elevate one too -- conduct herself like you have conduct yourself since you be call out of you bed . you be a pattern , you know , that be what you be , " say warmly ; " you be a pattern . " I tell he I be very glad , as indeed I be , to have be no hindrance to he , and that I hope I should be none now . " my dear , " he return , " when a young lady be as mild as she be game , and as game as she be mild , that be all I ask , and more than I expect . she then become a queen , and that be about what you be yourself . " with these encourage word -- they really be encourage to I under those lonely and anxious circumstance -- he get upon the box , and we once more drive away . where we drive I neither know then nor have ever know since , but we appear to seek out the narrowest and worst street in . whenever I see he direct the driver , I be prepare for we descending into a deeper complication of such street , and we never fail to do so . sometimes we emerge upon a wider thoroughfare or come to a larger building than the generality , well light . then we stop at office like those we have visit when we begin we journey , and I see he in consultation with other . sometimes he would get down by a archway or at a street corner and mysteriously show the light of he little lantern . this would attract similar light from various dark quarter , like so many insect , and a fresh consultation would be hold . by degrees we appear to contract we search within narrower and easier limit . single police -officer on duty could now tell what he want to know and point to he where to go . at last we stop for a rather long conversation between he and one of these man , which I suppose to be satisfactory from he manner of nodding from time to time . when it be finish he come to I look very busy and very attentive . " now , , " he say to I , " you will not be alarme whatever come off , I know . it be not necessary for I to give you any further caution than to tell you that we have mark this person down and that you may be of use to I before I know it myself . I do not like to ask such a thing , my dear , but would you walk a little way ? " of course I get out directly and take he arm . " it be not so easy to keep you foot , " say , " but take time . " although I look about I confusedly and hurriedly as we cross the street , I think I know the place . " be we in ? " I ask he . " yes , " say . " do you know this turning ? " " it look like . " " and be christen so , my dear , " say . we turn down it , and as we go shuffl through the sleet , I hear the clock strike half - past five . we pass on in silence and as quickly as we could with such a foot - hold , when some one come towards we on the narrow pavement , wrap in a cloak , stop and stand aside to give I room . in the same moment I hear a exclamation of wonder and my own name from . I know he voice very well . it be so unexpected and so -- I do not know what to call it , whether
whether pleasant or painful -- to come upon it after my feverish wander journey , and in the midst of the night , that I could not keep back the tear from my eye . it be like hear he voice in a strange country . " my dear , that you should be out at this hour , and in such weather ! " he have hear from my guardian of my have be call away on some uncommon business and say so to dispense with any explanation . I tell he that we have but just leave a coach and be go -- but then I be oblige to look at my companion . " why , you see , " -- he have catch the name from I --" we be a - go at present into the next street . . " , disregarde my remonstrance , have hurriedly take off he cloak and be put it about I . " that be a good move , too , " say , assist , " a very good move . " " may I go with you ? " say . I do not know whether to I or to my companion . " why , ! " exclaim , take the answer on himself . " of course you may . " it be all say in a moment , and they take I between they , wrap in the cloak . " I have just leave , " say . " I have be sit with he since ten o'clock last night . " " oh , dear I , he be ill ! " " no , no , believe I ; not ill , but not quite well . he be depresse and faint -- you know he get so worried and so worn sometimes -- and send to I of course ; and when I come home I find she note and come straight here . well ! revive so much after a little while , and be so happy and so convinced of its be my do , though know I have little enough to do with it , that I remain with he until he have be fast asleep some hour . as fast asleep as she be now , I hope ! " he friendly and familiar way of speaking of they , he unaffected devotion to they , the grateful confidence with which I know he have inspire my darling , and the comfort he be to she ; could I separate all this from he promise to I ? how thankless I must have be if it have not recal the word he say to I when he be so move by the change in my appearance : " I will accept he as a trust , and it shall be a sacred one ! " we now turn into another narrow street . " , " say , who have eye he closely as we come along , " we business take we to a law - stationer 's here , a certain 's . what , you know he , do you ? " he be so quick that he see it in a instant . " yes , I know a little of he and have call upon he at this place . " " indeed , sir ? " say . " then you will be so good as to let I leave with you for a moment while I go and have half a word with he ? " the last police -officer with whom he have confer be stand silently behind we . I be not aware of it until he strike in on my saying I hear some one crying . " do not be alarm , miss , " he return . " it be 's servant . " " why , you see , " say , " the girl 's subject to fit , and have 'em bad upon she to - night . a most contrary circumstance it be , for I want certain information out of that girl , and she must be bring to reason somehow . " " at all event , they would not be up yet if it be not for she , , " say the other man . " she be be at it pretty well all night , sir . " " well , that be true , " he return . " my light 's burn out . show yours a moment . " all this pass in a whisper a door or two from the house in which I could faintly hear crying and moaning . in the little round of light produce for the purpose , go up to the door and knock . the door be open after he have knock twice , and he go in , leave we stand in the street . " , " say , " if without obtrud myself on you confidence I may remain near you , pray let I do so . " " you be truly kind , " I answer . " I need wish to keep no secret of my own from you ; if i keep any , it be another ' . " " I quite understand . trust I , I will remain near you only so long as I can fully respect it . " " I trust implicitly to you , " I say . " I know and deeply feel how sacredly you keep you promise . " after a short time the little round of light shone out again , and advanc towards we in it with he earnest face . " please to come in , , " he say , " and sit down by the fire . , from information I have receive
receive I understand you be a medical man . would you look to this girl and see if anything can be do to bring she round . she have a letter somewhere that I particularly want . it be not in she box , and I think it must be about she ; but she be so twisted and clench up that she be difficult to handle without hurting . " we all three go into the house together ; although it be cold and raw , it smelt close too from be up all night . in the passage behind the door stand a scared , sorrowful -look little man in a grey coat who seem to have a naturally polite manner and speak meekly . " downstair , if you please , , " say he . " the lady will excuse the front kitchen ; we use it as we workaday sitting - room . the back be 's bedroom , and in it she be a - carry on , poor thing , to a frightful extent ! " we go downstairs , follow by , as I soon find the little man to be . in the front kitchen , sit by the fire , be , with very red eye and a very severe expression of face . " my little woman , " say , enter behind we , " to wave -- not to put too fine a point upon it , my dear -- hostility for one single moment in the course of this prolonge night , here be , , and a lady . " she look very much astonished , as she have reason for do , and look particularly hard at I . " my little woman , " say , sit down in the remotest corner by the door , as if he be take a liberty , " it be not unlikely that you may inquire of I why , , and a lady call upon we in 's , , at the present hour . I do not know . I have not the least idea . if I be to be inform , I should despair of understanding , and I would rather not be tell . " he appear so miserable , sit with he head upon he hand , and I appear so unwelcome , that I be go to offer a apology when take the matter on himself . " now , , " say he , " the best thing you can do be to go along with to look after you Guster -- " " my , ! " cry . " go on , sir , go on . I shall be charge with that next . " " and to hold the candle , " pursue bucket without correct himself , " or hold she , or make yourself useful in any way you be ask . which there be not a man alive more ready to do , for you be a man of urbanity and suavity , you know , and you have get the sort of heart that can feel for another . , would you be so good as see to she , and if you can get that letter from she , to let I have it as soon as ever you can ? " as they go out , make I sit down in a corner by the fire and take off my wet shoe , which he turn up to dry upon the fender , talk all the time . " do not you be at all put out , miss , by the want of a hospitable look from . Snagsby there , because she be under a mistake altogether . she will find that out sooner than will be agreeable to a lady of she generally correct manner of form she thought , because I be a - go to explain it to she . " here , stand on the hearth with he wet hat and shawl in he hand , himself a pile of wet , he turn to . " now , the first thing that I say to you , as a married woman possesse what you may call charms , you know --' believe Me , if all those Endearing , ' and cetrer -- you be well acquaint with the song , because it be in vain for you to tell I that you and good society be strangers -- charms -- attraction , mind you , that ought to give you confidence in yourself -- be , that you have do it . " look rather alarmed , relent a little and falter , what do mean . " what do mean ? " he repeat , and I see by he face that all the time he talk he be listen for the discovery of the letter , to my own great agitation , for I know then how important it must be ; " I will tell you what he mean , ma'am . go and see act . that be the tragedy for you . " consciously ask why . " why ? " say . " because you will come to that if you do not look out . why , at the very moment while I speak , I know what you mind be not wholly free from respect this young lady . but shall I tell you who this young lady be ? now , come , you be what I call a intellectual woman -- with you soul too large for you body , if you come to that , and chaf it -- and you know I , and you recollect where you see I last , and what be talk of in that circle . do not you ? yes ! very well
well . this young lady be that young lady . " appear to understand the reference better than I do at the time . " and -- he as you call --be mix up in the same business , and no other ; and the law - writer that you know of be mix up in the same business , and no other ; and you husband , with no more knowledge of it than you great grandfather , be mix up ( by , decease , he best customer ) in the same business , and no other ; and the whole bileing of people be mix up in the same business , and no other . and yet a married woman , possesse you attraction , shut she eye ( and sparkler too ) , and go and run she delicate - form head against a wall . why , I be asham of you ! ( I expect might have get it by this time . ) " shook she head and put she handkerchief to she eye . " be that all ? " say excitedly . " no . see what happen . another person mix up in that business and no other , a person in a wretched state , come here to - night and be see a - speak to you maid - servant ; and between she and you maid - servant there pass a paper that I would give a hundred pound for , down . what do you do ? you hide and you watch th'ey , and you pounce upon that maid - servant -- know what she be subject to and what a little thing will bring th'ey on -- in that surprising manner and with that severity that , by the , she go off and keep off , when a life may be hang upon that girl 's word ! " he so thoroughly mean what he say now that I involuntarily clasp my hand and feel the room turn away from I . but it stop . come in , put a paper into he hand , and go away again . " now , . , the only amend you can make , " say , rapidly glance at it , " be to let I speak a word to this young lady in private here . and if you know of any help that you can give to that gentleman in the next kitchen there or can think of any one thing that be likelier than another to bring the girl round , do you swiftest and best ! " in a instant she be gone , and he have shut the door . " now my dear , you be steady and quite sure of yourself ? " " quite , " say I . " whose write be that ? " it be my mother 's . a pencil - write , on a crush and tear piece of paper , blot with wet . fold roughly like a letter , and direct to I at my guardian 's . " you know the hand , " he say , " and if you be firm enough to read it to I , do ! but be particular to a word . " it have be write in portion , at different time . I read what follow : " I come to the cottage with two object . first , to see the dear one , if I could , once more -- but only to see she -- not to speak to she or let she know that I be near . the other object , to elude pursuit and to be lose . do not blame the mother for she share . the assistance that she render I , she render on my strongest assurance that it be for the dear one be good . you remember she dead child . the man 's consent i buy , but she help be freely give . " " 'I come . ' that be write , " say my companion , " when she rest there . it bear out what I make of it . I be right . " the next be write at another time : " I have wander a long distance , and for many hour , and I know that I must soon die . these street ! I have no purpose but to die . when I leave , I have a worse , but I be save from adding that guil to the rest . cold , wet , and fatigue be sufficient cause for my be find dead , but I shall die of other , though I suffer from these . it be right that all that have sustain I should give way at once and that I should die of terror and my conscience . " " take courage , " say . " there be only a few word more . " those , too , be write at another time . to all appearance , almost in the dark : " I have do all I could do to be lose . I shall be soon forget so , and shall disgrase he least . I have nothing about I by which I can be recognize . this paper I part with now . the place where I shall lie down , if I can get so far , have be often in my mind . farewell . forgive . " , support I with he arm , lower I gently into my chair . " Cheer up ! do not think I hard with you , my dear , but as soon as ever you feel equal to it , get you shoe on and be ready . " I do as he require ,
, but I be leave there a long time , pray for my unhappy mother . they be all occupy with the poor girl , and I hear direct they and speak to she often . at length he come in with and say that as it be important to address she gently , he think it best that I should ask she for whatever information we desire to obtain . there be no doubt that she could now reply to question if she be soothed and not alarm . the question , say , be how she come by the letter , what pass between she and the person who give she the letter , and where the person go . hold my mind as steadily as I could to these point , I go into the next room with they . would have remain outside , but at my solicitation go in with we . the poor girl be sit on the floor where they have lay she down . they stand around she , though at a little distance , that she might have air . she be not pretty and look weak and poor , but she have a plaintive and a good face , though it be still a little wild . I knee on the ground beside she and put she poor head upon my shoulder , whereupon she draw she arm round my neck and burst into tear . " my poor girl , " say I , lay my face against she forehead , for indeed I be cry too , and trembl , " it seem cruel to trouble you now , but more depend on we know something about this letter than I could tell you in a hour . " she begin piteously declare that she do not mean any harm , she do not mean any harm , ! " we be all sure of that , " say I . " but pray tell I how you get it . " " yes , dear lady , I will , and tell you true . I will tell true , indeed , . " " I be sure of that , " say I . " and how be it ? " " I have be out on a errand , dear lady -- long after it be dark -- quite late ; and when I come home , I find a common - look person , all wet and muddy , look up at we house . when she see I come in at the door , she call I back and say do I live here . and I say yes , and she say she know only one or two place about here , but have lose she way and could not find they . oh , what shall I do , what shall I do ! they will not believe I ! she do not say any harm to I , and I do not say any harm to she , indeed , ! " it be necessary for she mistress to comfort she -- which she do , I must say , with a good deal of contrition -- before she could be get beyond this . " she could not find those place , " say I . " no ! " cry the girl , shak she head . " no ! could not find they . and she be so faint , and lame , and miserable , oh so wretch , that if you have see she , , you would have give she half a crown , I know ! " " well , , my girl , " say he , at first not know what to say . " I hope I should . " " and yet she be so well speak , " say the girl , look at I with wide open eye , " that it make a person 's heart bleed . and so she say to I , do I know the way to the burying ground ? and I ask she which bury ground . and she say , the poor burying ground . and so I tell she I have be a poor child myself , and it be accord to parish . but she say she mean a poor burying ground not very far from here , where there be a archway , and a step , and a iron gate . " as I watch she face and soothe she to go on , I see that receive this with a look which I could not separate from one of alarm . " oh , dear , dear ! " cry the girl , press she hair back with she hand . " what shall I do , what shall I do ! she mean the burying ground where the man be bury that take the sleeping - stuff -- that you come home and tell we of , -- that frightene I so , . oh , I be frightene again . hold I ! " " you be so much better now , " sald I . " pray , pray tell I more . " " yes I will , yes I will ! but do not be angry with I , that be a dear lady , because I have be so ill . " angry with she , poor soul ! " there ! now I will , now I will . so she say , could I tell she how to find it , and I say yes , and I tell she ; and she look at I with eye like almost as if she be blind , and herself all wave back . and so she take out the letter , and show it I , and say
say if she be to put that in the post-office , it would be rub out and not mind and never send ; and would I take it from she , and send it , and the messenger would be pay at the house . and so I say yes , if it be no harm , and she say no -- no harm . and so I take it from she , and she say she have nothing to give I , and I say I be poor myself and consequently want nothing . and so she say bless you , and go . " " and do she go --" " yes , " cry the girl , anticipat the inquiry . " yes ! she go the way I have show she . then I come in , and . come behind I from somewhere and laid hold of I , and I be frightened . " take she kindly from I . wrap I up , and immediately we be in the street . hesitate , but I say , " do not leave I now ! " and add , " you will be better with we , we may want you ; do not lose time ! " I have the most confused impressions of that walk . I recollect that it be neither night nor day , that morning be dawn but the street-lamp be not yet put out , that the sleet be still fall and that all the way be deep with it . I recollect a few chilled people pass in the street . I recollect the wet house - top , the clog and burst gutter and water - spout , the mounds of blackened ice and snow over which we pass , the narrowness of the court by which we go . at the same time I remember that the poor girl seem to be yet tell she story audibly and plainly in my hearing , that I could feel she rest on my arm , that the stain house - fronts put on human shape and look at I , that great water - gate seem to be open and close in my head or in the air , and that the unreal thing be more substantial than the real . at last we stand under a dark and miserable cover way , where one lamp be burn over a iron gate and where the morning faintly struggle in . the gate be close . beyond it be a burial ground -- a dreadful spot in which the night be very slowly stirr , but where I could dimly see heap of dishonoured grave and stone , hem in by filthy house with a few dull light in they window and on whose wall a thick humidity break out like a disease . on the step at the gate , drench in the fearful wet of such a place , which ooze and splashed down everywhere , I see , with a cry of pity and horror , a woman lie -- , the mother of the dead child . I run forward , but they stop I , and entreate I with the greatest earnestness , even with tear , before I go up to the figure to listen for a instant to what say . I do so , as I think . I do so , as I be sure . " , you will understand I , if you think a moment . they change clothes at the cottage . " they change clothes at the cottage . I could repeat the word in my mind , and I know what they mean of themselves , but I attach no meaning to they in any other connexion . " and one return , " say , " and one go on . and the one that go on only go on a certain way agree upon to deceive and then turn across country and go home . think a moment ! " I could repeat this in my mind too , but I have not the least idea what it mean . I see before I , lie on the step , the mother of the dead child . she lay there with one arm creepe round a bar of the iron gate and seem to embrace it . she lay there , who have so lately speak to my mother . she lay there , a distressed , unsheltered , senseless creature . she who have bring my mother 's letter , who could give I the only clue to where my mother be ; she , who be to guide we to rescue and save she whom we have seek so far , who have come to this condition by some means connect with my mother that I could not follow , and might be pass beyond we reach and help at that moment ; she lay there , and they stop I ! I see but do not comprehend the solemn and compassionate look in 's face . I see but do not comprehend he touch the other on the breast to keep he back . I see he stand uncovered in the bitter air , with a reverence for something . but my understanding for all this be gone . I even hear it say between they , " shall she go ? " " she have better go . she hand should be the first to touch she . they have a higher right than ours . " I pass on to the gate and stoop down . I lift the heavy head , put the long dank hair aside , and turn the face . and it be my mother , cold and dead . I proceed to other passage of my narrative . from the goodness of
of all about I I derive such consolation as I can never think of unmoved . I have already say so much of myself , and so much still remain , that I will not dwell upon my sorrow . I have a illness , but it be not a long one ; and I would avoid even this mention of it if I could quite keep down the recollection of they sympathy . I proceed to other passage of my narrative . during the time of my illness , we be still in , where have come , on my guardian 's invitation , to stay with we . when my guardian think I well and cheerful enough to talk with he in we old way -- though I could have do that sooner if he would have believe I -- I resume my work and my chair beside he . he have appoint the time himself , and we be alone . " , " say he , receive I with a kiss , " welcome to the growlery again , my dear . I have a scheme to develop , little woman . I propose to remain here , perhaps for six month , perhaps for a longer time -- as it may be . quite to settle here for a while , in short . " " and in the meanwhile leave ? " say I . " aye , my dear ? , " he return , " must learn to take care of itself . " I think he tone sound sorrowful , but look at he , I see he kind face light up by its pleasantest smile . " , " he repeat -- and he tone do not sound sorrowful , I find --" must learn to take care of itself . it be a long way from , my dear , and stand much in need of you . " " it be like you , guardian , " say I , " to have be take that into consideration for a happy surprise to both of we . " " not so disinterest either , my dear , if you mean to extol I for that virtue , since if you be generally on the road , you could be seldom with I . and besides , I wish to hear as much and as often of as I can in this condition of estrangement from poor . not of she alone , but of he too , poor fellow . " " have you see , this morning , guardian ? " " I see every morning , . " " do he still say the same of ? " " just the same . he know of no direct bodily illness that he have ; on the contrary , he believe that he have none . yet he be not easy about he ; who can be ? " my dear girl have be to see we lately every day , some time twice in a day . but we have foreseen , all along , that this would only last until I be quite myself . we know full well that she fervent heart be as full of affection and gratitude towards she cousin as it have ever be , and we acquit of lay any injunction upon she to stay away ; but we know on the other hand that she feel it a part of she duty to he to be spare of she visit at we house . my guardian 's delicacy have soon perceive this and have try to convey to she that he think she be right . " dear , unfortunate , mistaken , " say I . " when will he awake from he delusion ! " " he be not in the way to do so now , my dear , " reply my guardian . " the more he suffer , the more averse he will be to I , have make I the principal representative of the great occasion of he suffering . " I could not help add , " so unreasonably ! " " ah , , , " return my guardian , " what shall we find reasonable in and ! Unreason and injustice at the top , unreason and injustice at the heart and at the bottom , unreason and injustice from begin to end -- if it ever have a end -- how should poor , always hover near it , pluck reason out of it ? he no more gather grape from thorn or fig from thistle than older man do in old time . " he gentleness and consideration for whenever we speak of he touch I so that I be always silent on this subject very soon . " I suppose the , and the vice Chancellor , and the whole Chancery battery of great gun would be infinitely astonished by such unreason and injustice in one of they suitor , " pursue my guardian . " when those learn gentleman begin to raise moss - rose from the powder they sow in they wig , I shall begin to be astonished too ! " he check himself in glancing towards the window to look where the wind be and lean on the back of my chair instead . " well , well , little woman ! to go on , my dear . this rock we must leave to time , chance , and hopeful circumstance . we must not shipwreck upon it . she can not afford , and he can not afford , the remotest chance of another separation from a friend . therefore I have particularly begge of , and I now particularly beg of you , my dear , not to move this subject with . let it rest . next week , next
next month , next year , sooner or later , he will see I with clearer eye . I can wait . " but I have already discuss it with he , I confess ; and so , I think , have . " so he tell I , " return my guardian . " very good . he have make he protest , and have make hers , and there be nothing more to be say about it . now I come to . how do you like she , my dear ? " in answer to this question , which be oddly abrupt , I say I like she very much and think she be more agreeable than she use to be . " I think so too , " say my guardian . " less pedigree ? not so much of ap -- what be he name ? " that be what I mean , I acknowledge , though he be a very harmless person , even when we have have more of he . " , upon the whole , he be as well in he native mountain , " say my guardian . " I agree with you . then , little woman , can I do better for a time than retain here ? " no . and yet -- my guardian look at I , wait for what I have to say . I have nothing to say . at least I have nothing in my mind that I could say . I have a undefined impression that it might have be better if we have have some other inmate , but I could hardly have explain why even to myself . or , if to myself , certainly not to anybody else . " you see , " say my guardian , " we neighbourhood be in 's way , and he can come here to see she as often as he like , which be agreeable to they both ; and she be familiar to we and fond of you . " yes . that be undeniable . I have nothing to say against it . I could not have suggest a better arrangement , but I be not quite easy in my mind . , , why not ? Esther , think ! " it be a very good plan indeed , dear guardian , and we could not do better . " " sure , little woman ? " quite sure . I have have a moment 's time to think , since I have urge that duty on myself , and I be quite sure . " good , " say my guardian . " it shall be done . carry unanimously . " " carry unanimously , " I repeat , go on with my work . it be a cover for he book - table that I happen to be ornament . it have be lay by on the night precede my sad journey and never resume . I show it to he now , and he admire it highly . after I have explain the pattern to he and all the great effect that be to come out by and by , I think I would go back to we last theme . " you say , dear guardian , when we speak of before leave we , that you think he would give a long trial to another country . have you be advise he since ? " " yes , little woman , pretty often . " " have he decide to do so ? " " I rather think not . " " some other prospect have open to he , perhaps ? " say I . " why -- yes -- perhaps , " return my guardian , begin he answer in a very deliberate manner . " about half a year hence or so , there be a medical attendent for the poor to be appoint at a certain place in . it be a thriving place , pleasantly situate -- stream and street , town and country , mill and moor -- and seem to present a opening for such a man . I mean a man whose hope and aim may sometimes lie ( as most man 's sometimes do , I dare say ) above the ordinary level , but to whom the ordinary level will be high enough after all if it should prove to be a way of usefulness and good service lead to no other . all generous spirit be ambitious , I suppose , but the ambition that calmly trust itself to such a road , instead of spasmodically try to fly over it , be of the kind I care for . it be 's kind . " " and will he get this appointment ? " I ask . " why , little woman , " return my guardian , smile , " not be a oracle , I can not confidently say , but I think so . he reputation stand very high ; there be people from that part of the country in the shipwreck ; and strange to say , I believe the best man have the best chance . you must not suppose it to be a fine endowment . it be a very , very commonplace affair , my dear , a appointment to a great amount of work and a small amount of pay ; but better thing will gather about it , it may be fairly hoped . " " the poor of that place will have reason to bless the choice if it fall on , guardian . " " you be right , little woman ; that I be sure they will . " we say no more about it , nor do he say a word about the future of . but
but it be the first time i have take my seat at he side in my mourning dress , and that account for it , I consider . I now begin to visit my dear girl every day in the dull dark corner where she liv . the morning be my usual time , but whenever I find I have a hour or so to spare , I put on my bonnet and bust off to . they be both so glad to see I at all hour , and use to brighten up so when they hear I open the door and come in ( be quite at home , I never knock ) , that I have no fear of become troublesome just yet . on these occasion I frequently find absent . at other time he would be write or read papers in the cause at that table of he , so covered with papers , which be never disturb . sometimes I would come upon he linger at the door of 's office . sometimes I would meet he in the neighbourhood lounge about and bite he nail . I often meet he wander in 's , near the place where I have first see he , oh how different , how different ! that the money bring he be melt away with the candle I use to see burn after dark in 's office I know very well . it be not a large amount in the beginning , he have marry in debt , and I could not fail to understand , by this time , what be mean by Vholes 's shoulder be at the wheel -- as I still hear it be . my dear make the best of housekeeper and try hard to save , but I know that they be get poorer and poorer every day . she shine in the miserable corner like a beautiful star . she adorn and grac it so that it become another place . Paler than she have be at home , and a little quieter than I have think natural when she be yet so cheerful and hopeful , she face be so unshadowed that I half believe she be blind by she love for to he ruinous career . I go one day to dine with they while I be under this impression . as I turn into 's , I meet little miss Flite come out . she have be to make a stately call upon the wards in , as she still call they , and have derive the highest gratification from that ceremony . have already tell I that she call every at five o'clock , with one little extra white bow in she bonnet , which never appear there at any other time , and with she largest reticule of document on she arm . " my dear ! " she begin . " so delighted ! how do you do ! so glad to see you . and you be go to visit we interesting Jarndyce wards ? to be sure ! we beauty be at home , my dear , and will be charme to see you . " " then be not come in yet ? " say I . " I be glad of that , for I be afraid of be a little late . " " no , he be not come in , " return . " he have have a long day in court . I leave he there with . you do not like Vhole , I hope ? do not like Vhole . - gerous man ! " " I be afraid you see oftener than ever now , " say I . " my dearest , " return , " daily and hourly . you know what i tell you of the attraction on the 's table ? my dear , next to myself he be the most constant suitor in court . he begin quite to amuse we little party . have - ry friendly little party , be we not ? " it be miserable to hear this from she poor mad lip , though it be no surprise . " in short , my value friend , " pursue , advance she lip to my ear with a air of equal patronage and mystery , " I must tell you a secret . I have make he my executor . nominate , constitute , and appoint he . in my will . ye - es . " " indeed ? " say I . " ye - es , " repeat in she most genteel accent , " my executor , administrator , and assign . ( we Chancery phrase , my love . ) I have reflect that if I should wear out , he will be able to watch that judgment . be so very regular in he attendance . " it make I sigh to think of he . " I do at one time mean , " say , echo the sigh , " to nominate , constitute , and appoint poor . also very regular , my charme girl . I assure you , most exemplary ! but he wear out , poor man , so I have appoint he successor . do not mention it . this be in confidence . " she carefully open she reticule a little way and show I a fold piece of paper inside as the appointment of which she speak . " another secret , my dear . I have add to my collection of bird . " " really , ? " say I , know how it pleas she to have she confidence receive with a appearance of interest . she nod several time , and she face become overcast and gloomy . " two more . I call they the
the Ward in . they be cage up with all the other . with , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and ! " the poor soul kiss I with the most troubled look I have ever see in she and go she way . she manner of run over the name of she bird , as if she be afraid of hear they even from she own lip , quite chill I . this be not a cheer preparation for my visit , and I could have dispense with the company of , when ( who arrive within a minute or two after I ) bring he to share we dinner . although it be a very plain one , and be for some minute both out of the room together help to get ready what we be to eat and drink . take that opportunity of hold a little conversation in a low voice with I . he come to the window where I be sit and begin upon 's . " a dull place , , for a life that be not a official one , " say , smear the glass with he black glove to make it clearer for I . " there be not much to see here , " say I . " to hear , miss , " return Vhole . " a little music do occasionally stray in , but we be not musical in the law and soon eject it . I hope be as well as he friend could wish he ? " I thank and say he be quite well . " I have not the pleasure to be admit among the number of he friend myself , " say , " and I be aware that the gentleman of we profession be sometimes regard in such quarter with a unfavourable eye . we plain course , however , under good report and evil report , and all kind of prejudice ( we be the victim of prejudice ) , be to have everything openly carry on . how do you find look , ? " " he look very ill . Dreadfully anxious . " " just so , " say . he stand behind I with he long black figure reach nearly to the ceiling of those low room , feel the pimple on he face as if they be ornament and speak inwardly and evenly as though there be not a human passion or emotion in he nature . " be in attendance upon , I believe ? " he resume . " be he disinterested friend , " I answer . " but I mean in professional attendance , medical attendance . " " that can do little for a unhappy mind , " say I . " just so , " say . so slow , so eager , so bloodless and gaunt , I feel as if be waste away beneath the eyes of this adviser and there be something of the vampire in he . " , " say , very slowly rub he gloved hand , as if , to he cold sense of touch , they be much the same in black kid or out of it , " this be a ill - advise marriage of 's . " I beg he would excuse I from discuss it . they have be engage when they be both very young , I tell he ( a little indignantly ) and when the prospect before they be much fairer and brighter . when have not yield himself to the unhappy influence which now darken he life . " just so , " assent again . " , with a view to everything be openly carry on , I will , with you permission , , observe to you that I consider this a very ill - advise marriage indeed . I owe the opinion not only to . connexion , against whom I should naturally wish to protect myself , but also to my own reputation -- dear to myself as a professional man aim to keep respectable ; dear to my three girl at home , for whom I be strive to realize some little independence ; dear , I will even say , to my aged father , whom it be my privilege to support . " " it would become a very different marriage , a much happier and better marriage , another marriage altogether , , " say I , " if be persuade to turn he back on the fatal pursuit in which you be engage with he . " , with a noiseless cough -- or rather gasp -- into one of he black glove , inclin he head as if he do not wholly dispute even that . " , " he say , " it may be so ; and I freely admit that the young lady who have take . 's name upon herself in so ill - advise a manner -- you will I be sure not quarrel with I for throw out that remark again , as a duty I owe to . connexion -- be a highly genteel young lady . have prevent I from mixing much with general society in any but a professional character ; still I trust I be competent to perceive that she be a highly genteel young lady . as to beauty , I be not a judge of that myself , and I never do give much attention to it from a boy , but I dare say the young lady be equally eligible in that point of view . she be consider so ( I have hear ) among the clerk in the , and it be a point more in they way than in
in mine . in reference to .' pursuit of he interest -- " " oh ! he interests , ! " " pardon I , " return , go on in exactly the same inward and dispassionate manner . " take certain interest under certain will dispute in the suit . it be a term we use . in reference to , 's pursuit of he interest , I mention to you , , the first time I have the pleasure of see you , in my desire that everything should he openly carry on -- I use those word , for I happen afterwards to note they in my diary , which be producible at any time -- I mention to you that have lay down the principle of watch he own interest , and that when a client of mine lay down a principle which be not of a immoral ( that be to say , unlawful ) nature , it devolve upon I to carry it out . I have carry it out ; I do carry it out . but I will not smooth thing over to any connexion of C.'s on any account . as open as I be to , I be to you . I regard it in the light of a professional duty to be so , though it can be charge to no one . I openly say , unpalatable as it may be , that I consider . affair in a very bad way , that I consider himself in a very bad way , and that I regard this as a exceedingly ill - advise marriage . be I here , sir ? yes , I thank you ; I be here , , and enjoy the pleasure of some agreeable conversation with , for which I have to thank you very much , sir ! " he break off thus in answer to , who address he as he come into the room . by this time I too well understand 's scrupulous way of save himself and he respectability not to feel that we worst fear do but keep pace with he client 's progress . we sit down to dinner , and I have a opportunity of observing , anxiously . I be not disturb by ( who take off he glove to dine ) , though he sit opposite to I at the small table , for I doubt if , look up at all , he once remove he eye from he host 's face . I find thing and languid , slovenly in he dress , abstract in he manner , force he spirits now and then , and at other interval relapse into a dull thoughtfulness . about he large bright eye that use to be so merry there be a wanness and a restlessness that change they altogether . I can not use the expression that he look old . there be a ruin of youth which be not like age , and into such a ruin 's youth and youthful beauty have all fall away . he eat little and seem indifferent what it be , show himself to be much more impatient than he use to be , and be quick even with . I think at first that he old light - hear manner be all gone , but it shine out of he sometimes as I have occasionally know little momentary glimpse of my own old face to look out upon I from the glass . he laugh have not quite leave he either , but it be like the echo of a joyful sound , and that be always sorrowful . yet he be as glad as ever , in he old affectionate way , to have I there , and we talk of the old time pleasantly . these do not appear to be interesting to , though he occasionally make a gasp which I believe be he smile . he rise shortly after dinner and say that with the permission of the ladie he would retire to he office . " devote to business , Vhole ! " cry . " yes , , " he return , " the interests of client be never to be neglect , sir . they be paramount in the thought of a professional man like myself , who wish to preserve a good name among he fellow- practitioner and society at large . my deny myself the pleasure of the present agreeable conversation may not be wholly irrespective of you own interest , . " express himself quite sure of that and light out . on he return he tell we , more than once , that be a good fellow , a safe fellow , a man who do what he pretend to do , a very good fellow indeed ! he be so defiant about it that it struck I he have begin to doubt . then he throw himself on the sofa , tire out ; and and I put thing to rights , for they have no other servant than the woman who attend to the chamber . my dear girl have a cottage piano there and quietly sit down to s some of 's favourite , the lamp be first remove into the next room , as he complain of its hurt he eye . I sit between they , at my dear girl 's side , and feel very melancholy listen to she sweet voice . I think do too ; I think he darken the room for that reason . she have be singe some time , rise between whiles to bend over he and speak to he , when come in . then he sit down by and half playfully , half earnestly , quite naturally and easily , find out how he feel and where he have be all
all day . presently he propose to accompany he in a short walk on one of the bridge , as it be a moonlight airy night ; and readily consent , they go out together . they leave my dear girl still sit at the piano and I still sit beside she . when they be go out , I draw my arm round she waist . she put she left hand in mine ( I be sit on that side ) , but keep she right upon the key , go over and over they without strike any note . " , my dearest , " she say , break silence , " be never so well and I be never so easy about he as when he be with . we have to thank you for that . " I point out to my darling how this could scarcely be , because have come to she cousin 's house and have know we all there , and because he have always like , and have always like he , and -- and so forth . " all true , " say , " but that he be such a devot friend to we we owe to you . " I think it best to let my dear girl have she way and to say no more about it . so I say as much . I say it lightly , because I feel she trembling . " , my dearest , I want to be a good wife , a very , very good wife indeed . you shall teach I . " I teach ! I say no more , for I notice the hand that be flutter over the key , and I know that it be not I who ought to speak , that it be she who have something to say to I . " when I marry I be not insensible to what be before he . I have be perfectly happy for a long time with you , and I have never know any trouble or anxiety , so love and car for , but I understand the danger he be in , dear . " " I know , I know , my darling . " " when we be marry I have some little hope that I might be able to convince he of he mistake , that he might come to regard it in a new way as my husband and not pursue it all the more desperately for my sake -- as he do . but if I have not have that hope , I would have marry he just the same , . just the same ! " in the momentary firmness of the hand that be never still -- a firmness inspire by the utterance of these last word , and die away with they -- I see the confirmation of she earnest tone . " you be not to think , my dearest , that I fail to see what you see and fear what you fear . no one can understand he better than I do . the greatest wisdom that ever live in the world could scarcely know better than my love do . " she speak so modestly and softly and she trembl hand expresse such agitation as it move to and for upon the silent note ! my dear , dear girl ! " I see he at he worst every day . I watch he in he sleep . I know every change of he face . but when I marry I be quite determined , , if heaven would help I , never to show he that I grieve for what he do and so to make he more unhappy . I want he , when he come home , to find no trouble in my face . I want he , when he look at I , to see what he love in I . I marry he to do this , and this support I . " I feel she trembl more . I wait for what be yet to come , and I now think I begin to know what it be . " and something else support I , . " she stop a minute . stop speak only ; she hand be still in motion . " I look forward a little while , and I do not know what great aid may come to I . when turn he eye upon I then , there may be something lie on my breast more eloquent than I have be , with greater power than mine to show he he true course and win he back . " she hand stop now . she clasp I in she arm , and I clasp she in mine . " if that little creature should fail too , , I still look forward . I look forward a long while , through year and year , and think that then , when I be grow old , or when I be dead perhaps , a beautiful woman , he daughter , happily married , may be proud of he and a blessing to he . or that a generous brave man , as handsome as he use to be , as hopeful , and far more happy , may walk in the sunshine with he , honour he grey head and say to himself , 'I thank this be my father ! ruin by a fatal inheritance , and restore through I ! ' " oh , my sweet girl , what a heart be that which beat so fast against I ! " these hope uphold I , my dear Esther , and I know they will . though sometimes even they depart from I before a dread that arise when I look at . " I
I try to cheer my darling , and ask she what it be . Sobb and weep , she reply , " that he may not live to see he child . " the day when I frequent that miserable corner which my dear girl brighten can never fake in my remembrance . I never see it , and I never wish to see it now ; I have be there only once since , but in my memory there be a mournful glory shin on the place which will shine for ever . not a day pass without my go there , of course . at first I find there , on two or three occasion , idly play the piano and talk in he usual vivacious strain . now , besides my very much mistrust the probability of he be there without make poorer , I feel as if there be something in he careless gaiety too inconsistent with what I know of the depth of 's life . I clearly perceive , too , that share my feeling . I therefore resolve , after much think of it , to make a private visit to and try delicately to explain myself . my dear girl be the great consideration that make I bold . I set off one morning , accompany by , for . as I approach the house , I be strongly inclin to turn back , for I feel what a desperate attempt it be to make a impression on and how extremely likely it be that he would signally defeat I . however , I think that be there , I would go through with it . I knock with a trembling hand at 's door -- literally with a hand , for the knocker be gone -- and after a long parley gain admission from a , who be in the area when I knock , break up the lid of a water - butt with a poker to light the fire with . , lie on the sofa in he room , play the flute a little , be enchant to see I . now , who should receive I , he ask . who would I prefer for mistress of the ceremony ? would I have he daughter , he daughter , or he sentiment daughter ? or would I have all the daughter at once in a perfect nosegay ? I reply , half defeat already , that I wish to speak to himself only if he would give I leave . " my dear , most joyfully ! of course , " he say , bring he chair nearer mine and break into he fascinating smile , " of course it be not business . then it be pleasure ! " I say it certainly be not business that I come upon , but it be not quite a pleasant matter . " then , my dear , " say he with the frankest gaiety , " do not allude to it . why should you allude to anything that be not a pleasant matter ? I never do . and you be a much pleasanter creature , in every point of view , than I . you be perfectly pleasant ; I be imperfectly pleasant ; then , if I never allude to a unpleasant matter , how much less should you ! so that be dispose of , and we will talk of something else . " although I be embarrass , I take courage to intimate that I still wish to pursue the subject . " I should think it a mistake , " say with he airy laugh , " if I think capable of make one . but I do not ! " " , " say I , raise my eye to he , " I have so often hear you say that you be unacquainted with the common affair of life -- " " mean we three banking - house friend , , , and who be the junior partner ? ? " say , brightly . " not a idea of they ! " " -- that perhaps , " I go on , " you will excuse my boldness on that account . I think you ought most seriously to know that be poorer than he be . " " dear I ! " say . " so be I , they tell I . " " and in very embarrassed circumstance . " " parallel case , exactly ! " say with a delighted countenance . " this at present naturally cause much secret anxiety , and as I think she be less anxious when no claim be make upon she by visitor , and as have one uneasiness always heavy on he mind , it have occur to I to take the liberty of say that -- if you would -- not -- " I be come to the point with great difficulty when he take I by both hand and with a radiant face and in the liveliest way anticipate it . " not go there ? certainly not , my dear , most assuredly not . why should I go there ? when I go anywhere , I go for pleasure . I do not go anywhere for pain , because I be make for pleasure . come to I when it want I . now , I have have very little pleasure at we dear 's lately , and you practical sagacity demonstrate why . we young friend , lose the youthful poetry which be once so captivat in they , begin to think , ' this be a man who want pound . ' so I be ; I always want pound ; not for myself , but because tradespeople always want they of I . next , we young friend begin to think
think , become mercenary , ' this be the man who have pound , who borrowed they , ' which I do . I always borrow pound . so we young friend , reduce to prise ( which be much to be regret ) , degenerate in they power of imparting pleasure to I . why should I go to see they , therefore ? ! " through the beame smile with which he regard I as he reaso thus , there now break forth a look of disinterest benevolence quite astonishing . " , " he say , pursue he argument in he tone of light - hear conviction , " if I do not go anywhere for pain -- which would be a perversion of the intention of my being , and a monstrous thing to do -- why should I go anywhere to be the cause of pain ? if I go to see we young friend in they present ill - regulate state of mind , I should give they pain . the associations with I would be disagreeable . they might say , ' this be the man who have pound and who can not pay pound , ' which I can not , of course ; nothing could be more out of the question ! then kindness require that I should not go near they -- and I will not . " he finish by genially kiss my hand and thanke I . nothing but 's fine tact , he say , would have find this out for he . I be much disconcert , but I reflect that if the main point be gain , it matter little how strangely he pervert everything lead to it . I have determi to mention something else , however , and I think I be not to be put off in that . " , " say I , " I must take the liberty of say before I conclude my visit that I be much surprised to learn , on the best authority , some little time ago , that you know with whom that poor boy leave and that you accept a present on that occasion . I have not mention it to my guardian , for I fear it would hurt he unnecessarily ; but I may say to you that I be much surprised . " " no ? really surprise , my dear ? " he return inquiringly , raise he pleasant eyebrow . " greatly surprise . " he think about it for a little while with a highly agreeable and whimsical expression of face , then quite give it up and say in he most engage manner , " you know what a child I be . why surprise ? " I be reluctant to enter minutely into that question , but as he beg I would , for he be really curious to know , I give he to understand in the gentlest word I could use that he conduct seem to involve a disregard of several moral obligation . he be much amused and interested when he hear this and say , " no , really ? " with ingenuous simplicity . " you know I do not intend to be responsible . I never could do it . responsibility be a thing that have always be above I -- or below I , " say . " I do not even know which ; but as I understand the way in which my dear miss Summerson ( always remarkable for she practical good sense and clearness ) put this case , I should imagine it be chiefly a question of money , do you know ? " I incautiously give a qualified assent to this . " ah ! then you see , " say , shak he head , " I be hopeless of understand it . " I suggest , as I rise to go , that it be not right to betray my guardian 's confidence for a bribe . " my dear , " he return with a candid hilarity that be all he own , " I can not be bribe . " " not by ? " say I . " no , " say he . " not by anybody . I do not attach any value to money . I do not care about it , I do not know about it , I do not want it , I do not keep it -- it go away from I directly . how can I be bribe ? " I show that I be of a different opinion , though I have not the capacity for argue the question . " on the contrary , " say , " I be exactly the man to be place in a superior position in such a case as that . I be above the rest of mankind in such a case as that . I can act with philosophy in such a case as that . I be not war by prejudice , as a italian baby be by bandage . I be as free as the air . I feel myself as far above suspicion as 's wife . " anything to equal the lightness of he manner and the playful impartiality with which he seem to convince himself , as he toss the matter about like a ball of feather , be surely never see in anybody else ! " observe the case , my dear . here be a boy receive into the house and put to be in a state that I strongly object to . the boy be in bed , a man arrive -- like the house that build . here be the man who demand the boy who be receive into the house and put to be in a state that I strongly object
object to . here be a bank - note produce by the man who demand the boy who be receive into the house and put to be in a state that I strongly object to . here be the Skimpole who accept the bank - note produce by the man who demand the boy who be receive into the house and put to be in a state that I strongly object to . those be the fact . very well . should the have refuse the note ? why should the have refuse the note ? Skimpole protest to , ' what be this for ? I do not understand it , it be of no use to I , take it away . ' still entreat to accept it . be there reason why Skimpole , not be warp by prejudice , should accept it ? yes . Skimpole perceive they . what be they ? Skimpole reason with himself , this be a tame lynx , a active police -officer , a intelligent man , a person of a peculiarly directed energy and great subtlety both of conception and execution , who discover we friend and enemy for we when they run away , recover we property for we when we be rob , avenge we comfortably when we be murder . this active police -officer and intelligent man have acquire , in the exercise of he art , a strong faith in money ; he find it very useful to he , and he make it very useful to society . shall I shake that faith in because I want it myself ; shall I deliberately blunt one of 's weapon ; shall I positively paralyse in he next detective operation ? and again . if it be blameable in to take the note , it be blameable in to offer the note -- much more blameable in , because he be the know man . now , wish to think well of ; deem it essential , in its little place , to the general cohesion of thing , that he should think well of . the state expressly ask he to trust to . and he do . and that be all he do ! " I have nothing to offer in reply to this exposition and therefore take my leave . , however , who be in excellent spirit , would not hear of my returning home attend only by " , " and accompany I himself . he entertain I on the way with a variety of delightful conversation and assure I , at parting , that he should never forget the fine tact with which i have find that out for he about we young friend . as it so happen that I never see again , I may at once finish what I know of he history . a coolness arise between he and my guardian , base principally on the foregoing grounds and on he have heartlessly disregard my guardian 's entreaty ( as we afterwards learn from ) in reference to . he be heavily in my guardian 's debt have nothing to do with they separation . he die some five year afterwards and leave a diary behind he , with letter and other material towards he life , which be publish and which show he to have be the victim of a combination on the part of mankind against a amiable child . it be consider very pleasant reading , but I never read more of it myself than the sentence on which I chance to light on open the book . it be this : " , in common with most other man I have know , be the incarnation of selfishness . " and now I come to a part of my story touch myself very nearly indeed , and for which I be quite unprepared when the circumstance occur . whatever little lingerings may have now and then revive in my mind associate with my poor old face have only revive as belong to a part of my life that be go -- go like my infancy or my childhood . I have suppress none of my many weakness on that subject , but have write they as faithfully as my memory have recal they . and I hope to do , and mean to do , the same down to the last word of these page , which I see now not so very far before I . the months be glid away , and my dear girl , sustain by the hope she have confide in I , be the same beautiful star in the miserable corner . , more worn and haggard , haunt the court day after day , listlessly sit there the whole day long when he know there be no remote chance of the suit be mention , and become one of the stock sight of the place . I wonder whether any of the gentleman remember he as he be when he first go there . so completely be he absorb in he fix idea that he use to avow in he cheerful moment that he should never have breathe the fresh air now " but for . " it be only who could occasionally divert he attention for a few hour at a time and rouse he , even when he sunk into a lethargy of mind and body that alarme we greatly , and the return of which become more frequent as the month go on . my dear girl be right in say that he only pursue he error the more desperately for she sake . I have no doubt that he desire to retrieve what he have lose be render the more intense by he grief for he young wife , and become like the madness of a gamester . I be there ,
, as I have mention , at all hour . when I be there at night , I generally go home with in a coach ; sometimes my guardian would meet I in the neighbourhood , and we would walk home together . one evening he have arrange to meet I at eight o'clock . I could not leave , as I usually do , quite punctually at the time , for I be work for my dear girl and have a few stitch more to do to finish what I be about ; but it be within a few minute of the hour when I bundle up my little work - basket , give my darling my last kiss for the night , and hurrie downstairs . go with I , as it be dusk . when we come to the usual place of meeting -- it be close by , and have often accompany I before -- my guardian be not there . we wait half a hour , walk up and down , but there be no sign of he . we agree that he be either prevent from come or that he have come and go away , and propose to walk home with I . it be the first walk we have ever take together , except that very short one to the usual place of meeting . we speak of and the whole way . I do not thank he in word for what he have do -- my appreciation of it have risen above all word then -- but I hope he might not be without some understanding of what I feel so strongly . arrive at home and go upstairs , we find that my guardian be out and that be out too . we be in the very same room into which i have bring my blushing girl when she youthful lover , now she so alte husband , be the choice of she young heart , the very same room from which my guardian and I have watch they go away through the sunlight in the fresh bloom of they hope and promise . we be stand by the opened window look down into the street when speak to I . I learn in a moment that he love I . I learn in a moment that my scarred face be all unchanged to he . I learn in a moment that what I have think be pity and compassion be devoted , generous , faithful love . oh , too late to know it now , too late , too late . that be the first ungrateful thought I have . too late . " when I return , " he tell I , " when I come back , no richer than when I go away , and find you newly risen from a sick bed , yet so inspire by sweet consideration for other and so free from a selfish thought -- " " oh , , forbear , forbear ! " I entreate he . " I do not deserve you high praise . I have many selfish thought at that time , many ! " " heaven know , belove of my life , " say he , " that my praise be not a lover 's praise , but the truth . you do not know what all around you see in , how many heart she touch and awaken , what sacr admiration and what love she win . " " oh , , " cry I , " it be a great thing to win love , it be a great thing to win love ! I be proud of it , and honoure by it ; and the hearing of it cause I to shed these tear of mingled joy and sorrow -- joy that I have win it , sorrow that I have not deserve it better ; but I be not free to think of yours . " I say it with a stronger heart , for when he praise I thus and when I hear he voice thrill with he belief that what he say be true , I aspire to be more worthy of it . it be not too late for that . although I close this unforeseen page in my life to - night , I could be worthier of it all through my life . and it be a comfort to I , and a impulse to I , and I feel a dignity rise up within I that be derive from he when I think so . he break the silence . " I should poorly show the trust that I have in the dear one who will evermore be as dear to I as now " -- and the deep earnestness with which he say it at once strengthen I and make I weep -- " if , after she assurance that she be not free to think of my love , I urge it . dear Esther , let I only tell you that the fond idea of you which I take abroad be exalt to the heaven when I come home . I have always hope , in the first hour when I seem to stand in any ray of good fortune , to tell you this . I have always fear that I should tell it you in vain . my hope and fear be both fulfil to - night . I distress you . I have say enough . " something seem to pass into my place that be like the angel he think I , and I feel so sorrowful for the loss he have sustain ! I wish to help he in he trouble , as I have wish to do when he show that first commiseration for I . " dear , " say I ,
, " before we part to - night , something be leave for I to say . I never could say it as I wish -- I never shall -- but -- " I have to think again of be more deserving of he love and he affliction before I could go on . " -- I be deeply sensible of you generosity , and I shall treasure its remembrance to my dying hour . I know full well how change I be , I know you be not unacquaint with my history , and I know what a noble love that be which be so faithful . what you have say to I could have affect I so much from no other lip , for there be none that could give it such a value to I . it shall not be lose . it shall make I better . " he cover he eye with he hand and turn away he head . how could I ever be worthy of those tear ? " if , in the unchanged intercourse we shall have together -- in tending and , and I hope in many happier scene of life -- you ever find anything in I which you can honestly think be better than it use to be , believe that it will have spring up from to - night and that I shall owe it to you . and never believe , dear dear , never believe that I forget this night or that while my heart beat it can be insensible to the pride and joy of have be belove by you . " he take my hand and kiss it . he be like himself again , and I feel still more encouraged . " I be induce by what you say just now , " say I , " to hope that you have succeed in you endeavour . " " I have , " he answer . " with such help from as you who know he so well can imagine he to have render I , I have succeed . " " bless he for it , " say I , give he my hand ; " and heaven bless you in all you do ! " " I shall do it better for the wish , " he answer ; " it will make I enter on these new duty as on another sacr trust from you . " " ah ! ! " I exclaim involuntarily , " what will he do when you be gone ! " " I be not require to go yet ; I would not desert he , dear , even if I be . " one other thing I feel it needful to touch upon before he leave I . I know that I should not be worthier of the love I could not take if I reserve it . " , " say I , " you will be glad to know from my lip before I say good night that in the future , which be clear and bright before I , I be most happy , most fortunate , have nothing to regret or desire . " it be indeed a glad hearing to he , he reply . " from my childhood I have be , " say I , " the object of the untiring goodness of the best of human being , to whom I be so bound by every tie of attachment , gratitude , and love , that nothing I could do in the compass of a life could express the feeling of a single day . " " I share those feeling , " he return . " you speak of . " " you know he virtue well , " say I , " but few can know the greatness of he character as I know it . all it be highest and best quality have be reveal to I in nothing more brightly than in the shaping out of that future in which I be so happy . and if you highest homage and respect have not be he already -- which I know they be -- they would have be he , I think , on this assurance and in the feeling it would have awaken in you towards he for my sake . " he fervently reply that indeed indeed they would have be . I give he my hand again . " good night , " I say , " good - bye . " " the first until we meet to - morrow , the second as a farewell to this theme between we for ever . " " yes . " " good night ; good - bye . " he leave I , and I stand at the dark window watch the street . he love , in all its constancy and generosity , have come so suddenly upon I that he have not leave I a minute when my fortitude give way again and the street be blot out by my rushing tear . but they be not tear of regret and sorrow . no . he have call I the beloved of he life and have say I would be evermore as dear to he as I be then , and I feel as if my heart would not hold the triumph of have hear those word . my first wild thought have die away . it be not too late to hear they , for it be not too late to be animate by they to be good , true , grateful , and contente . how easy my path , how much easier than he ! I have not the courage to see any one that night . I have not even the courage to see myself , for I be afraid that my tear
tear might a little reproach I . I go up to my room in the dark , and pray in the dark , and lay down in the dark to sleep . I have no need of any light to read my guardian 's letter by , for I know it by heart . I take it from the place where I keep it , and repeat its contents by its own clear light of integrity and love , and go to sleep with it on my pillow . I be up very early in the morning and call to come for a walk . we buy flower for the breakfast - table , and come back and arrange they , and be as busy as possible . we be so early that I have a good time still for 's lesson before breakfast ; ( who be not in the least improve in the old defective article of grammar ) come through it with great applause ; and we be altogether very notable . when my guardian appear he say , " why , little woman , you look fresher than you flower ! " and repeat and translate a passage from the expressive of my be like a mountain with the sun upon it . this be all so pleasant that I hope it make I still more like the mountain than I have be before . after breakfast I wait my opportunity and pee about a little until I see my guardian in he own room -- the room of last night -- by himself . then I make a excuse to go in with my housekeeping key , shutt the door after I . " well , ? " say my guardian ; the post have bring he several letter , and he be write . " you want money ? " " no , indeed , I have plenty in hand . " " there never be such a , " say my guardian , " for make money last . " he have lay down he pen and lean back in he chair look at I . I have often speak of he bright face , but I think I have never see it look so bright and good . there be a high happiness upon it which make I think , " he have be do some great kindness this morning . " " there never be , " say my guardian , muse as he smile upon I , " such a for make money last . " he have never yet alter he old manner . I love it and he so much that when I now go up to he and take my usual chair , which be always put at he side -- for sometimes I read to he , and sometimes I talk to he , and sometimes I silently work by he -- I hardly like to disturb it by lay my hand on he breast . but I find I do not disturb it at all . " dear guardian , " say I , " I want to speak to you . have I be remiss in anything ? " " Remiss in anything , my dear ! " " have I not be what I have mean to be since -- I bring the answer to you letter , guardian ? " " you have be everything I could desire , my love . " " I be very glad indeed to hear that , " I return . " you know , you say to I , be this the mistress of . and I say , yes . " " yes , " say my guardian , nodd he head . he have put he arm about I as if there be something to protect I from and look in my face , smile . " since then , " say I , " we have never speak on the subject except once . " " and then I say be thin fast ; and so it be , my dear . " " and I say , " I timidly remind he , " but its mistress remain . " he still hold I in the same protect manner and with the same bright goodness in he face . " dear guardian , " say I , " I know how you have feel all that have happen , and how considerate you have be . as so much time have pass , and as you speak only this morning of my be so well again , perhaps you expect I to renew the subject . perhaps I ought to do so . I will be the mistress of when you please . " " see , " he return gaily , " what a sympathy there must be between we ! I have have nothing else , poor Rick accept -- it be a large exception -- in my mind . when you come in , I be full of it . when shall we give its mistress , little woman ? " " when you please . " " next month ? " " next month , dear guardian . " " the day on which I take the happiest and best step of my life -- the day on which I shall be a man more exulting and more enviable than any other man in the world -- the day on which I give its little mistress -- shall be next month then , " say my guardian . I put my arm round he neck and kiss he just as I have do on the day when I bring my answer . a servant come to the door to announce , which be quite unnecessary , for be already look in over the servant 's shoulder . "
" and , " say he , rather out of breath , " with all apology for intruding , will you allow I to order up a person that be on the stair and that object to be leave there in case of become the subject of observation in he absence ? thank you . be so good as chair that there member in this direction , will you ? " say , beckon over the banister . this singular request produce a old man in a black skull - cap , unable to walk , who be carry up by a couple of bearer and deposite in the room near the door . immediately get rid of the bearer , mysteriously shut the door , and bolt it . " now you see , , " he then begin , put down he hat and open he subject with a flourish of he well - remember finger , " you know I , and know I . this gentleman likewise know I , and he name be Smallweed . the discounting line be he line principally , and he be what you may call a dealer in bill . that be about what you be , you know , be not you ? " say , stop a little to address the gentleman in question , who be exceedingly suspicious of he . he seem about to dispute this designation of himself when he be seize with a violent fit of coughing . " now , moral , you know ! " say , improve the accident . " do not you contradict when there be not no occasion , and you will not be take in that way . now , , I address myself to you . I have be negotiate with this gentleman on behalf of , , and one way and another I have be in and out and about he premise a deal . he premise be the premise formerly occupy by , marine store dealer -- a relation of this gentleman 's that you see in he lifetime if I do not mistake ? " my guardian reply , " yes . " " well ! you be to understand , " say , " that this gentleman he come into 's property , and a good deal of magpie property there be . vast lot of waste - paper among the rest . bless you , of no use to nobody ! " the cunning of 's eye and the masterly manner in which he contrive , without a look or a word against which he watchful auditor could protest , to let we know that he state the case accord to previous agreement and could say much more of if he think it advisable , deprive we of any merit in quite understand he . he difficulty be increase by 's be deaf as well as suspicious and watch he face with the closest attention . " among they odd heap of old papers , this gentleman , when he come into the property , naturally begin to rummage , do not you see ? " say . " to which ? say that again , " cry in a shrill , sharp voice . " to rummage , " repeat . " be a prudent man and accustom to take care of you own affair , you begin to rummage among the papers as you have come into ; do not you ? " " of course I do , " cry . " of course you do , " say conversationally , " and much to blame you would be if you do not . and so you chance to find , you know , " go on , stoop over he with a air of cheerful raillery which Smallweed by no means reciprocate , " and so you chance to find , you know , a paper with the signature of to it . do not you ? " glance with a troubled eye at we and grudgingly nod assent . " and come to look at that paper at you full leisure and convenience -- all in good time , for you be not curiious to read it , and why should you be ?-- what do you find it to be but a will , you see . that be the drollery of it , " say with the same lively air of recalle a joke for the enjoyment of , who still have the same crest -fallen appearance of not enjoy it at all ; " what do you find it to be but a will ? " " I do not know that it be good as a or as anything else , " snarl . ey the old man for a moment -- he have slipp and shrink down in he chair into a mere bundle -- as if he be much dispose to pounce upon he ; nevertheless , he continue to bend over he with the same agreeable air , keep the corner of one of he eye upon we . " Notwithstand which , " say , " you get a little doubtful and uncomfortable in you mind about it , have a very tender mind of you own . " " Eh ? what do you say I have get of my own ? " ask with he hand to he ear . " a very tender mind . " " ! well , go on , " say . " and as you have hear a good deal mention regard a celebrated Chancery will case of the same name , and as you know what a card be for buy all manner of old piece of furniter , and book , and papers , and what not , and never like to part with 'em , and always a
a - go to teach himself to read , you begin to think -- and you never be more correct in you born day --'Ecod , if I do not look about I , I may get into trouble regarding this will . ' " " now , mind how you put it , , " cry the old man anxiously with he hand at he ear . " speak up ; none of you brimstone trick . pick I up ; I want to hear better . oh , , I be shake to bits ! " have certainly pick he up at a dart . however , as soon as he could be hear through 's coughing and he vicious ejaculation of " oh , my bone ! oh , dear ! I have no breath in my body ! I be worse than the chattering , clatter , brimsto pig at home ! " proceed in the same convivial manner as before . " so , as I happen to be in the habit of come about you premise , you take I into you confidence , do not you ? " I think it would be impossible to make a admission with more ill will and a worse grace than display when he admit this , render it perfectly evident that be the very last person he would have think of take into he confidence if he could by any possibility have keep he out of it . " and I go into the business with you -- very pleasant we be over it ; and I confirm you in you well - foun fear that you will get yourself into a most precious line if you do not come out with that there will , " say emphatically ; " and accordingly you arrange with I that it shall be deliver up to this present , on no condition . if it should prove to be valuable , you trust yourself to he for you reward ; that be about where it be , be not it ? " " that be what be agree , " assent with the same bad grace . " in consequence of which , " say , dismiss he agreeable manner all at once and become strictly business - like , " you have get that will upon you person at the present time , and the only thing that remain for you to do be just to out with it ! " have give we one glance out of the watch corner of he eye , and have give he nose one triumphant rub with he forefinger , stand with he eye fasten on he confidential friend and he hand stretch forth ready to take the paper and present it to my guardian . it be not produce without much reluctance and many declaration on the part of Smallweed that he be a poor industrious man and that he leave it to 's honour not to let he lose by he honesty . little by little he very slowly take from a breast - pocket a stain , discoloure paper which be much singe upon the outside and a little burnt at the edge , as if it have long ago be throw upon a fire and hastily snatch off again . lose no time in transfer this paper , with the dexterity of a conjuror , from to . as he give it to my guardian , he whisper behind he finger , " have not settle how to make they market of it . Quarrell and hint about it . I lay out twenty pound upon it . first the avaricious grandchild split upon he on account of they objection to he living so unreasonably long , and then they split on one another . ! there be not one of the family that would not sell the other for a pound or two , except the old lady -- and she be only out of it because she be too weak in she mind to drive a bargain . " " , " say my guardian aloud , " whatever the worth of this paper may be to any one , my obligation be great to you ; and if it be of any worth , I hold myself bound to see remunerate accordingly . " " not accord to you merit , you know , " say in friendly explanation to . " do not you be afraid of that . accord to its value . " " that be what I mean , " say my guardian . " you may observe , , that I abstain from examine this paper myself . the plain truth be , I have forswear and abjure the whole business these many year , and my soul be sick of it . but and I will immediately place the paper in the hand of my solicitor in the cause , and its existence shall be make know without delay to all other party interested . " " can not say fairer than that , you understand , " observe to he fellow - visitor . " and it be now make clear to you that nobody be a - go to be wronge -- which must be a great relief to you mind -- we may proceed with the ceremony of chair you home again . " he unbolt the door , call in the bearer , wish we good morning , and with a look full of meaning and a crook of he finger at parting go he way . we go we way too , which be to 's , as quickly as possible . be disengage , and we find he at he table in he dusty room with the inexpressive - look book and the pile of papers . chair have be place for
for we by , express the surprise and gratification he feel at the unusual sight of in he office . he turn over he double eye - glass as he speak and be more than ever . " I hope , " say , " that the genial influence of , " he bow to I , " may have induce , " he bow to he , " to forego some little of he animosity towards a cause and towards a court which be -- shall I say , which take they place in the stately vista of the pillars of we profession ? " " I be inclin to think , " return my guardian , " that have see too much of the effect of the court and the cause to exert any influence in they favour . nevertheless , they be a part of the occasion of my be here . , before I lay this paper on you desk and have do with it , let I tell you how it have come into my hand . " he do so shortly and distinctly . " it could not , sir , " say , " have be state more plainly and to the purpose if it have be a case at law . " " do you ever know law , or equity either , plain and to the purpose ? " say my guardian . " oh , fie ! " say . at first he have not seem to attach much importance to the paper , but when he see it he appear more interested , and when he have open and read a little of it through he eye - glass , he become amazed . " , " he say , look off it , " you have peruse this ? " " not I ! " return my guardian . " but , my dear sir , " say , " it be a will of later date than any in the suit . it appear to be all in the testator 's handwriting . it be duly execute and attest . and even if intend to be cancel , as might possibly be suppose to be denote by these mark of fire , it be not cancel . here it be , a perfect instrument ! " " well ! " say my guardian . " what be that to I ? " " ! " cry , raise he voice . " I beg you pardon , . " " . " " of 's . my compliment . and . glad to speak with he . " disappear . " you ask I what be this to you , . if you have peruse this document , you would have see that it reduce you interest considerably , though still leave it a very handsome one , still leave it a very handsome one , " say , wave he hand persuasively and blandly . " you would further have see that the interests of and of , now , be very materially advanced by it . " " , " say my guardian , " if all the flourish wealth that the suit bring into this vile court of Chancery could fall to my two young cousins , I should be well contente . but do you ask I to believe that any good be to come of and ? " " oh , really , ! prejudice , prejudice . my dear sir , this be a very great country , a very great country . it be system of equity be a very great system , a very great system . really , really ! " my guardian say no more , and arrive . he be modestly impress by 's professional eminence . " how do you do , ? will you be so good as to take a chair here by I and look over this paper ? " do as he be ask and seem to read it every word . he be not accit by it , but he be not excit by anything . when he have well examine it , he retire with into a window , and shade he mouth with he black glove , speak to he at some length . I be not surprise to observe inclin to dispute what he say before he have say much , for I know that no two people ever do agree about anything in and . but he seem to get the better of too in a conversation that sound as if it be almost compose of the word " receiver - General , " " accountant - General , " " report , " " estate , " and " cost . " when they have finish , they come back to 's table and spoke aloud . " well ! but this be a very remarkable document , , " say . Vholes say , " very much so . " " and a very important document , , " say . again say , " very much so . " " and as you say , , when the cause be in the paper next term , this document will be a unexpected and interesting feature in it , " say , look loftily at my guardian . be gratify , as a smaller practitioner strive to keep respectable , to be confirm in any opinion of he own by such a authority . " and when , " ask my guardian , rise after a pause , during which have rattle he money and have pick he pimple , " when be next term ? " " next term , , will be next month , " say . " of course we shall at once proceed to do what be necessary with this
this document and to collect the necessary evidence concern it ; and of course you will receive we usual notification of the cause be in the paper . " " to which I shall pay , of course , my usual attention . " " , my dear sir , " say , show we through the outer office to the door , " still bent , even with you enlarged mind , on echo a popular prejudice ? we be a prosperous community , , a very prosperous community . we be a great country , , we be a very great country . this be a great system , , and would you wish a great country to have a little system ? now , really , really ! " he say this at the stair - head , gently move he right hand as if it be a silver trowel with which to spread the cement of he word on the structure of the system and consolidate it for a thousand age . and 's be to let , and the stock be sell off , and himself be at attend on in he ride and ride very near he bridle - rein because of the uncertain hand with which he guide he horse . but not to - day be so occupy . he be journey to - day into the iron country farther north to look about he . as he come into the iron country farther north , such fresh green wood as those of be leave behind ; and coal pit and ash , high chimney and red brick , blighted verdure , scorching fire , and a heavy never - lighten cloud of smoke become the feature of the scenery . among such object rides the trooper , look about he and always look for something he have come to find . at last , on the black canal bridge of a busy town , with a clang of iron in it , and more fir and more smoke than he have see yet , the trooper , swart with the dust of the coal roads , check he horse and ask a workman do he know the name of thereabout . " why , master , " quoth the workman , " do I know my own name ? " " ' so well know here , be it , comrade ? " ask the trooper . " 's ? ah ! you be right . " " and where might it be now ? " ask the trooper with a glance before he . " the bank , the factory , or the house ? " the workman want to know . " Hum ! 's be so great apparently , " mutter the trooper , strok he ching , " that I have as good as half a mind to go back again . why , I do not know which i want . should I find at the factory , do you think ? " " Tbe not easy to say where you would find he -- at this time of the day you might find either he or he son there , if he be in town ; but he contract take he away . " and which be the factory ? why , he see those chimney -- the tallest one ! yes , he see they . well ! let he keep he eye on those chimney , go on as straight as ever he can , and presently he will see th'ey down a turning on the left , shut in by a great brick wall which form one side of the street . that be 's . the trooper thanks he informant and ride slowly on , look about he . he do not turn back , but put up he horse ( and be much disposed to groom he too ) at a public - house where some of 's hand be dining , as the ostler tell he . some of 's hand have just knock off for dinner - time and seem to be invade the whole town . they be very sinewy and strong , be 's hand -- a little sooty too . he come to a gateway in the brick wall , look in , and see a great perplexity of iron lie about in every stage and in a vast variety of shape -- in bar , in wedge , in sheet ; in tank , in boiler , in axle , in wheel , in cog , in crank , in rail ; twiste and wrench into eccentric and perverse form as separate part of machinery ; mountain of it break up , and rusty in its age ; distant furnace of it glow and bubbl in its youth ; bright firework of it shower about under the blow of the steam - hammer ; red - hot iron , white - hot iron , cold - black iron ; a iron taste , a iron smell , and a Babel of iron sound . " this be a place to make a man 's head aco too ! " say the trooper , look about he for a counting - house . " who come here ? this be very like I before I be set up . this ought to be my nephew , if likeness run in family . you servant , sir . " " yours , sir . be you look for any one ? " " excuse I . yong , I believe ? " " yes . " " I be look for you father , sir . I wish to have a word with he . " the young man , tell he he be fortunate in he choice of a time , for he father be there
there , lead the way to the office where he be to be find . " very like I before I be set up -- devilish like I ! " think the trooper as he follow . they come to a building in the yard with a office on a upper floor . at sight of the gentleman in the office , turn very red . " what name shall I say to my father ? " ask the young man . , full of the idea of iron , in desperation answer " Steel , " and be so presented . he be leave alone with the gentleman in the office , who sit at a table with account - book before he and some sheet of paper blot with host of figure and drawing of cunning shape . it be a bare office , with bare window , look on the iron view below . Tumble together on the table be some piece of iron , purposely break to be test at various period of they service , in various capacity . there be iron - dust on everything ; and the smoke be see through the window roll heavily out of the tall chimney to mingle with the smoke from a vaporous Babylon of other chimney . " I be at you service , , " say the gentleman when he visitor have take a rusty chair . " well , , " reply , lean forward with he left arm on he knee and he hat in he hand , and very chary of meet he brother 's eye , " I be not without my expectation that in the present visit I may prove to be more free than welcome . I have serve as a dragoon in my day , and a comrade of mine that I be once rather partial to be , if I do not deceive myself , a brother of yours . I believe you have a brother who give he family some trouble , and run away , and never do any good but in keep away ? " " be you quite sure , " return the ironmaster in a altered voice , " that you name be Steel ? " the trooper falter and look at he . he brother start up , call he by he name , and grasp he by both hand . " you be too quick for I ! " cry the trooper with the tear spring out of he eye . " how do you do , my dear old fellow ? I never could have think you would have be half so glad to see I as all this . how do you do , my dear old fellow , how do you do ! " they shake hand and embrace each other over and over again , the trooper still couple he " how do you do , my dear old fellow ! " with he protestation that he never think he brother would have be half so glad to see he as all this ! " so far from it , " he declare at the end of a full account of what have proceed he arrival there , " I have very little idea of make myself know . I think if you take by any means forgivingly to my name I might gradually get myself up to the point of writing a letter . but I should not have be surprised , brother , if you have consider it anything but welcome news to hear of I . " " we will show you at home what kind of news we think it , , " return he brother . " this be a great day at home , and you could not have arrive , you bronz old soldier , on a better . I make a agreement with my son to - day that on this day twelvemonth he shall marry as pretty and as good a girl as you have see in all you travels . she go to Germany to - morrow with one of you niece for a little polishing up in she education . we make a feast of the event , and you will be make the hero of it . " be so entirely overcome at first by this prospect that he resist the propose honour with great earnestness . be overborne , however , by he brother and he nephew -- concern whom he renew he protestation that he never could have think they would have be half so glad to see he -- he be take home to a elegant house in all the arrangement of which there be to be observe a pleasant mixture of the originally simple habits of the father and mother with such a be suit to they altered station and the higher fortune of they child . here be much dismay by the graces and accomplishment of he niece that be and by the beauty of , he niece that be to be , and by the affectionate salutation of these young lady , which he receive in a sort of dream . he be sorely take aback , too , by the dutiful behaviour of he nephew and have a woeful consciousness upon he of be a scapegrace . however , there be great rejoicing and a very hearty company and infinite enjoyment , and come bluff and martial through it all , and he pledge to be present at the marriage and give away the bride be receive with universal favour . a whirling head have that night when he lie down in the state - bed of he brother 's house to think of all these thing and to see the image of he niece ( awful all the evening in they float muslin ) waltze , after the
the german manner , over he counterpane . the brother be closet next morning in the ironmaster 's room , where the elder be proceed , in he clear sensible way , to show how he think he may best dispose of in he business , when squeeze he hand and stop he . " brother , I thank you a million time for you more than brotherly welcome , and a million time more to that for you more than brotherly intention . but my plan be make . before I say a word as to they , I wish to consult you upon one family point . how , " say the trooper , fold he arm and look with indomitable firmness at he brother , " how be my mother to be get to scratch I ? " " I be not sure that I understand you , , " reply the ironmaster . " I say , brother , how be my mother to be get to scratch I ? she must be get to do it somehow . " " scratch you out of she will , I think you mean ? " " of course I do . in short , " say the trooper , fold he arm more resolutely yet , " I mean -- to -- scratch I ! " " my dear , " return he brother , " be it so indispensable that you should undergo that process ? " " quite ! absolutely ! I could not be guilty of the meanness of come back without it . I should never be safe not to be off again . I have not sneak home to rob you child , if not yourself , brother , of you rights . I , who forfeit mine long ago ! if I be to remain and hold up my head , I must be scratch . come . you be a man of celebrated penetration and intelligence , and you can tell I how it be to be bring about . " " I can tell you , , " reply the ironmaster deliberately , " how it be not to be bring about , which I hope may answer the purpose as well . look at we mother , think of she , recall she emotion when she recover you . do you believe there be a consideration in the world that would induce she to take such a step against she favourite son ? do you believe there be any chance of she consent , to balance against the outrage it would be to she ( love dear old lady ! ) to propose it ? if you do , you be wrong . no , ! you must make up you mind to remain UNscratched , I think . " there be a amused smile on the ironmaster 's face as he watch he brother , who be ponder , deeply disappoint . " I think you may manage almost as well as if the thing be do , though . " " how , brother ? " " be bend upon it , you can dispose by will of anything you have the misfortune to inherit in any way you like , you know . " " that be true ! " say the trooper , ponder again . then he wistfully ask , with he hand on he brother 's , " would you mind mention that , brother , to you wife and family ? " " not at all . " " thank you . you would not object to say , perhaps , that although a undoubted vagabond , I be a vagabond of the harum -scarum order , and not of the mean sort ? " the ironmaster , repress he amused smile , assent . " thank you . thank you . it be a weight off my mind , " say the trooper with a heave of he chest as he unfold he arm and put a hand on each leg , " though I have set my heart on be scratch , too ! " the brother be very like each other , sit face to face ; but a certain massive simplicity and absence of usage in the way of the world be all on the trooper 's side . " well , " he proceed , throw off he disappointment , " next and last , those plan of mine . you have be so brotherly as to propose to I to fall in here and take my place among the product of you perseverance and sense . I thank you heartily . it be more than brotherly , as I say before , and I thank you heartily for it , " shak he a long time by the hand . " but the truth be , brother , I be a -- I be a kind of a weed , and it be too late to plant I in a regular garden . " " my dear , " return the elder , concentrate he strong steady brow upon he and smile confidently , " leave that to I , and let I try . " shake he head . " you could do it , I have not a doubt , if anybody could ; but it be not to be do . not to be do , sy ! whereas it so fall out , on the other hand , that I be able to be of some trifle of use to since he illness -- bring on by family sorrow -- and that he would rather have that help from we mother 's son than from anybody else . " " well , my dear , " return the other with a very slight shade upon he open face , " if you
you prefer to serve in 's household brigade -- " " there it be , brother , " cry the trooper , check he , with he hand upon he knee again ; " there it be ! you do not take kindly to that idea ; I do not mind it . you be not use to be office ; I be . everything about you be in perfect order and discipline ; everything about I require to be keep so . we be not accustom to carry thing with the same hand or to look at 'em from the same point . I do not say much about my garrison manners because I find myself pretty well at my ease last night , and they would not be notice here , I dare say , once and away . but I shall get on best at , where there be more room for a weed than there be here ; and the dear old lady will be make happy beside . therefore I accept of 's proposal . when I come over next year to give away the bride , or whenever I come , I shall have the sense to keep the household brigade in ambuscade and not to manoeuvre it on you ground . I thank you heartily again and be proud to think of the Rouncewell as they will be found by you . " " you know yourself , , " say the elder brother , return the grip of he hand , " and perhaps you know I better than I know myself . take you way . so that we do not quite lose one another again , take you way . " " no fear of that ! " return the trooper . " now , before I turn my horse 's head homeward , brother , I will ask you -- if you will be so good -- to look over a letter for I . I bring it with I to send from these part , as might be a painful name just now to the person it be write to . I be not much accustom to correspondence myself , and I be particular respect this present letter because I want it to be both straightforward and delicate . " herewith he hand a letter , closely write in somewhat pale ink but in a neat round hand , to the ironmaster , who read as follow : , a communication have be make to I by of a letter to myself be find among the papers of a certain person , I take the liberty to make know to you that it be but a few line of instruction from abroad , when , where , and how to deliver a enclose letter to a young and beautiful lady , then unmarried , in . I duly observ the same . I further take the liberty to make know to you that it be get from I as a proof of handwriting only and that otherwise I would not have give it up , as appear to be the most harmless in my possession , without be previously shoot through the heart . I further take the liberty to mention that if I could have suppose a certain unfortunate gentleman to have be in existence , I never could and never would have rest until I have discover he retreat and share my last farthing with he , as my duty and my inclination would have equally be . but he be ( officially ) report drown , and assuredly go over the side of a transport - ship at night in a irish harbour within a few hour of she arrival from the , as I have myself hear both from officer and man on board , and know to have be ( officially ) confirm . I further take the liberty to state that in my humble quality as one of the rank and file , I be , and shall ever continue to be , you thoroughly devote and admir servant and that I esteem the quality you possess above all other far beyond the limit of the present dispatch . I have the honour to be , " a little formal , " observe the elder brother , refold it with a puzzl face . " but nothing that might not be send to a pattern young lady ? " ask the younger . " nothing at all . " therefore it be seal and deposit for post among the iron correspondence of the day . this do , take a hearty farewell of the family party and prepare to saddle and mount . he brother , however , unwill to part with he so soon , propose to ride with he in a light open carriage to the place where he will bait for the night , and there remain with he until morning , a servant riding for so much of the journey on the thoroughbred old grey from . the offer , be gladly accept , be follow by a pleasant ride , a pleasant dinner , and a pleasant breakfast , all in brotherly communion . then they once more shake hand long and heartily and part , the ironmaster turn he face to the smoke and fire , and the trooper to the green country . Early in the afternoon the subdue sound of he heavy military trot be hear on the turf in the avenue as he ride on with imaginary clank and jingle of accoutrement under the old elm - tree . 's after I have that convertion with my guardian , he put a seal paper in my hand one morning and say , " this be for next month , my dear . " I find in it two hundred pound . I now begin
begin very quietly to make such preparations as I think be necessary . Regulat my purchase by my guardian 's taste , which I know very well of course , I arrange my wardrobe to please he and hope I should be highly successful . I do it all so quietly because I be not quite free from my old apprehension that would be rather sorry and because my guardian be so quiet himself . I have no doubt that under all the circumstance we should be marry in the most private and simple manner . perhaps I should only have to say to , " would you like to come and see I marry to - morrow , my pet ? " perhaps we wedding might even be as unpretending as she own , and I might not find it necessary to say anything about it until it be over . I think that if I be to choose , I would like this best . the only exception I make be . I tell she that I be go to be marry to my guardian and that we have be engage some time . she highly approve . she could never do enough for I and be remarkably soften now in comparison with what she have be when we first know she . there be no trouble she would not have take to have be of use to I , but I need hardly say that I only allow she to take as little as gratify she kindness without taske it . of course this be not a time to neglect my guardian , and of course it be not a time for neglect my darling . so I have plenty of occupation , which I be glad of ; and as to , she be absolutely not to be see for needlework . to surround herself with great heap of it -- basket full and table full -- and do a little , and spend a great deal of time in staring with she round eye at what there be to do , and persuade herself that she be go to do it , be 's great dignity and delight . meanwhile , I must say , I could not agree with my guardian on the subject of the will , and I have some sanguine hope of and . which of we be right will soon appear , but I certainly do encourage expectation . in , the discovery give occasion for a burst of business and agitation that buoy he up for a little time , but he have lose the elasticity even of hope now and seem to I to retain only its feverish anxiety . from something my guardian say one day when we be talk about this , I understand that my marriage would not take place until after the term - time we have be tell to look forward to ; and I think the more , for that , how rejoice I should be if I could be marry when and be a little more prosperous . the term be very near indeed when my guardian be call out of town and go down into on 's business . he have tell I beforehand that he presence there would be necessary . I have just come in one night from my dear girl 's and be sit in the midst of all my new clothes , look at they all around I and think , when a letter from my guardian be bring to I . it ask I to join he in the country and mention by what stage - coach my place be take and at what time in the morning I should have to leave town . it add in a postscript that I would not be many hour from . I expect few thing less than a journey at that time , but I be ready for it in half a hour and set off as appoint early next morning . I travel all day , wonder all day what I could be want for at such a distance ; now I think it might be for this purpose , and now I think it might be for that purpose , but I be never , never , never near the truth . it be night when I come to my journey 's end and find my guardian wait for I . this be a great relief , for towards evening I have begin to fear ( the more so as he letter be a very short one ) that he might be ill . however , there he be , as well as it be possible to be ; and when I see he genial face again at its brightest and best , I say to myself , he have be do some other great kindness . not that it require much penetration to say that , because I know that he be there at all be a act of kindness . be ready at the hotel , and when we be alone at table he say , " full of curiosity , no doubt , little woman , to know why I have bring you here ? " " well , guardian , " say I , " without think myself a or you a , I be a little curiious about it . " " then to ensure you night 's rest , my love , " he return gaily , " I will not wait until to - morrow to tell you . I have very much wished to express to , somehow , my sense of he humanity to poor unfortunate , he inestimable service to my young cousins , and he value to we all . when it be decide that he should settle here , it come into my head
head that I might ask he acceptance of some unpretending and suitable little place to lay he own head in . I therefore cause such a place to be look out for , and such a place be find on very easy term , and I have be touch it up for he and make it habitable . however , when I walk over it the day before yesterday and it be report ready , I find that I be not housekeeper enough to know whether thing be all as they ought to be . so I send off for the best little housekeeper that could possibly be get to come and give I she advice and opinion . and here she be , " say my guardian , " laugh and cry both together ! " because he be so dear , so good , so admirable . I try to tell he what I think of he , but I could not articulate a word . " Tut , tut ! " say my guardian . " you make too much of it , little woman . why , how you sob , , how you sob ! " " it be with exquisite pleasure , guardian -- with a heart full of thanks . " " well , well , " say he . " I be delight that you approve . I think you would . I mean it as a pleasant surprise for the little mistress of . " I kiss he and dry my eye . " I know now ! " say I . " I have see this in you face a long while . " " no ; have you really , my dear ? " say he . " what a it be to read a face ! " he be so quaintly cheerful that I could not long be otherwise , and be almost ashamed of have be otherwise at all . when I go to bed , I cry . I be bound to confess that I cry ; but I hope it be with pleasure , though I be not quite sure it be with pleasure . I repeat every word of the letter twice over . a most beautiful summer morning succeed , and after breakfast we go out arm in arm to see the house of which I be to give my mighty housekeeping opinion . we enter a flower - garden by a gate in a side wall , of which he have the key , and the first thing I see be that the bed and flower be all laid out accord to the manner of my bed and flower at home . " you see , my dear , " observe my guardian , stand still with a delighted face to watch my look , " know there could be no better plan , I borrowed yours . " we go on by a pretty little orchard , where the cherry be nestle among the green leave and the shadow of the apple - tree be sport on the grass , to the house itself -- a cottage , quite a rustic cottage of doll 's room ; but such a lovely place , so tranquil and so beautiful , with such a rich and smile country spread around it ; with water sparkl away into the distance , here all overhng with summer - growth , there turn a hum mill ; at its nearest point glance through a meadow by the cheerful town , where cricket - player be assemble in bright group and a flag be fly from a white tent that ripple in the sweet west wind . and still , as we go through the pretty room , out at the little rustic verandah door , and underneath the tiny wooden colonnade garland with woodbine , jasmine , and honey - suckle , I see in the papering on the wall , in the colour of the furniture , in the arrangement of all the pretty object , my little taste and fancie , my little methods and invention which they use to laugh at while they praise they , my odd way everywhere . I could not say enough in admiration of what be all so beautiful , but one secret doubt arise in my mind when I see this , I think , oh , would he be the happier for it ! would it not have be better for he peace that I should not have be so bring before he ? because although I be not what he think I , still he love I very dearly , and it might remind he mournfully of what be believe he have lose . I do not wish he to forget I -- perhaps he might not have do so , without these aids to he memory -- but my way be easier than he , and I could have reconcile myself even to that so that he have be the happier for it . " and now , little woman , " say my guardian , whom I have never see so proud and joyful as in show I these thing and watch my appreciation of they , " now , last of all , for the name of this house . " " what be it call , dear guardian ? " " my child , " say he , " come and see , " he take I to the porch , which he have hithertoo avoided , and say , pause before we go out , " my dear child , do not you guess the name ? " " no ! " say I . we go out of the porch and he show I write over it , . he lead I to a seat among the leave close by
by , and sit down beside I and take my hand in he , speak to I thus , " my darling girl , in what there have be between we , I have , I hope , be really solicitous for you happiness . when I write you the letter to which you bring the answer , " smile as he refer to it , " I have my own too much in view ; but I have yours too . whether , under different circumstance , I might ever have renew the old dream I sometimes dream when you be very young , of make you my wife one day , I need not ask myself . I do renew it , and I write my letter , and you bring you answer . you be follow what I say , my child ? " I be cold , and I tremble violently , but not a word he uttere be lose . as I sit look fixedly at he and the sun 's ray descende , softly shine through the leaf upon he bare head , I feel as if the brightness on he must be like the brightness of the angel . " hear I , my love , but do not speak . it be for I to speak now . when it be that I begin to doubt whether what I have do would really make you happy be no matter . come home , and I soon have no doubt at all . " I clasp he round the neck and hang my head upon he breast and wept . " lie lightly , confidently here , my child , " say he , press I gently to he . " I be you guardian and you father now . rest confidently here . " Soothingly , like the genle rustling of the leave ; and genially , like the ripening weather ; and radiantly and beneficently , like the sunshine , he go on . " understand I , my dear girl . I have no doubt of you be contented and happy with I , be so dutiful and so devoted ; but I see with whom you would be happier . that I penetrate he secret when be blind to it be no wonder , for I know the good that could never change in she better far than she do . well ! I have long be in 's confidence , although he be not , until yesterday , a few hour before you come here , in mine . but I would not have my 's bright example lose ; I would not have a jot of my dear girl 's virtue unobserved and unhonoured ; I would not have she admit on sufferance into the line of ap - , no , not for the weight in gold of all the mountain in Wales ! " he stop to kiss I on the forehead , and I sob and weep afresh . for I feel as if I could not bear the painful delight of he praise . " Hush , little woman ! do not cry ; this be to be a day of joy . I have look forward to it , " he say exultingly , " for month on month ! a few word more , , and I have say my say . Determine not to throw away one atom of my 's worth , I take into a separate confidence . ' now , madam , ' say I , ' I clearly perceive -- and indeed I know , to boot -- that you son love my ward . I be further very sure that my ward love you son , but will sacrifice she love to a sense of duty and affection , and will sacrifice it so completely , so entirely , so religiously , that you should never suspect it though you watch she night and day . ' then I tell she all we story -- ours -- yours and mine . ' now , madam , ' say I , ' come you , know this , and live with we . come you , and see my child from hour to hour ; set what you see against she pedigree , which be this , and this '-- for I scorn to mince it -- 'and tell I what be the true legitimacy when you shall have quite make up you mind on that subject . ' why , honour to she old blood , my dear , " cry my guardian with enthusiasm , " I believe the heart it animate beat no less warmly , no less admiringly , no less lovingly , towards than my own ! " he tenderly raise my head , and as I cling to he , kiss I in he old fatherly way again and again . what a light , now , on the protecte manner I have think about ! " one more last word . when speak to you , my dear , he speak with my knowledge and consent -- but I give he no encouragement , not I , for these surprise be my great reward , and I be too miserly to part with a scrap of it . he be to come and tell I all that pass , and he do . I have no more to say . my dearest , stand beside you father when he lay dead -- stand beside you mother . this be . this day I give this house its little mistress ; and before , it be the brightest day in all my life ! " he rise and raise I with he . we be no longer alone . my husband -- I have call he by that name full seven
seven happy year now -- stand at my side . " , " say my guardian , " take from I a willing gift , the best wife that ever man have . what more can I say for you than that I know you deserve she ! take with she the little home she bring you . you know what she will make it , ; you know what she have make it be nameake . let I share its felicity sometimes , and what do I sacrifice ? nothing , nothing . " he kiss I once again , and now the tear be in he eye as he say more softly , " , my dearest , after so many year , there be a kind of part in this too . I know that my mistake have cause you some distress . forgive you old guardian , in restore he to he old place in you affections ; and blot it out of you memory . Allan , take my dear . " he move away from under the green roof of leave , and stop in the sunlight outside and turn cheerfully towards we , say , " I shall be find about here somewhere . it be a west wind , little woman , due west ! let no one thank I any more , for I be go to revert to my bachelor habit , and if anybody disregard this warning , I will run away and never come back ! " what happiness be ours that day , what joy , what rest , what hope , what gratitude , what bliss ! we be to be marry before the month be out , but when we be to come and take possession of we own house be to depend on and . we all three go home together next day . as soon as we arrive in town , go straight to see and to carry we joyful news to he and my darling . late as it be , I mean to go to she for a few minute before lie down to sleep , but I go home with my guardian first to make he tea for he and to occupy the old chair by he side , for I do not like to think of its be empty so soon . when we come home we find that a young man have call three time in the course of that one day to see I and that have be tell on the occasion of he third call that I be not expect to return before ten o'clock at night , he have left word that he would call about then . he have leave he card three time . . as I naturally speculate on the object of these visit , and as I always associate something ludicrous with the visitor , it fall out that in laugh about I tell my guardian of he old proposal and he subsequent retraction . " after that , " say my guardian , " we will certainly receive this hero . " so instructions be give that should be show in when he come again , and they be scarcely give when he do come again . he be embarrass when he find my guardian with I , but recover himself and say , " how de do , sy ? " " how do you do , sy ? " return my guardian . " thank you , sir , I be tolerable , " return . " will you allow I to introduce my mother , Guppy of the , and my particular friend , . that be to say , my friend have go by the name of , but he name be really and truly Jobling . " my guardian beg they to be seat , and they all sit down . " , " say to he friend after a awkward silence . " will you open the case ? " " do it yourself , " return the friend rather tartly . " well , , sir , " , after a moment 's consideration , begin , to the great diversion of he mother , which she display by nudging with she elbow and wink at I in a most remarkable manner , " I have a idea that I should see by herself and be not quite prepare for you esteemed presence . but have mention to you , perhaps , that something have pass between we on former occasion ? " " , " return my guardian , smile , " have make a communication to that effect to I . " " that , " say , " make matter easier . , I have come out of my article at and , and I believe with satisfaction to all party . I be now admit ( after undergo a examination that be enough to badger a man blue , touch a pack of nonsense that he do not want to know ) on the roll of attorney and have take out my certificate , if it would be any satisfaction to you to see it . " " thank you , , " return my guardian . " I be quite willing -- I believe I use a legal phrase -- to admit the certificate . " therefore desiste from take something out of he pocket and proceed without it . " I have no capital myself , but my mother have a little property which take the form of a annuity " -- here 's mother roll she head as if she never could sufficiently enjoy the observation , and put she handkerchief to she mouth , and again wink at I -- " and a few pound for expense out of pocket in conducting business will never be
be want , free of interest , which be a advantage , you know , " say feelingly . " certainly a advantage , " return my guardian . " I have some connexion , " pursue , " and it lay in the direction of , . I have therefore take a ' ouse in that locality , which , in the opinion of my friend , be a hollow bargain ( tax ridiculous , and use of fixture include in the rent ) , and intend set up professionally for myself there forthwith . " here 's mother fall into a extraordinary passion of roll she head and smile waggishly at anybody who would look at she . " it be a six - roomer , exclusive of kitchens , " say , " and in the opinion of my friend , a commodious tenement . when I mention my friend , I refer principally to my friend , who I believe have know I , " look at he with a sentimental air , " from boyhood 's hour . " confirm this with a slide movement of he leg . " my friend Jobling will render I he assistance in the capacity of clerk and will live in the ' ouse , " say . " my mother will likewise live in the ' ouse when she present quarter in the shall have cease and expire ; and consequently there will be no want off society . my friend Jobling be naturally aristocratic by taste , and besides be acquaint with the movement of the upper circle , fully back I in the intention I be now develope . " say " certainly " and withdraw a little from the elbow of 's mother . " now , I have no occasion to mention to you , sir , you be in the confidence of , " say , " ( mother , I wish you would be so good as to keep still ) , that 's image be formerly imprinted on my ' eart and that i make she a proposal of marriage . " " that I have hear , " return my guardian . " circumstance , " pursue , " over which i have no control , but quite the contrary , weaken the impression of that image for a time . at which time 's conduct be highly genteel ; I may even add , magnanimous . " my guardian patt I on the shoulder and see much amused . " now , sir , " say , " I have get into that state of mind myself that I wish for a reciprocity of magnanimous behaviour . I wish to prove to that I can rise to a heighth of which perhaps she hardly think I capable . I find that the image which I do suppose have be eradicate from my ' eart be not eradicate . it be influence over I be still tremenjous , and yield to it , I be willing to overlook the circumstance over which none of we have have any control and to renew those proposal to which I have the honour to make at a former period . I beg to lay the ' ouse in , the business , and myself before for she acceptance . " " very magnanimous indeed , sir , " observ my guardian . " well , sir , " reply with candour , " my wish be to be magnanimous . I do not consider that in make this offer to I be by any means throw myself away ; neither be that the opinion of my friend . still , there be circumstance which I submit may be take into account as a set off against any little drawback of mine , and so a fair and equitable balance arrive at . " " I take upon myself , sir , " say my guardian , laugh as he ring the bell , " to reply to you proposal on behalf of . she be very sensible of you handsome intentions , and wish you good evening , and wish you well . " " oh ! " say with a blank look . " be that tantamount , sir , to acceptance , or rejection , or consideration ? " " to decide rejection , if you please , " return my guardian . look incredulously at he friend , and at he mother , who suddenly turn very angry , and at the floor , and at the ceiling . " indeed ? " say he . " then , , if you be the friend you represent yourself , I should think you might hand my mother out of the gangway instead of allow she to remain where she be not want . " but positively refuse to come out of the gangway . she would not hear of it . " why , get along with you , " say she to my guardian , " what do you mean ? be not my son good enough for you ? you ought to be asham of yourself . get out with you ! " " my good lady , " return my guardian , " it be hardly reasonable to ask I to get out of my own room . " " I do not care for that , " say . " get out with you . if we be not good enough for you , go and procure somebody that be good enough . go along and find th'ey . " I be quite unprepared for the rapid manner in which 's power of jocularity merge into a power of take the profoundest offence . " go along and find somebody that be good enough for you , " repeat . " get out ! " nothing seem
seem to astonish 's mother so much and to make she so very indignant as we not get out . " why do not you get out ? " say . " what be you stop here for ? " " mother , " interpose she son , always get before she and push she back with one shoulder as she sidle at my guardian , " will you hold you tongue ? " " no , , " she return , " I will not ! not unless he get out , I will not ! " however , and together close on 's mother ( who begin to be quite abusive ) and take she , very much against she will , downstairs , she voice rise a stair higher every time she figure get a stair lower , and insist that we should immediately go and find somebody who be good enough for we , and above all thing that we should get out . begin the the term have commence , and my guardian find a intimation from that the cause would come on in two day . as I have sufficient hope of the will to be in a flutter about it , and I agree to go down to the court that morning . be extremely agitated and be so weak and low , though he illness be still of the mind , that my dear girl indeed have sore occasion to be support . but she look forward -- a very little way now -- to the help that be to come to she , and never droop . it be at that the cause be to come on . it have come on there , I dare say , a hundred time before , but I could not divest myself of a idea that it might lead to some result now . we leave home directly after breakfast to be at in good time and walk down there through the lively street -- so happily and strangely it seem !--together . as we be go along , plan what we should do for and , I hear somebody call " ! my dear Esther ! ! " and there be , with she head out of the window of a little carriage which she hire now to go about in to she pupil ( she have so many ) , as if she want to embrace I at a hundred yard ' distance . I have write she a note to tell she of all that my guardian have do , but have not have a moment to go and see she . of course we turn back , and the affectionate girl be in that state of rapture , and be so overjoyed to talk about the night when she bring I the flower , and be so determined to squeeze my face ( bonnet and all ) between she hand , and go on in a wild manner altogether , call I all kind of precious name , and tell I have do I do not know what for she , that I be just oblige to get into the little carriage and calm she down by letting she say and do exactly what she like . Allan , stand at the window , be as pleased as ; and I be as pleased as either of they ; and I wonder that I get away as I do , rather than that I come off laughing , and red , and anything but tidy , and look after , who look after we out of the coach - window as long as she could see we . this make we some quarter of a hour late , and when we come to we find that the day 's business be begin . worse than that , we find such a unusual crowd in the of that it be full to the door , and we could neither see nor hear what be pass within . it appear to be something droll , for occasionally there be a laugh and a cry of " Silence ! " it appear to be something interesting , for every one be push and strive to get nearer . it appear to be something that make the professional gentleman very merry , for there be several young counsellor in wig and whisker on the outside of the crowd , and when one of they tell the other about it , they put they hand in they pocket , and quite double themselves up with laughter , and go stamp about the pavement of the Hall . we ask a gentleman by we if he know what cause be on . he tell we and . we ask he if he know what be do in it . he say really , no he do not , nobody ever do , but as well as he could make out , it be over . over for the day ? we ask he . no , he say , over for good . over for good ! when we hear this unaccountable answer , we look at one another quite lost in amazement . could it be possible that the will have set thing right at last and that and be go to be rich ? it seem too good to be true . Alas it be ! we suspense be short , for a break - up soon take place in the crowd , and the people come stream out look flushed and hot and bring a quantity of bad air with they . still they be all exceedingly amused and be more like people come out from a farce or a juggler than from a court of justice . we stand aside , watch for any countenance we know , and presently great bundle of
of paper begin to be carry out -- bundle in bag , bundle too large to be get into any bag , immense mass of papers of all shape and no shape , which the bearer stagger under , and throw down for the time be , anyhow , on the hall pavement , while they go back to bring out more . even these clerk be laugh . we glance at the papers , and see and everywhere , ask a official - look person who be stand in the midst of they whether the cause be over . yes , he say , it be all up with it at last , and burst out laugh too . at this juncture we perceive come out of court with a affable dignity upon he , listen to , who be deferential and carry he own bag . be the first to see we . " here be , sir , " he say . " and . " " oh , indeed ! yes . truly ! " say , raise he hat to I with polished politeness . " how do you do ? glad to see you . be not here ? " no . he never come there , I remind he . " really , " return , " it be as well that he be not here to - day , for he -- shall I say , in my good friend 's absence , he indomitable singularity of opinion ?--might have be strengthen , perhaps ; not reasonably , but might have be strengthen . " " pray what have be do to - day ? " ask . " I beg you pardon ? " say with excessive urbanity . " what have be do to - day ? " " what have be do , " repeat . " quite so . yes . why , not much have be do ; not much . we have be check -- bring up suddenly , I would say -- upon the -- shall I term it threshold ? " " be this will consider a genuine document , sir ? " say . " will you tell we that ? " " most certainly , if I could , " say ; " but we have not go into that , we have not go into that . " " we have not go into that , " repeat as if he low inward voice be a echo . " you be to reflect , , " observ , use he silver trowel persuasively and smoothingly , " that this have be a great cause , that this have be a protract cause , that this have be a complex cause . and have be term , not inaptly , a monument of Chancery practice . " " and patience have sit upon it a long time , " say . " very well indeed , sir , " return with a certain condeseending laugh he have . " very well ! you be further to reflect , , " become dignify almost to severity , " that on the numerous difficulty , contingency , masterly fiction , and form of procedure in this great cause , there have be expend study , ability , eloquence , knowledge , intellect , , high intellect . for many year , the -- a -- I would say the flower of the bar , and the -- a -- I would presume to add , the matured autumnal fruit of the woolsack -- have be lavish upon and . if the public have the benefit , and if the country have the adornment , of this great grasp , it must be pay for in money or money 's worth , sir . " " , " say , appear enlighten all in a moment . " excuse I , we time pressis . do I understand that the whole estate be find to have be absorb in cost ? " " hey ! I believe so , " return . " , what do you say ? " " I believe so , " say Vhole . " and that thus the suit lapse and melt away ? " " probably , " return . " ? " " probably , " say . " my dearest life , " whisper , " this will break 's heart ! " there be such a shock of apprehension in he face , and he know so perfectly , and I too have see so much of he gradual decay , that what my dear girl have say to I in the fullness of she forebod love sound like a knell in my ear . " in case you should be want , sir , " say , come after we , " you will find he in court . I leave he there rest himself a little . good day , sir ; good day , . " as he give I that slowly devour look of he , while twist up the string of he bag before he hasten with it after , the benignant shadow of whose conversational presence he seem afraid to leave , he give one gasp as if he have swallow the last morsel of he client , and he black buttone - up unwholesome figure glide away to the low door at the end of the Hall . " my dear love , " say , " leave to I , for a little while , the charge you give I . go home with this intelligence and come to 's by and by ! " I would not let he take I to a coach , but entreate he to go to without a moment 's delay and leave I to do as he wish . Hurry home
home , I find my guardian and tell he gradually with what news I have return . " little woman , " say he , quite unmoved for himself , " to have do with the suit on any term be a greater bless than I have look for . but my poor young cousins ! " we talk about they all the morning and discuss what it be possible to do . in the afternoon my guardian walk with I to 's and leave I at the door . I go upstairs . when my darling hear my footstep , she come out into the small passage and throw she arm round my neck , but she compose herself directly and say that have ask for I several time . have find he sit in the corner of the court , she tell I , like a stone figure . on be rouse , he have break away and make as if he would have speak in a fierce voice to the judge . he be stop by he mouth be full of blood , and have bring he home . he be lie on a sofa with he eye close when I go in . there be restorative on the table ; the room be make as airy as possible , and be darken , and be very orderly and quiet . stand behind he watch he gravely . he face appear to I to be quite destitute of colour , and now that I see he without he see I , I fully see , for the first time , how wear away he be . but he look handsomer than I have see he look for many a day . I sit down by he side in silence . open he eye by and by , he say in a weak voice , but with he old smile , " , kiss I , my dear ! " it be a great comfort and surprise to I to find he in he low state cheerful and look forward . he be happier , he say , in we intend marriage than he could find word to tell I . my husband have be a guardian angel to he and , and he bless we both and wish we all the joy that life could yield we . I almost feel as if my own heart would have break when I see he take my husband 's hand and hold it to he breast . we speak of the future as much as possible , and he say several time that he must be present at we marriage if he could stand upon he foot . would contrive to take he , somehow , he say . " yes , surely , dearest ! " but as my darling answer he thus hopefully , so serene and beautiful , with the help that be to come to she so near -- I know -- I know ! it be not good for he to talk too much , and when he be silent , we be silent too . sit beside he , I make a pretence of work for my dear , as he have always be use to joke about my be busy . lean upon he pillow , hold he head upon she arm . he doze often , and whenever he awoke without see he , say first of all , " where be ? " evening have come on when I lift up my eye and see my guardian stand in the little hall . " who be that , ? " ask I . the door be behind he , but he have observ in my face that some one be there . I look to for advice , and as he nod " yes , " bend over and tell he . my guardian see what pass , come softly by I in a moment , and lay he hand on 's . " oh , sir , " say , " you be a good man , you be a good man ! " and burst into tear for the first time . my guardian , the picture of a good man , sit down in my place , keep he hand on 's . " my dear , " say he , " the cloud have clear away , and it be bright now . we can see now . we be all bewilder , , more or less . what matter ! and how be you , my dear boy ? " " I be very weak , sir , but I hope I shall be stronger . I have to begin the world . " " aye , truly ; well say ! " cry my guardian . " I will not begin it in the old way now , " say with a sad smile . " I have learn a lesson now , sir . it be a hard one , but you shall be assure , indeed , that I have learn it . " " well , well , " say my guardian , comfort he ; " well , well , well , dear boy ! " " I be think , sir , " resume , " that there be nothing on earth I should so much like to see as they house -- 's and 's house . if I could be remove there when I begin to recover my strength , I feel as if I should get well there sooner than anywhere . " " why , so have I be think too , , " say my guardian , " and we little woman likewise ; she and I have be talk of it this very day . I dare say she husband will not object .
. what do you think ? " smile and lift up he arm to touch he as he stand behind the head of the couch . " I say nothing of , " say , " but I think of she , and have think of she very much . look at she ! see she here , sir , bend over this pillow when she have so much need to rest upon it herself , my dear love , my poor girl ! " he clasp she in he arm , and none of we spoke . he gradually release she , and she look upon we , and look up to heaven , and move she lip . " when I get down to , " say , " I shall have much to tell you , sir , and you will have much to show I . you will go , will not you ? " " undoubtedly , dear . " " thank you ; like you , like you , " say . " but it be all like you . they have be tell I how you plan it and how you remember all 's familiar taste and way . it will be like come to the old again . " " and you will come there too , I hope , . I be a solitary man now , you know , and it will be a charity to come to I . a charity to come to I , my love ! " he repeat to as he gently pass he hand over she golden hair and put a lock of it to he lip . ( I think he vowe within himself to cherish she if she be leave alone . ) " it be a troubled dream ? " say , clasp both my guardian 's hand eagerly . " nothing more , ; nothing more . " " and you , be a good man , can pass it as such , and forgive and pity the dreamer , and be lenient and encourage when he wake ? " " indeed I can . what be I but another dreamer , ? " " I will begin the world ! " say with a light in he eye . my husband draw a little nearer towards , and I see he solemnly lift up he hand to warn my guardian . " when shall I go from this place to that pleasant country where the old time be , where I shall have strength to tell what have be to I , where I shall be able to recall my many fault and blindness , where I shall prepare myself to be a guide to my unborn child ? " say . " when shall I go ? " " dear , when you be strong enough , " return my guardian . " , my darling ! " he seek to raise himself a little . raise he so that she could hold he on she bosom , which be what he want . " I have do you many wrongs , my own . I have fall like a poor stray shadow on you way , I have marry you to poverty and trouble , I have scatter you means to the wind . you will forgive I all this , my , before I begin the world ? " a smile irradiate he face as she bend to kiss he . he slowly lay he face down upon she bosom , draw he arm closer round she neck , and with one parting sob begin the world . not this world , oh , not this ! the world that set this right . when all be still , at a late hour , poor craze come weepe to I and tell I she have give she bird they liberty . in there be a hush upon in these alte day , as there be upon a portion of the family history . the story go that pay some who could have speak out to hold they peace ; but it be a lame story , feebly whisper and creep about , and any brighter spark of life it show soon die away . it be know for certain that the handsome lie in the mausoleum in the park , where the tree arch darkly overhead , and the owl be hear at night make the wood ring ; but whence she be bring home to be lay among the echoe of that solitary place , or how she die , be all mystery . some of she old friend , principally to be find among the peachy - cheek charmer with the skeleton throat , do once occasionally say , as they toy in a ghastly manner with large fan -- like charmer reduce to flirt with grim death , after lose all they other beaux -- do once occasionally say , when the world assemble together , that they wonder the ash of the , entomb in the mausoleum , never rise against the profanation of she company . but the dead - and - gone Dedlock take it very calmly and have never be know to object . up from among the fern in the hollow , and win by the bridle - road among the tree , come sometimes to this lonely spot the sound of horse 's hoof . then may be see -- invalide , bend , and almost blind , but of worthy presence yet -- ride with a stalwart man beside he , constant to he bridle- rein . when they come to a certain spot before the mausoleum - door , 's accustom horse stop of he own accord , and , pull off he hat , be still for a few moment before they ride away .
. rage yet with the audacious Boythorn , though at uncertain interval , and now hotly , and now coolly , flicker like a unsteady fire . the truth be say to be that when come down to for , show a manifest desire to abandon he right of way and do whatever would , which , conceive to be a condescension to he illness or misfortune , take in such high dudgeon , and be so magnificently aggrieve by , that find himself under the necessity of commit a flagrant trespass to restore he neighbour to himself . similarly , continue to post tremendous placard on the dispute thoroughfare and ( with he bird upon he head ) to hold forth vehemently against in the sanctuary of he own home ; similarly , also , he defy he as of old in the little church by testify a bland unconsciousness of he existence . but it be whisper that when he be most ferocious towards he old foe , he be really most considerate , and that , in the dignity of be implacable , little suppose how much he be humoure . as little do he think how near together he and he antagonist have suffer in the fortune of two sister , and he antagonist , who know it now , be not the man to tell he . so the quarrel go on to the satisfaction of both . in one of the lodg of the park -- that lodge within sight of the house where , once upon a time , when the water be out down in , my use to see the keeper 's child -- the stalwart man , the trooper formerly , be house . some relic of he old calling hang upon the wall , and these it be the chosen recreation of a little lame man about the stable - yard to keep gleam bright . a busy little man he always be , in the polishing at harness - house door , of stirrup - iron , bits , curb -chain , harness boss , anything in the way of a stable - yard that will take a polish , lead a life of friction . a shaggy little damage man , withal , not unlike a old dog of some mongrel breed , who have be considerably knock about . he answer to the name of . a goodly sight it be to see the grand old housekeeper ( harder of hearing now ) go to church on the arm of she son and to observe -- which few do , for the house be scant of company in these time -- the relation of both towards , and he towards they . they have visitor in the high summer weather , when a grey cloak and umbrella , unknown to at other period , be see among the leave ; when two young lady be occasionally find gambolling in sequester saw - pit and such nook of the park ; and when the smoke of two pipe wreathe away into the fragrant evening air from the trooper 's door . then be a fife heard troll within the lodge on the inspire topic of the " british Grenadier " ; and as the evening close in , a gruff inflexible voice be hear to say , while two man pace together up and down , " but I never own to it before the old girl . must be maintain . " the greater part of the house be shut up , and it be a show - house no longer ; yet hold he shrunken state in the long drawing - room for all that , and repose in he old place before my 's picture . close in by night with broad screen , and illumin only in that part , the light of the drawing - room seem gradually contract and dwindl until it shall be no more . a little more , in truth , and it will be all extinguish for ; and the damp door in the mausoleum which shut so tight , and look so obdurate , will have open and receive he . , grow with the flight of time pinker as to the red in she face , and yellower as to the white , read to in the long evening and be drive to various artifice to conceal she yawn , of which the chief and most efficacious be the insertion of the pearl necklace between she rosy lip . long - win treatise on the and question , show how be immaculate and Boodle villainous , and how the country be lose by be all Boodle and no Buffy , or save by be all and no Boodle ( it must be one of the two , and can not be anything else ) , be the staple of she reading . be not particular what it be and do not appear to follow it very closely , further than that he always come broad awake the moment Volumnia venture to leave off , and sonorously repeat she last word , begs with some displeasure to know if she find herself fatigue . however , , in the course of she bird - like hop about and peck at papers , have alight on a memorandum concern herself in the event of " anything happen " to she kinsman , which be handsome compensation for a extensive course of read and hold even the dragon Boredom at bay . the cousin generally be rather shy of in its dullness , but take to it a little in the shooting season , when gun be hear in the plantation , and a few scattered beater and keeper wait at the old place of appointment for low - spirited two and threes of cousin . the debilitate cousin
cousin , more debilitate by the dreariness of the place , get into a fearful state of depression , groan under penitential sofa-pillow in he gunless hour and protest that such fernal old jail 's -- nough t' sew fler up-- frever . the only great occasion for in this change aspect of the place in be those occasion , rare and widely separate , when something be to be do for the county or the country in the way of grac a public ball . then , indeed , do the tucker sylph come out in fairy form and proceed with joy under cousinly escort to the exhaust old assembly - room , fourteen heavy mile off , which , during three hundred and sixty - four day and night of every ordinary year , be a kind of antipodean lumber - room full of old chair and table upside down . then , indeed , do she captivate all heart by she condescension , by she girlish vivacity , and by she skip about as in the day when the hideous old general with the mouth too full of tooth have not cut one of they at two guinea each . then do she twirl and twine , a pastoral nymph of good family , through the maze of the dance . then do the swain appear with tea , with lemonade , with sandwich , with homage . then be she kind and cruel , stately and unassuming , various , beautifully wilful . then be there a singular kind of parallel between she and the little glass chandelier of another age embellish that assembly - room , which , with they meagre stem , they spare little drop , they disappoint knob where no drop be , they bear little stalk from which knob and drop have both depart , and they little feeble prismatic twinkling , all seem Volumnias . for the rest , life to be a vast blank of overgrown house look out upon tree , sigh , wringe they hand , bow they head , and cast they tear upon the window - pane in monotonous depression . a labyrinth of grandeur , less the property of a old family of human being and they ghostly likeness than of a old family of echoing and thundering which start out of they hundr grave at every sound and go resoun through the building . a waste of unused passage and staircase in which to drop a comb upon a bedroom floor at night be to send a stealthy footfall on a errand through the house . a place where few people care to go about alone , where a maid scream if a ash drop from the fire , take to cry at all time and season , become the victim of a low disorder of the spirit , and give warning and depart . thus . with so much of itself abandon to darkness and vacancy ; with so little change under the summer shining or the wintry lower ; so sombre and motionless always -- no flag fly now by day , no row of light sparkl by night ; with no family to come and go , no visitor to be the soul of pale cold shape of room , no stir of life about it -- passion and pride , even to the stranger 's eye , have die away from the place in and yield it to dull repose . the close of 's full seven happy year I have be the mistress of . the few word that I have to add to what I have write be soon penn ; then I and the unknown friend to whom I write will part for ever . not without much dear remembrance on my side . not without some , I hope , on he or hers . they give my darling into my arm , and through many week I never leave she . the little child who be to have do so much be bear before the turf be plan on its father 's grave . it be a boy ; and I , my husband , and my guardian give he he father 's name . the help that my dear count on do come to she , though it come , in the eternal wisdom , for another purpose . though to bless and restore he mother , not he father , be the errand of this baby , its power be mighty to do it . when I see the strength of the weak little hand and how it be touch could heal my darling 's heart and raise hope within she , I feel a new sense of the goodness and the tenderness of . they thrive , and by degree I see my dear girl pass into my country garden and walk there with she infant in she arm . I be marry then . I be the happiest of the happy . it be at this time that my guardian join we and ask when she would come home . " both house be you home , my dear , " say he , " but the older claim priority . when you and my boy be strong enough to do it , come and take possession of you home . " call he " she dearest cousin , . " but he say , no , it must be guardian now . he be she guardian henceforth , and the boy 's ; and he have a old association with the name . so she call he guardian , and have call he guardian ever since . the child know he by no other name . I say the child ; I have two little daughter . it be difficult to believe that ( round - eye still , and
and not at all grammatical ) be marry to a miller in we neighbourhood ; yet so it be ; and even now , look up from my desk as I write early in the morning at my summer window , I see the very mill begin to go round . I hope the miller will not spoil ; but he be very fond of she , and be rather vain of such a match , for he be well to do and be in great request . so far as my small maid be concerned , I might suppose time to have stood for seven year as still as the mill do half a hour ago , since little , 's sister , be exactly what use to be . as to , 's brother , I be really afraid to say what he do at school in ciphering , but I think it be decimal . he be apprentice to the miller , whatever it be , and be a good bashful fellow , always fall in love with somebody and be asham of it . pass she very last holiday with we and be a dearer creature than ever , perpetually dance in and out of the house with the child as if she have never give a dancing - lesson in she life . keep she own little carriage now instead of hire one , and life full two mile further westward than . she work very hard , she husband ( a excellent one ) be lame and able to do very little . still , she be more than content and do all she have to do with all she heart . spend he evening at she new house with he head against the wall as he use to do in she old one . I have hear that . be understand to suffer great mortification from she daughter 's ignoble marriage and pursuit , but I hope she get over it in time . she have be disappoint in - , which turn out a failure in consequence of the king of want to sell everybody -- who survive the climate -- for rum , but she have take up with the rights of woman to sit in parliament , and tell I it be a mission involve more correspondence than the old one . I have almost forgotten 's poor little girl . she be not such a mite now , but she be deaf and dumb . I believe there never be a better mother than , who learn , in she scanty interval of leisure , innumerable deaf and dumb art to soften the affliction of she child . as if I be never to have do with , I be remind here of and old . be in the , and do extremely well . , very apoplectic , still exhibit he deportment about town , still enjoy himself in the old manner , be still believe in in the old way . he be constant in he patronage of and be understand to have bequeath he a favourite french clock in he dressing - room -- which be not he property . with the first money we save at home , we add to we pretty house by throw out a little growlery expressly for my guardian , which we inaugurate with great splendour the next time he come down to see we . I try to write all this lightly , because my heart be full in draw to a end , but when I write of he , my tear will have they way . I never look at he but I hear we poor dear call he a good man . to and she pretty boy , he be the fondest father ; to I he be what he have ever be , and what name can I give to that ? he be my husband 's best and dearest friend , he be we child 's darling , he be the object of we deepest love and veneration . yet while I feel towards he as if he be a superior being , I be so familiar with he and so easy with he that I almost wonder at myself . I have never lose my old name , nor have he lose he ; nor do I ever , when he be with we , sit in any other place than in my old chair at he side , , , -- all just the same as ever ; and I answer , " yes , dear guardian ! " just the same . I have never know the wind to be in the east for a single moment since the day when he take I to the porch to read the name . I remark to he once that the wind seem never in the east now , and he say , no , truly ; it have finally depart from that quarter on that very day . I think my darling girl be more beautiful than ever . the sorrow that have be in she face -- for it be not there now -- seem to have purify even its innocent expression and to have give it a diviner quality . sometimes when I raise my eye and see she in the black dress that she still wear , teach my , I feel -- it be difficult to express -- as if it be so good to know that she remember she dear Esther in she prayer . I call he my ! but he say that he have two mamas , and I be one . we be not rich in the bank , but we have always prospered , and we have quite enough . I never walk out with my husband but I hear the people bless he
